
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: AA/06906/2014
                                                                    & Others


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 June 2017                               |On 30 August 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between


                          MM v SSHD (AA/06906/2014)
                            EDO AND OTHERS v SSHD
        (HU/01879/2015; HU/01881/2015; HU/01882/2015; HU/01883/2015)
                       SSHD v KHATTAB (HU/13552/2015)
                        SSHD v COMERY (IA/00866/2016)
                    SSHD v BOATENG-DANSOH (IA/23617/2015)
                         SSHD v KAUR (IA/30887/2015)
                      SSHD v BOPOLONGA (IA/31116/2015)
                 SSHD v BOATENG AND BEMPONG (IA/31918/2015)
                         SSHD v WANG (IA/32046/2015)
                        SSHD v OKPALA (IA/32286/2015)
                        PATEL v SSHD (IA/32901/2015)
                        ECO v STEPHEN (OA/07779/2015
                       SSHD v SHINWARI (RP/00104/2016)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. The Tribunal has arranged to hear in the same list a number of  appeals
    from a single judge, Judge Majid.  This no  doubt  unusual  arrangement
    has been prompted by the following factors.  First, many  decisions  by
    judge Majid give rise to  successful  applications  for  permission  to
    appeal.   Secondly,   the   grounds   of   appeal   have   considerable
    similarities: they  frequently  include  assertions  that  insufficient
    reasons are given for even a  well-informed  reader  to  work  out  the
    reasons for the decision, that there is no reference in the decision to
    the relevant law or the contested facts, and sometimes that there  were
    problems of communication or of fairness during the hearing.   Thirdly,
    the determinations themselves are very short and substantial  parts  of
    them are word for word the same, or nearly so,  from  determination  to
    determination, leaving only relatively small  parts  dealing  with  the
    individual case. Thus, despite the dissimilarities between the  appeals
    before the First-tier Tribunal that are  determined  by  Judge  Majid's
    decisions,  the  numerous  appeals  from  them  to  this  Tribunal  are
    essentially similar and raise similar issues.

 2. We are aware of the dangers that may be posed by collecting together  a
    number of appeals in this way.  There is the possibility that  we  will
    be influenced in making our decision on any appeal by factors  that  do
    not in truth belong to that appeal.  There is also  the  difficulty  of
    reputation:  parties  and  judges  may,  whether  consciously  or  not,
    attribute faults to a judge only for the bad reason  that  there  is  a
    weight of opinion against him.  On the  other  hand,  when  a  body  of
    appeals sharing characteristics such as those set out above  are  heard
    together, we have the advantage of comparison, and in the present  case
    we have decided that it is necessary in the interests of  justice  that
    as well as deciding the individual  appeals  on  their  own  merits  we
    should consider the Judge's work as it appears in these decisions as  a
    whole.  It is only by making comparisons that it  is  possible  to  say
    whether a particular paragraph or series of paragraphs is indeed common
    to several determinations.  It is only by making comparisons that it is
    possible to say whether a  particular  apparent  error  is  the  result
    merely of a slip, or whether it pervades a judge's work.

 3. There is a further factor, which we express with considerable  caution.
    It is this.  In the Upper Tribunal we hear numerous appeals in which  a
    single point of error or omission is said to  be  discoverable  in  the
    determination under appeal.  We have, of course, no duty to the  First-
    tier Tribunal or its judges, other than perhaps  to  be  clear  in  any
    guidance we give to them: our duties are to the law,  the  parties  and
    the interests of justice.  Nevertheless, in undertaking those duties we
    are likely to make our decisions on the assumption that each appeal  is
    from a decision of a judge who has been  duly  appointed  and  trained,
    and, broadly speaking, may be considered to know and do the job with  a
    degree of skill and competence.  The overwhelming majority of decisions
    under appeal are capable of giving the reader confidence that  that  is
    the case.   Where  there  is  an  omission  or  slip  in  an  otherwise
    apparently wholly competent and careful judgment it may well be that on
    appeal the proper conclusion is that the judge  did  have  the  correct
    facts, or law, or principle in mind, and that the point  on  which  the
    appeal is brought is therefore without  merit.   That  is  one  of  the
    reasons why any alleged error must be looked at in the context  of  the
    decision as a whole.  This is the universal  experience  of  those  who
    take judicial decisions on the work of others,  whether  on  appeal  or
    review.

 4. It would, however, be quite wrong for those determining appeals to make
    assumptions about the merits of a particular  ground  of  appeal  in  a
    context that does not apply to the judge in question.   If,  therefore,
    it should be that review of a judge's decisions leads to the conclusion
    that there is something lacking in the  skill  or  competence  that  he
    brings to his task, it is right that we should  say  so.   A  suspicion
    that might arise from examining only  one  case,  as  is  normally  the
    position on appeal, may be either  confirmed  or  wholly  dispelled  by
    examining a group of cases.

 5. We are also aware that Judge Majid has a  physical  disability:  he  is
    blind.  Indeed, he mentions that expressly or by implication in several
    of the decisions under appeal. We understand that the statutory duty to
    make reasonable adjustments is carried  out  by  the  provision  of  an
    assistant to help him to appreciate the contents of documents.  It  may
    be wholly unreasonable to expect him to assimilate a complex matter  in
    writing at short notice.  But it is not, and indeed  cannot  reasonably
    be, suggested that blindness prevents a  person  learning  or  applying
    law, or performing the crucial judicial tasks of hearing both sides and
    reaching, and  expressing,  a  properly  reasoned  conclusion.   It  is
    failure in these areas that form the  grounds  of  appeal  we  have  to
    consider.

 6. We each have considered all the issues raised by each of  the  appeals,
    and we have each made substantial contributions to  this  decision.  In
    this general part of our decision (paras [7] - [47]), we consider those
    issues that appear to us to be common to many or all of  the  decisions
    under appeal.  It is to be read with the decisions  on  the  individual
    appeals, which follow.

THE JUDGE'S TASK

 7. In every one of the decisions under appeal there occurs  the  following
    paragraph, word for word or very nearly so:

          "I reminded myself of the judgment of Henry J (later  on  promoted
          to be a Lord Justice) in ex parte Gondolia [1991]  Imm  A.R.  519.
          It is not incumbent upon me  to  isolate  every  single  piece  of
          evidence and indicate whether I have  found  it  relevant  to  the
          issue.  I am only obliged  by  the  superior  precedents  to  give
          "sufficient and adequate" reasons and I am not  under  a  duty  to
          refer to each and every piece of evidence and  it  therefore  does
          not follow that because I have not referred to certain facts, they
          have not been taken into account."

 8. It is perhaps worrying that the judge finds it necessary to resist  the
    hypothetical critic of his decision on the ground of lack of detail; it
    would in addition be surprising if a sentiment in an extempore judgment
    on  judicial  review  of  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal   refusing
    permission to appeal in a primary purpose appeal in the late 1980s were
    today to be regarded as the locus classicus on the duties of a Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In fact, not  merely  does  the  judgment  in
    Gondolia not appear to contain any such guidance as that cited, but  it
    is impossible to draw such general wisdom from it either.  The decision
    of this Tribunal in Kalim v SSHD  (IA/30716/2014)  contains  a  careful
    examination and analysis of Gondolia by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Ryan, which we endorse and adopt with gratitude. That was  an  appeal
    by an appellant against a decision of Judge Majid, so  although  it  is
    unreported it is highly likely that  it  was  brought  to  the  Judge's
    attention.   The appellant complained that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules,  failed  to  consider  the
    evidence, failed to make findings of fact, and failed to give  adequate
    reasons for his conclusion.  The judge found that the  inadequacies  of
    the determination demanded that it  be  set  aside,  with  no  findings
    preserved.

 9. It is difficult to see that there could be  any  good  reason  for  the
    judge to cite Gondolia.  His doing so, and the  words  surrounding  the
    citation, suggest not merely that he has not read  (or  has  forgotten)
    Gondolia itself, but that he  has  also  not  read  any  of  the  other
    numerous decisions on the duties of a judge in this regard.  Even if he
    wanted to confine himself to the  era  of  Gondolia,  the  judge's  own
    research ought to have led him to the words of Schiemann J in R  v  IAT
    ex p Mohd Khan [1992] Imm AR  367, 374, another primary  purpose  case:




          "In my judgment adjudicators should indicate with some clarity in
             their decisions:
             (1) what evidence they accept;
             (2) what evidence they reject;
             (3) whether there is any evidence as to which they cannot make
             up their mind
                      whether or not they accept it;
             (4) what, if any, evidence they regard as irrelevant."

10. That view might be regarded as the opposite  extreme,  and  would  have
    revealed to any inquiring lawyer that Henry J could not be regarded  as
    having had the last word.  The  Judge  should  also  be  aware  of  the
    starred judgment of the IAT in Slimani v SSHD (01/TH/00092), binding on
    him, in which Collins J as President points out that it is wrong to try
    and follow a checklist, but that it is in all cases necessary  to  give
    proper reasons.


           "7.   ... It is of course  essential  that  proper  reasons  are
               given by adjudicators and (albeit now only in summary  form)
               by the tribunal. But it is not necessary to deal  in  detail
               with every matter; the  reasons  need  only  deal  with  the
               substantial points which have been raised: see Re  Poyser  &
               Mills Arbitration [1964] 2 Q.B.  467.  They  must  tell  the
               losing party why he has lost and enable  him  to  appreciate
               whether  there  has  been  any  appealable  error.  In  Save
               Britain's Heritage v Secretary of State for the  Environment
               [1991] 1 WLR 153, Lord Bridge said this:-


                      "The three criteria suggested in the dictum of  Megaw
                 J [in Re Poyser & Mills Arbitration] are that  the  reasons
                 should be proper, intelligible and adequate. If the reasons
                 given are improper  they  will  reveal  some  flaw  in  the
                 decision-making process which will be open to challenge  on
                 some ground other than the failure to give reasons. If  the
                 reasons given are unintelligible, this will  be  equivalent
                 to giving no reasons  at  all.  The  difficulty  arises  in
                 determining whether the reasons given are adequate, whether
                 they deal with the substantial points that have been raised
                 or enable the reader to know what conclusion the  decision-
                 maker has reached on the  principal  controversial  issues.
                 What degree of particularity is required? I  do  not  think
                 one can safely say more in  general  terms  than  that  the
                 degree of particularity required will  depend  entirely  on
                 the nature of the issues falling for decision".
           ...
               9.  ...  The observations of Schiemann, J in R v  I.A.T.  ex
                 p. Amin [1992] Imm AR 367 at 374 are all too often cited as
                 if they were a  statutory  requirement  and  are  regularly
                 misunderstood. ...  Those observations were in the  context
                 of a failure by the adjudicator to  give  adequate  reasons
                 for her findings  on  primary  purpose  in  relation  to  a
                 marriage  application  and  the  headnote  in  the   report
                 correctly refers to the observations  under  that  heading:
                 see [1992] Imm A.R. 367 Heading 3. They  do  not  mean  nor
                 could the learned judge have intended that they should mean
                 that an adjudicator must carry out the  exercise  specified
                 in them in relation to all the evidence given before him.


               10.  But even in  relation  to  specific  issues  which  are
                 material and which have to be properly  reasoned,  they  go
                 too far. The reality is that it is quite impossible to  set
                 out a detailed check list of  what  must  be  done  in  all
                 cases. It will in many cases be quite  unnecessary  to  set
                 out evidence  regarded  as  irrelevant;  indeed,  very  few
                 judges would recognise that as an exercise they  carry  out
                 in  giving  judgment  following  a  trial.   Equally,   the
                 circumstances will dictate  whether  there  is  a  need  to
                 identify the evidence upon which they cannot make up  their
                 minds, although  in  deciding  on  credibility  it  may  be
                 necessary to deal with such  evidence.  The  only  guidance
                 needed is that the conclusions reached  must  be  justified
                 and  it  must  be  clear  that  any  adverse  findings   in
                 particular are based on evidence put before the adjudicator
                 or the tribunal and a proper explanation must be  given  to
                 show why the conclusions on the issues  of  substance  have
                 been  reached.  We  have  no  wish  to  encourage   lengthy
                 decisions. Succinctness  is  a  virtue  provided  that  the
                 guidance given by Lord Bridge which we have  already  cited
                 is followed and the decision does show why the findings  of
                 material fact have been made and the important  conclusions
                 have been reached."

11. In giving his decision in Kalim, the Deputy Judge referred also to  the
    decision of this Tribunal, given by the President, in MK (duty to  give
    reasons) [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC), of which again Judge Majid should  have
    been aware.  The headnote is as follows:
               "(1)   It is axiomatic that a determination discloses
               clearly the reasons for a
                        tribunal's decision.
                 (2)  If a tribunal finds oral evidence to be implausible,
                    incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth no
                    weight whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the
                    determination and for such findings to be supported by
                    reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not
                    believed or that a document was afforded no weight is
                    unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons."

12. The decision itself cites another statement to the same effect, by Lane
    CJ in R v IAT ex parte Khan [1983] QB 790.

13. The second half of Judge Majid's Gondolia paragraph is a not inaccurate
    statement of the position that might be taken on an  appeal  against  a
    First-tier Tribunal decision, but it is odd to find it given as a  sort
    of excuse.  The truth of the matter is that if there is anything in the
    judge's  mind  as  something  that  a  party  might   consider   needed
    mentioning, then it should be mentioned and  dealt  with,  rather  than
    being omitted with an explanation such as this.

14. Any assurance that the reader of a decision might derive from  what  is
    said in that paragraph  is,  however,  likely  to  be  put  in  serious
    question by what follows, again in each case and again word for word or
    more or less so:

           "I am  concerned  only  with  "dispositive"  reasons  which  are
           obviously relevant to my  Decision  -  of  course  "dispositive"
           means that the reason involved enables me to deal with an  issue
           fairly.  An example of that is if a person is getting the income
           of �1,000,000 per annum then the "maintenance"  issue  is  dealt
           with if I have reliable evidence for this datum and I  need  not
           spend time giving reasons for matters I deem to be "marginal".

15. This is wholly obscure.  The first half of the first  sentence,  before
    the dash, looks as though it might be intended as a  reference  to  the
    principle that irrelevant matters usually do not need to be included in
    a decision, although of course even that is not a universal rule.  Even
    interpreted  like  this,  however,  the  words  pose   some   problems.
    'Obviously' does not seem right, because the question  is  whether  the
    matters are relevant, not whether they  are  obviously  relevant.   The
    whole phrase beginning 'which' seems to suggest  that  there  are  some
    '"dispositive" reasons' that are not obviously relevant and so  do  not
    concern the judge.  And it is far from  clear  exactly  what  'reasons'
    itself means: in the context it looks as though it is  a  reference  to
    the facts that might need to be found in order  to  establish  a  legal
    entitlement, but 'reasons' is not the word for that.  Perhaps it  means
    the judge's expressed reasons for his findings, but in that  case  what
    is said seems to become even more obscure.  No light  is  shed  by  the
    words following the dash.  Nothing in a judge's  consideration  can  be
    other  than  dealing  with  any  issue  fairly.   If  that  is  what  a
    dispositive reason means, then it is the whole  of  the  judge's  work.
    One might have expected that a statement of this  sort  would  indicate
    that the crucial things that need mentioning are those that  have  been
    the subject of concern between the parties and (or) those that regulate
    the outcome of the litigation.  That,  however,  is  clearly  not  what
    Judge Majid is saying here.

16. There is then the example.  The obscurity  deepens.   If  there  is  an
    issue as to 'maintenance', the judge will need  to  determine  it,  and
    give reasons for his conclusion.  It is impossible  to  conceive  of  a
    case where that would not be true; and the fact that  the  judge  might
    consider that he had 'reliable  evidence  for  this  datum'  would  not
    absolve him from the duty of expressing his decision  and  the  reasons
    for it.  It could not be 'marginal'.   There  is,  however,  a  further
    concern that arises from this  example.   The  issue  has  always  been
    whether maintenance is 'adequate'; and it is difficult to see  how  the
    mere fact that 'a person is getting the income of �1,000,000 per annum'
    could answer 'the "maintenance" issue.  It would depend what  was  left
    out  of  that  income,  after  other  commitments,  for  the  requisite
    maintenance.

17. We are of course aware that a judicial decision is not a  statute,  and
    is not to be subject to the same process  of  detailed  interpretation.
    The problem here, however, is that the paragraph in question  does  not
    appear to be intelligible whatever process of interpretation is applied
    to it.  We accept that none of the above concerns  would  be  of  great
    importance if the rest of the decisions showed that whatever he said in
    these paragraphs the judge was aware of what he needed to do,  and  did
    it.  Unfortunately, that is not the case.

SUBSTANTIVE LAW

18. In many of the decisions Judge Majid says this:

          'I  cannot  ignore  the   "legal   requirements"   stipulated   by
          immigration law.  It is incumbent upon me to  advert  to  the  new
          Rules giving respect to the intention  of  the  House  of  Commons
          dictated by the supremacy of Parliament.'

19. That is  perhaps  confused  as  an  exposition  of  the  constitutional
    position, but certainly the judge's job is to apply  the  law.   It  is
    perhaps a little surprising that this passage seems only to come at the
    very end of his decisions, almost as an afterthought, and is  sometimes
    followed immediately, in the next sentence,  by  a  demonstrably  wrong
    statement of the law to be applied.  We may give examples:


          'The Appellant can benefit from the relevant Rules because she  is
          a genuine student who should be helped' (in a case  in  which  the
          question was whether the student met the detailed requirements  of
          the rules and the judge did not find that she had met them; he had
          no power to 'help' her)."[Kaur: IA/30887/2015]


          'The Appellant ought [sic] to  benefit  from  the  relevant  Rules
          since the compassionate circumstances of the  case  lead  to  that
          conclusion" (in a  case  where  the  relevant  Rules  are  neither
          identified nor applied by  the  Judge,  and  do  not  include  any
          provision  for  compassionate   circumstances).   [Boateng-Dansoh:
          IA/23617/2015]


          "The Appellant should be aware  that  the  current  fiscal  crisis
          cannot allow judges to permit people to  remain  in  the  UK  when
          British citizens need jobs" (not surprisingly, this  sentiment  is
          not found in  any  of  the  law  the  Judge  was  supposed  to  be
          applying). [EDO and others: HU/01882/2015]


          'The Appellant cannot benefit from the relevant Rules because  the
          evidence he had presented to the Respondent has led it to make the
          negative decision" (confirming what might otherwise have been only
          a suspicion from the previous paragraph that  the  judge  did  not
          appreciate he had to make the decision himself, which is confirmed
          again at the end of the decision: the "negative decision about the
          deception is "reasonable" and [the appellant] "is stuck with it").
          [Patel: IA/32901/2015]


          "The Appellant can benefit from the relevant rules and the
          discretion advocated by the Superior Courts" (in a case in which
          neither the rules nor discretion was in issue). [Okpala:
          IA/32286/2015]

20. Many of the cases depend on the application of the  Immigration  Rules.
    Taken  as  a  whole,  those  rules  are  notoriously  complex,  but  an
    individual case usually raises a specific issue on the  application  of
    one or more provisions of the Rules to the facts.  Judge  Majid  refers
    in general terms to the Rules, but  in  none  of  the  decisions  under
    appeal does he set out the part of the Rules that is in issue,  and  to
    be frank, in none of the decisions under appeal does he give the  least
    reason to suppose that he is aware what the  relevant  requirements  of
    the Rules are.  The conclusions cited above indicate that; and we  give
    details in our decisions on  the  individual  appeals.   As  a  result,
    whoever  wins  the  case  can  have  no  confidence  that  'the  "legal
    requirements" stipulated by immigration law' have been followed at all.
     It is not surprising that in a number of the appeals  before  us,  the
    grounds of appeal focus on the  inadequacy of reasons  given.   Parties
    to an appeal are entitled to know why they have won or lost.

21. No more than the most basic principles of law are referred  to  in  the
    decisions, and even these seem to be quite often wrong.  Again, we give
    examples:


          "The burden of proof is upon the Appellant  and  the  standard  of
          proof is the balance of  probabilities"  (in  an  asylum  appeal).
          [Shinwari: RP/00104/2016].


          "The Appellant ... does not meet the basic  requirement  of  being
          outside the country from  which  he  is  seeking  protection"  (in
          another asylum case; the appellant is in the UK and claims that he
          will be persecuted in Bangladesh). [MM: AA/06906/2014].


          "The best interests of the children are involved and that  creates
          a knockout element" (the opposite of what  the  authorities  say).
          [Okpala: IA/32286/2015].


          "Whenever one feels that the  case  misses  the  point  marginally
          judicial discretion should help" (there is no judicial  discretion
          available).[Okpala: IA/32286/2015].


          "I  am  willing  to  exercise  my  discretion  in  favour  of  the
          Appellant's very young children" (different case;  same  problem).
          [Wang: IA/32046/2015].


          "I am happy to exercise "discretion" because one  cannot  overlook
          the compassionate facets of this case" (different case again: same
          problem).[Stephen: OA/07779/2015].


          "According to the IDI guidance viz paragraph 320, refusal of leave
          is not permitted  unless  "there  are  aggravating  circumstances"
          (same case as  the  foregoing;  a  gross  misapprehension  in  the
          context of a case about whether the appellant met the requirements
          of the Rules as part of a human rights appeal; the  Rules  provide
          time after time that leave is to be refused if the requirements of
          the Rules are not met, and paragraph 320 had no application to the
          case). [Stephen: OA/07779/2015].


          "John Smith, a patrial"  (status  abolished  in  1981).  [Boateng:
          IA/31918/2015].


          "My attention is drawn of the case of the Upper Tier  Tribunal  of
          the most recent case of Sala (case 00411 of 2016)  and  a  careful
          perusal of that case has  led  me  to  believe  that  my  negative
          decision is fully justified bearing in  mind  the  current  fiscal
          crisis and the  views  announced  in  that  case"  (this  "careful
          perusal" evidently did not enable the judge to appreciate that the
          decision, wholly concerned with whether there is a statutory right
          of appeal in certain EEA cases concerning unmarried partners,  had
          absolutely nothing to do with the case he was  considering,  which
          was about a married couple, both  Ghanaian,  and  their  children,
          both Ghanaian; the 'views announced' in Sala could not do anything
          to justify his decision, and 'the current fiscal  crisis'  has  of
          course nothing to do with either Sala or the appeal the Judge  was
          deciding). [EDO and others: HU/01882/2015].


          "The new provision in paragraph 117 of the  Immigration  Act  2014
          clearly says that there is no "public interest" in a case where  a
          person has some  things  in  his/her  favour  like  employability,
          education gained and the English language fluency.  This statutory
          concept permits the Respondent to reject an  Application  for  any
          discretionary or other relief by making sure that such  conditions
          do exist in a particular case" (the provision is question  appears
          to be section 117B of the 2002 Act; the summary of the  provisions
          and their effect is inadequate and inaccurate). [EDO  and  others:
          HU/01882/2015].

22. In our judgment, these errors, and others to be found in Judge  Majid's
    decisions, are serious.  They give the impression that  the  judge  has
    very little idea of either his own (limited) powers or the  content  of
    the law that is in issue in the appeals before him.   The  error  about
    the standard of proof in an asylum appeal is the sort of thing that the
    Upper Tribunal might well think was just an unimportant slip of the pen
    or ill-advised use of a standard paragraph if it occurred in a decision
    that was in other respects clearly an application  of  the  appropriate
    law and standard of proof; but in Judge Majid's decisions there  is  so
    little attention paid to the law or (as we shall show below) the actual
    facts of the cases that no such allowance can be made. The point  about
    not being outside the country from which protection is  sought  demands
    more  detailed  comment.   In  the  case  of  MM  (AA/06906/2014),  the
    appellant had obtained a visa to travel to the  United  Kingdom  where,
    after a period of time as a student, he claimed asylum when  threatened
    with removal as an overstayer.  No doubt issues of  credibility  arise:
    they are fully discussed in the Secretary of State's decision  and  the
    basic facts of the applicant's history are rejected.  Judge Majid makes
    no decision  on  the  applicant's  credibility;  indeed,  he  makes  no
    reference to  the  reason  the  appellant  claims  to  be  at  fear  of
    persecution  or  the  evidence  relied  upon  to  support  that  claim.
    Instead, the Judge  concludes  that  the  appellant  is  excluded  from
    protection because  of  his  obtaining  a  visa  from  the  Bangladeshi
    government before he travelled.  The judge heard oral evidence from the
    Applicant and cannot have thought he was not outside Bangladesh, so  he
    must think that a history of obtaining a visa removes a person from the
    Refugee Convention.  That is  a  misconception  so  basic  that  it  is
    difficult to deal with briefly and coherently: suffice it to  say  that
    it essentially ignores the terms of  the  Convention,  the  authorities
    from (at latest) Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97 onwards, and the  entire
    trend of state and judicial status determination.

23. The Judge's impression that he is empowered to allow an appeal  on  the
    basis of his discretion or dismiss it on the basis of his impression of
    the economy is similarly a really serious error.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judges, Immigration Judges and Adjudicators have never had a  power  to
    dismiss an appeal on the grounds of a general  feeling  of  justice  or
    some other factor, when the Appellant meets  the  requirements  of  the
    relevant Rules.  They have had power to allow appeals if  they  thought
    that a discretion found within the terms of a Rule should be  exercised
    differently, but no  general  discretion  to  allow  appeals,  and  the
    limited power was abolished by the Immigration Act 2014.  A  judge  who
    expresses himself (and acts) in the way indicated in the examples above
    is rightly going to be suspected of being ignorant of his jurisdiction,
    or exceeding it, or both.

24. What makes this feature of the decisions particularly troubling is that
    it  appears  to  replace,  rather  than  supplementing,  the  necessary
    consideration of the legal issues actually raised by the  appeals.   So
    far as the latter are concerned, Judge  Majid's  decisions  are  almost
    wholly silent.

25. Another difficulty in appreciating what the judge considers his job  to
    be appears from the following statement, to be found in some form in  a
    number of the decisions:

          "In reaching my decision I am fully conscious of the fact that the
          overriding objective of the judicial function guides  that  judges
          in pursuing expedition and efficiency in disposal of cases  should
          not sacrifice justice.  Thus I  am  alert  to  the  fact  that  my
          Decision does not violate any of the  following  legal  principles
          applicable in this case and coming from binding precedents.  These
          principles are:-

             (a) I am conducting an appeal and not  a  Judicial  Review  and
               therefore cannot restrict myself in  conducting  the  proper
               evaluation of the evidence on the  matters  of  fact;  if  a
               factual issue is properly raised before the  Respondent  the
               evidence surrounding that issue can  always  be  taken  into
               account.  I must say  to  the  Presenting  Officer  that  my
               consideration of this appeal is not confined  to  points  of
               "law".  Of course, if I was sitting in an appellate court, I
               would have to be concerned only with the points of "law"."

26. We have read and re-read this.  We do not know what it means.   As  one
    of the examples cited above indicates (in relation  to  the  appeal  of
    Patel: IA/32901/2015), Judge Majid does not always realise that  it  is
    his task to make  a  decision  on  the  evidence,  rather  than  merely
    deciding that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion she did.  It may  be  that  it  is  intended  to  mean  that
    evidence, if available, is always  admissible.   Perhaps  that  is  the
    reason why in another of the cases under appeal the Judge decides  that
    the Secretary of State was wrong to conclude in September that she  had
    not provided with the evidence of a relationship that she and the Rules
    require, because it was provided in late October.  We do not know.  The
    particular iteration of this  sentiment  is  taken  from  the  case  of
    Shinwari (RP/00104/2016) where it is preceded by a reference  (avoiding
    any discussion of the actual law) to a controversy between the parties,
    and then this:

          "This controversy was fully discussed and the  Presenting  Officer
          Mr Harvey said the  Home  Office  is  entitled  to  have  its  own
          interpretation  of  the  revocation  clause.   It  is   not   just
          background circumstances but individual circumstances that can  be
          taking into account.  If I may say so Mr Harvey conducted  himself
          with  special  competence  before  me.   He  was  the  picture  of
          politeness and I did not outline my contradictory view to him - my
          view is contained in [the paragraph already cited] below.

27. Again, it is difficult, perhaps impossible,  to  know  what  is  meant.
    Evidently the judge disagreed  with  the  submission  that  'individual
    circumstances that can be taking into account' ([18]), but  why  it  is
    said  that  the   contrast   with   Judicial   Review   provides   this
    'contradictory  view'  (referring  to  [22(a)]  of  the  decision)   is
    mystifying.  The conclusion on whether individual  circumstances  could
    be taken into account would presumably be a decision on a point of law,
    and the Judge was obviously required to decide it.   Taking  them  into
    account would then be making a decision not confined to points of  law.
    So far as we can read  the  decision  the  Judge  decided  neither  the
    question of law nor the question of fact; as an explanation  for  these
    failures the passage cited is wholly inadequate.

EVIDENCE AND THE FACTS

28. Specific reference to the facts of cases is  sparse;  in  some  of  the
    decisions it is even sparser than specific reference to  the  law.   We
    have already identified two clear errors of law in the third and fourth
    examples in the second set above (paragraph 21).  Those two  statements
    come from the same decision (Okpala: IA/32286/2015).  It is a  decision
    in which, in 30 paragraphs (the decision, running to over seven  pages,
    is an unusually long one for Judge Majid) the Judge gives  no  hint  at
    all of what the case is about except to say  that  there  are  children
    involved and that the appellant depends  on  "the  robust  exercise  of
    discretion for her children not to be separated from  her",  that  "the
    Appellant's story has become complicated", and that there is  a  social
    worker's opinion that "the Appellant does not  pose  a  danger  to  her
    children any more".  The rest is silence.

29. This is a case in which refusal decisions were made  in  respect  of  a
    mother and her four children.  The Secretary of State's decision letter
    runs to 12 pages in small print.  The only available ground  of  appeal
    was that the decisions breached the Human Rights Act 1998.  There  does
    not appear to have been any threat that the mother would  be  separated
    from her children, who were all  (as  we  have  said)  the  subject  of
    adverse decisions and (if the formal parts of  Judge  Majid's  decision
    are correct) on whose behalf no  appeal  against  those  decisions  was
    raised.

30. There is no indication of how the issue of separation  came  to  arise.
    There is no  indication  of  what  the  trouble  was  that  caused  the
    appellant to be assessed as a  danger  to  her  children,  how  it  was
    resolved, or how Judge  Majid  decided  the  issue  (as  distinct  from
    reciting the view of an unnamed social worker).

31. There is almost no indication of what took place in the hearing, except
    for what we have already mentioned, and the following.  In  the  middle
    of a hotchpot of generalities in paragraph 17 is a series of assertions
    about freedom of speech for academic lecturers and its  recognition  by
    courts and Tribunals (except apparently the Employment Appeal Tribunal)
    "in  particular  when  a  postgraduate  research  document   is   being
    considered".   This  discussion  occupies  nearly  half  a  page  -   a
    substantial proportion of the decision.  Unlike almost all the rest  of
    the decision, it is not a paragraph frequently used  by  the  Judge  to
    give his decisions what bulk they have.  The reader has to assume  that
    it refers to something that was in the Judge's  mind  as  a  result  of
    evidence or submissions at the hearing, for there  is  nothing  in  the
    Secretary of State's decision, or the other  documents  on  file,  that
    could raise it.  What the issue was, who said what about  it,  what  is
    the relevance of the judge's observations,  and  how  he  resolved  the
    issue, all remain matters of speculation.  All that the reader can tell
    is that there are numerous features of the case that the  judge  needed
    to decide but did not.

32. A  similar  difficulty  arises  in  another  case  featuring  twice  in
    paragraph 21 above, citing reference to the "compassionate facets"  and
    to paragraph 320 (Stephen: OA/07779/2015).  There  is  nothing  in  the
    facts of the case or elsewhere in the decision that begins to show  why
    the judge was thinking about paragraph 320 of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    which largely contains provisions  dealing  with  those  who  would  be
    successful under the Rules but for some form of misconduct.  We do  not
    know whether there is a whole aspect of the case that emerged  only  at
    the hearing and whose only visible relic is this reference, or  whether
    the judge was simply not attending to what he was  doing.   We  suspect
    the latter, but in either  event  it  is  a  cause  for  concern.   The
    reference to the "compassionate facets", on  the  basis  of  which  the
    appeal was apparently allowed, is entirely unspecific.  It was  crucial
    to identify what the facts were  that  elevated  this  case  above  the
    ordinary run of cases governed by the application of  the  Rules.   The
    appellant applied as a spouse,  there  was  little  evidence  that  the
    relationship  was  subsisting  and  no  evidence  that  the   financial
    requirements of the rules could be met.  The  only  factors  detectable
    from the determination as going in the appellant's favour are that  the
    parties are married and her husband "has been fully  committed  to  her
    welfare".  There is no indication of how the facts and evidence  before
    the judge could lead to an  identification  of  "compassionate  facets"
    particular to the case before him and sufficiently strong  to  override
    the rules.

33. Another case, Wang (IA/32046/2015), concerned the partner of a  British
    citizen; there were, by the time of the  hearing,  two  children.   The
    Judge refers to them as the appellant's grandchildren: but that is  the
    least of the factual difficulties in the case.  The respondent  refused
    the appellant's application for further leave for a number  of  reasons
    given in detail in the refusal decision.  The first was  that  she  had
    obtained her existing leave by fraud (this is an ETS case).  The second
    is that she did not appear to meet the  specific  requirements  of  the
    rules in relation to income, having  failed  to  evidence  the  minimum
    level required, and having submitted a  payslip  that  appeared  to  be
    unreliable in that it was dated after the application to which  it  was
    attached.  Thirdly, the appellant failed to meet either the suitability
    or the eligibility requirements of the  parent  route.   Fourthly,  the
    applicant did not meet the requirements of the rules in relation  to  a
    grant of leave in recognition of private life: in particular, she was a
    relatively frequent visitor to her home  country.   Finally,  there  is
    consideration of the case under  article  8  outside  the  Rules.   The
    Secretary of State makes a number of observations about the  deception,
    and concludes that it is so clearly in the  public  interest  that  the
    appellant be required to leave the United  Kingdom  that  a  separation
    from her child (then only one) is justified: they can be  looked  after
    by their father.

34. The grounds of appeal take issue with the  finding  of  deception,  and
    assert that the appellant's removal would  be  disproportionate.   They
    make no reference to the Rules.

35. The Judge says in his decision that he has borne every provision of the
    Rules "in mind meticulously", but does not make any  further  reference
    to them.  Nor, more alarmingly, does  he  make  any  reference  to  the
    allegation of deception or the grounds challenging  it.   He  does  not
    even include his standard paragraph setting out the burden of proof  in
    cases where deception is alleged  (although  that  paragraph  is  often
    included in decisions where it can have no relevance).   As  a  result,
    the appellant is deprived of what she  must  partly  have  sought  -  a
    judicial finding that  the  deception  was  not  established;  and  the
    parties are both deprived of any assurance that  the  judge  even  knew
    that that was a crucially important feature of the challenged decision.
     The Judge also makes no reference to the appellant's failure  to  meet
    the income requirements of the Rules.   It  is  trite  law  that  these
    factors would need to be taken into account even where  a  decision  is
    sought outside the Rules, because the Rules set out  the  Secretary  of
    State's understanding of the balance of public interest under article 8
    and the extent to which the requirements of the rules are met, and  the
    question whether the  appellant  has  been  guilty  of  deception,  are
    factors that must feed the proportionality exercise.   Additionally,  s
    117A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  sets  out
    factors that every court or  tribunal  is  required  to  consider  when
    undertaking the article 8 balance, some of which  require  findings  of
    fact.   Dr  Majid  makes  no  reference  to  the  provisions,  to   the
    requirements, to the relevant facts, or to his  assessment.   All  that
    can be clear to the reader is that the judge has failed  to  deal  with
    the contentions of the parties, to apprehend the facts or to apply  the
    law to them.   This is indeed the case in which the judge  purports  to
    allow the appeal on the basis of exercising his discretion in favour of
    the children.

36. As Collins J said in Slimani, there is a virtue in  brevity.   But  the
    basic requirements of a judicial decision must be met in all cases.  It
    is necessary to set out sufficient of the facts to give  a  context  to
    the dispute; sufficient of the evidence and submissions  to  show  what
    the dispute was; findings on any disputed material fact and  sufficient
    and adequate reasons for those findings; and adequate reasons  for  the
    conclusion, derived from the facts and the applicable legal rules.   In
    the decisions under appeal before us it is not easy to find even one of
    those basic requirements being met.  The reasons given are not  proper,
    intelligible or accurate.  The failures amount to errors of law.

OTHER MATTERS

37. Given that Judge Majid makes no detailed reference to facts or to  law,
    it might be expected that his decisions are short, and indeed they are.
     Despite that, however, they are full of observations many of which are
    of dubious correctness, some of which are of dubious relevance,  and  a
    few of which are wholly inappropriate.

38. The decisions all begin with standard paragraphs.  That is something we
    do not criticise, although even when using a standard paragraph a judge
    is of course responsible for ensuring that the  assertions  in  it  are
    true.  Given the points we have set out above there must be some  doubt
    of the accuracy of the statements in standard paragraph 2 that "I  have
    read [the] refusal carefully and have taken into account  its  text  in
    assessing this case, paying specific attention  to  the  justifications
    advanced for the negative decision" or that  in  standard  paragraph  3
    that the Judge has borne in mind all the paragraphs of the  Immigration
    Rules and the provisions of  the  "recent  Immigration  Act  2014"  (no
    reference ever seems to be made to previous  legislation).   There  may
    even be doubt  about  standard  paragraph  6  "To  make  this  Decision
    comprehensive, I have carefully read all the documents".

39. The next paragraph usually records simply that there was oral  evidence
    "consistent with the assertions in  the  application".   The  paragraph
    usually numbered  8,  immediately  preceding  the  Gondolia  paragraph,
    usually reads as follows or something very similar:

           "I have outlined the evidential elements of the evidence adduced
           on behalf of the  Appellant  which  are  relevant  to  the  fair
           disposal of this appeal.  I have taken into account all  of  the
           documentary and oral evidence in making up my  mind  on  factual
           issues.  To avoid repetition, I shall refer to some evidence  in
           my deliberations below."

40. In the light  of  the  preceding  discussion  it  is  clear  that  this
    assertion is unfulfilled.  In  most  cases,  none  of  the  "evidential
    elements of the evidence" have been outlined, nor are they going to be,
    whether or not they are "relevant to the fair disposal of" the  appeal.
    Not merely is repetition avoided: there is nothing capable of being the
    subject of repetition.

41. By the end of  the  paragraph  on  "dispositive"  reasons  the  initial
    standard paragraphs have finished.  Allowing more than half a page  for
    headings and so on, the determination is at the beginning  of  page  3,
    and at about paragraph 12.  This is the point where there are, in  most
    (but not all) the decisions, a few references to a few  of  the  facts,
    and to one or two matters that occurred at the  hearing.   Usually  the
    important  references  occupy  less  than  a  page,  often  much  less.
    Sometimes there is a supplement of irrelevant  matters:  in  one  case,
    where the sponsor's nationality was not  seriously  in  dispute  (Wang:
    IA/32046/2015), the Judge took it upon himself to find as a  fact  that
    the sponsor was a British national because although he did not  produce
    his passport he recited what he said was the number on  it.   Sometimes
    the supplementary observations are ill-judged: in the case of  EDO  and
    others (HU/01882/2015), the Judge  observes  at  some  length  that  he
    criticised the Presenting Officer, apparently for taking the point that
    the appellant had been an overstayer for about 14 years before  he  was
    arrested for fighting; then on another issue in the same case he writes
    that he "must admire"  the  Presenting  Officer,  "who  should  not  be
    condemned  for  suspecting  the  Appellants'  credibility";  a  similar
    observation in another case is cited at para 26 above.

42. After these references to the hearing, the evidence and the facts,  the
    Judge sets out his observations on the law.  Sometimes the observations
    are concise; sometimes they are  relevant;  we  have  considered  their
    accuracy above, and we have also noted that the law relating to  deceit
    is sometimes mentioned when it is not relevant, or omitted when  it  is
    relevant.  But much of what appears in this part of  the  decisions  is
    material that simply should not be there; the Judge makes no attempt to
    tie  down  as  relevant  to  his  decision  even  those  parts  of  his
    disquisition that refer to the law.  The following  is  a  particularly
    egregious example, from the case in which the only  issue  was  whether
    the Secretary of State was permitted in terms of the Refugee Convention
    to withdraw the appellant's refugee status (Shinwari: RP/00104/2016).

          "22. In reaching my decision I am fully conscious of the fact that
          the overriding objective of  the  judicial  function  guides  that
          judges in pursuing expedition and efficiency in disposal of  cases
          should sacrifice justice.  Thus I am alert to  the  fact  that  my
          Decision does not violate any of the  following  legal  principles
          applicable in this case and coming from binding precedents.  These
          principles are:-

      a)    [the discussion of Judicial Review set out above]

              b) One must be cautious in applying the  immigration  concepts
                 since "the Secretary of State holds  all  the  cards.   The
                 Secretary  of  State  drafts  the  Immigration  Rules;  the
                 Secretary of State issues IDIs and guidance statements; the
                 Secretary of State authorises the public statements made by
                 his/her officials. - Pokhriyal v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1568,
                 per Jackson LJ.

              c) Mr Justice Turner who is not known  to  be  an  immigration
                 lawyer  was  handling  an  immigration  case  for  judicial
                 review.  Subsequent to a lucid  analysis  of  the  relevant
                 issues  covering   81   paragraphs,   he   announced   that
                 "immigration" control  should  be  handled  fairly  and  it
                 should be encouraged when a migrant is good for this nation
                 and its economy - Case No: CO/11203/2011  [2013]  EWHC  891
                 (Admin) (18/04/2013).

          23. To make sure that my decision is totally  in  accordance  with
             the  law  I   have   obeyed   the   following   principles   of
             interpretation in this case:-

                 (a) if the other party asserts something that the Appellant
                    is guilty of then the Appellant should be  able  to  say
                    that the asserting  party  must  prove  that  assertion;
                    otherwise the Appellant must not  be  saddled  with  the
                    inference.  I must seek the forgiveness  of  Lord  Woolf
                    and his supporters for using  the  Latin  tag  for  this
                    principle; this  rule  of  interpretation  is  known  as
                    contra   proferentem.    Since   this    principle    of
                    interpretation is for the  protection  of  a  vulnerable
                    Appellant I  am  pleased  to  have  it  in  my  judicial
                    armoury.

                 (b) the "Golden Rule" of interpretation should be used  for
                    the benefit of the  Appellant.   As  predicated  in  the
                    Bedford case 1921 even the  expressed  language  of  the
                    binding statue should be ignored if  the  interpretation
                    put forward by a particular party  leads  to  an  absurd
                    decision - in that case it  was  held  by  the  old  CCA
                    (Criminal Court of Appeal) that the  statutory  language
                    "on the pavement" could be ignored  where  a  woman  was
                    asserting that she was not "on the pavement" and she was
                    standing on the floor of her own flat and tapping on the
                    window to attract the attention of the people  who  were
                    on the pavement.

          24. The test of arguability leads to the appeal to the UTT  (Upper
             Tier Tribunal) against the decision taken by  a  judge  in  the
             First Tier Tribunal.  Senior trainers with  manifest  expertise
             in judicial craft have advised me that "arguability" is a  very
             easy test to meet and permit an appeal.  "First you decide  you
             do not like a decision taken by a junior judge and  then  worry
             about the permission on the ground of "arguability" because one
             can always say something is arguable because  it  is  desirable
             that any defective decision at the lower level is corrected  on
             appeal.  Thus the arguability test is "very easy" to meet.

          25.  The  present  Conservative  Government  did  not  succeed  in
             abolishing the Human Rights Act 1998 making  the  Human  Rights
             Convention 1950  devoid  of  legislative  effect.   Indeed  the
             Commission established to  abolish  the  ECHR  (headed  by  the
             senior civil servant Home Office Permanent Secretary) could not
             give a report which could justify the abolition of the ECHR  as
             it was the main objective of this commission.  This  commission
             was very well put together and included  in  its  members  Lord
             Lester who is known to  be  the  father  of  the  Human  Rights
             Convention - obviously Lord Lester was not  in  favour  of  the
             abolition of the Convention.  The upshot of this background  is
             that an immigration judge will not be fair to deny  the  relief
             available under the Convention if Parliament does  not  abolish
             the 1998 Act which brought into force the ECHR in the municipal
             jurisdiction of the UK.

          26.  The  Judicial  Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords  was  the
             predecessor of the present British Supreme Court.  It faced the
             argument in the case of Pepper v Hart [1993] AC  593  that  the
             record of the speeches of the MPs in the House of  Commons  was
             too rambling to allow a person to work out the proper intention
             of Parliament.  However in this case the HL  held  that  judges
             may  refer  to  Hansard  as  a  guide  to   interpretation   of
             legislation.  Now this is  an  established  principle  and  the
             intention of Parliament can be worked out by referring  to  it.
             Accordingly referring to the MPs speeches in  Parliament  I  am
             obliged to note that the Human Rights Convention  and  the  Act
             bringing it  into  force  (the  HR  Act  1998)  have  not  been
             abolished and Parliament does not oblige me to  obviate  relief
             under them."

43. In one of the other decisions  (Comery:  IA/00866/2016)  this  text  is
    expanded with some memories of a radio interview given by  Lord  Lester
    of Herne Hill.  In another decision, Wang (IA/32046/2015), the  warning
    said to be derived from Pokhriyal is changed  to  being  applicable  to
    working out the best interests of the child (in fact the  consideration
    is specifically directed by Jackson LJ at to  be  applicable  only  and
    precisely to prohibiting the Secretary of State from seeking  "to  rely
    upon extraneous material in order to persuade a court  or  tribunal  to
    construe the rules more harshly or  to  resolve  an  ambiguity  in  the
    Government's favour"; none of the decisions under appeal  involves  any
    detailed or contested interpretation of the wording of the rules).   In
    another  decision,  Khattab  (HU/13552/2015),  there  is  a   paragraph
    containing  an  anecdotal  reference  to  an  apparently  extrajudicial
    observation of Lawton  LJ  cited  (so  far  as  we  understand  it)  as
    investing the First-tier Tribunal with inherent  power  to  exercise  a
    discretion to allow appeals.  Nearly all  the  decisions  contain  some
    material of this sort.  The passage set out  above,  not  one  word  of
    which appears to be relevant to the case  in  hand,  occupies  about  a
    third of the entire text of the decision.

44. There are two other matters to which we  should  refer.  The  first  is
    that, as will have been apparent from some  of  the  passages  we  have
    quoted; it does not look as though any attempt has been made  to  check
    the decisions for grammatical or linguistic  error.   The  phrase  "the
    evidential elements of the evidence" is in a  standard  paragraph.   It
    ought not to have survived being in one draft.  The  second  factor  is
    that as well as the principal issue we have to determine,  that  is  to
    say  whether  the  determinations  display  error  of  law,  there  are
    allegations of unreasonable and  inappropriate  conduct  by  the  judge
    during the hearing.  It is very telling that  one  such  allegation  is
    made by a representative who won his case (Khattab: HU/13552/2015), and
    so did not need to complain: he has no axe to grind.  He wrote a letter
    to the President of the First-tier Tribunal.  With the  consent  of  Mr
    Wilding we gave our permission for its material parts to be  introduced
    into the hearing as, essentially,  a  late  Rule  24  response  to  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.      As so amended, it reads as
    follows:-

          "Rule 24 Response

                 1. All grounds of  appeal  raised  by  the  Respondent  are
                    conceded.

          2.  In  addition,  it  is  submitted  that  there  was  procedural
             unfairness/irregularity on the following basis:

            a) It was extremely  difficult  for  the  participants  in  the
               hearing (including the court interpreter) to understand what
               IJ Majid was saying, which caused significant  confusion  on
               numerous occasions.

            b) His comments and questions were of tangential  relevance  to
               the case and it was difficult  for  the  witness  and  legal
               representative to grasp the points he was trying to make.

            c) He became angry with both witnesses and legal representative
               as a result  of  the  strained  communication  and  frequent
               misunderstandings.

   d) He was unwilling and/or unable to hear legal submissions.

          I would go so far as to suggest that the nature of the proceedings
          before IJ Majid were so shambolic as to bring  the  Tribunal  into
          disrepute and undermine public confidence in an effective judicial
          system."

45. Another difficulty during the course of the hearing  arose  in  Stephen
    OA/07779/2015, and is considered below. In that case, we find that  the
    Secretary of State's grounds are made out.  In the other case,  all  we
    need to do is record that the points  raised  by  Mr  Moran  caused  us
    serious concern, particularly as they appear to be endorsed by the note
    made by the Presenting Officer.  We do not need  to  reach  a  view  on
    them; we hope that no party to an appeal will ever  feel  it  right  to
    make such allegations again.

CONCLUSIONS

46. It seems to us that the complaints made about Judge  Majid's  decisions
    are entirely well-founded.  Nobody reading them could  detect  how  the
    judge reached the conclusion he did, acting within the law and applying
    the relevant substantive law to the facts as  found.   That  is  partly
    because the law and the facts are never the  subject  of  any  detailed
    reference, disputes on the facts are not identified, and there are next
    to no findings of relevant fact;  more  seriously  it  is  because  the
    Judge's statements in his decisions, either by direct assertion  or  by
    disquisition on the irrelevant, give real reason to suppose that he  is
    not  even  trying  to  act  within  the  law  and  apply  the  relevant
    substantive law to the facts as found.

47. We regard the body of his work that we have examined in the  course  of
    these appeals as wholly failing to meet the standards that are demanded
    by the office of a judge and expected by the  parties.   As  a  result,
    every one of the decisions under appeal shows error  of  law,  in  most
    cases serious error, in most cases multiple  serious  errors.   Whether
    the decisions are looked at together  or  separately,  they  show  that
    nobody should assume that Judge Majid has an adequate knowledge of  the
    law or of his task as a judge.  If his decisions continue to  have  the
    features we have identified in  the  foregoing  examination,  they  are
    clearly open to criticism.

48. We turn now to our individual examination of the appeals before us.



                                AA/06906/2014
                                     MM

                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, instructed by Chancery solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

49. We have in this case made an anonymity order in favour of the Appellant
    since the appeal concerns a protection claim.   The  Appellant  appeals
    against a decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Majid promulgated on 15
    November  2016  ("the  Decision")  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  dated  9  September  2014
    refusing his asylum and human rights claims and directing  his  removal
    under section 10 Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The  appeal  against
    the Decision is on protection and human rights grounds.


50. We do not need to set out the facts of this case since those appear  at
    [22] of our general decision above. By a  Rule  24  response  dated  21
    February 2017, the Respondent invited the Tribunal  to  set  aside  the
    Decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-making.
     The concession is in the following terms (so far as relevant):-
         "2.   Whilst  the  Respondent  considers  that  the  FtTJ  arrived
           ultimately at the correct  position  it  is  accepted  that  the
           reader would be  none  the  wiser  as  to  why  the  appeal  was
           dismissed and arguably demonstrates a lack of anxious  scrutiny,
           especially given the reference to homosexuality at [10]."


51. The Respondent's concession is rightly made.  The issues for the  Judge
    to determine were, so far as the protection claim is concerned, whether
    the Appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution  or  would  be  at
    real risk on return to Bangladesh.  In relation to the claim  based  on
    his family and private life, the Judge needed to determine whether  the
    Appellant meets the Immigration Rules and, if not, whether he should be
    permitted to remain for reasons existing outside the Rules.


52. There are some general and largely correct statements of some  features
    of the law in asylum appeals at [4].  At [2] the judge says he has read
    the refusal carefully.  At [5] the  judge  notes  that  the  respondent
    doubts the appellant's credibility, which is right.  At [10] the  judge
    says that the refusal letter "does not accept that [the appellant] is a
    homosexual with commonly accepted immutable characteristics which  make
    him vulnerable to persecution".  Neither the appellant's claim nor  the
    refusal letter make any reference to homosexuality.  At [8] and [9] the
    judge appears to indicate that the only issue assigned before  him  was
    credibility.  Thereafter the  Judge  fundamentally  misunderstands  the
    facts of the Appellant's case at [11] to  [12]  of  the  Decision.   We
    assume that the Judge was aware that  the  Appellant  was  outside  his
    country of origin since he gave evidence in person at the hearing.   It
    appears therefore that the Judge thought that the Appellant  could  not
    succeed in his asylum claim because he had obtained a visa to travel to
    the UK from his home country.  But that visa was as a  family  visitor.
    Whilst, as we observe at [22] of our decision above, the fact of having
    come as a visitor and only claiming asylum some  two  years  later  may
    give rise to some credibility issues, that fact  did  not  prevent  the
    protection claim succeeding in and of itself.


53. That fundamental error then led to the  Judge  making  no  findings  on
    credibility, the subject of the submissions before him, on the core  of
    the Appellant's protection claim or whether he would be at real risk on
    return to his home country.  The Decision plainly cannot be allowed  to
    stand.   The Judge also made  no  findings  on  the  Appellant's  human
    rights claims whether under or outside the Rules.


54. Whether or not  the  Appellant's  appeal  ultimately  succeeds,  he  is
    entitled to know the reasons for the outcome.  The  Decision  does  not
    provide  adequate  findings  or  reasons  for  the  conclusions,  fails
    properly to consider the claims made or the evidence before  the  Judge
    and, insofar as the claim is considered at all, fundamentally fails  to
    understand the facts of the claim.  In consequence, the reasons for the
    Decision reached were not open to the Judge on  the  evidence  and  the
    conclusion reached is therefore unsustainable.


55. The Decision therefore discloses a material error of law and we set  it
    aside.    Given the fundamental nature of the errors of law  found  and
    the Appellant's entitlement to have the facts  of  his  claim  properly
    determined, we agree with the parties that it  is  necessary  for  this
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for redetermination by
    a Judge other than Judge Majid.




         HU/01879/2015; HU/01881/2015; HU/01882/2015; HU/01883/2015

                               EDO AND OTHERS
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

Representation:
For the Appellants:    In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

56. We make an anonymity direction in this appeal pursuant to  Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, given that  two  of
    the appellants are minors.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the appellants herein  are  granted  anonymity.   No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them
    or any member of their family.  Failure to comply with  this  direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


57. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Majid, promulgated on 14 March 2017, dismissing the appellants' appeals
    against the Secretary of State's decision(s) of 23 June  2015  refusing
    their human rights claims. The appellants are nationals of  Ghana.  The
    first and second appellants are husband and  wife  and  the  third  and
    fourth appellants are their minor children (born in the United  Kingdom
    on 16 May 2007 and 21 January 2009, respectively).


58. At the outset of the hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  Mr  Wilding
    accepted that: (i) the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  should  be  set
    aside as a consequence of the numerous material errors of law contained
    therein; and, (ii) the fundamental nature of such errors  requires  the
    appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
    afresh by a different judge. We concur with both  concessions,  as  did
    the appellants. Although, as a consequence of the concessions  made  by
    the Mr Wilding, we need not set out in detail the nature of the  errors
    in the Judge Majid's consideration of the appeal,  we  do  consider  it
    appropriate to summarise them, if for no other reason  than  to  enable
    Judge Majid to understand why this particular  decision  has  been  set
    aside.


59. Two passages from the Judge's decision in the instant case are set  out
    at [21] above, with observations as to the nature of  the  errors  that
    can be identified therein. We need not repeat those  observations.  The
    Judge's decision also suffers from  the  frailties  considered  in  our
    general conclusions above at [7] - [17] and [19] - [20].


60. The Judge Majid's overarching conclusion is reflected in the  following
    paragraph:


           "[16] Accordingly, in view of my deliberations in the  preceding
           paragraphs and having taken into account all  of  the  oral  and
           documentary evidence as well as the submissions at my  disposal,
           cognisant of the fact  that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
           Appellant  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  the   balance   of
           probabilities, I am persuaded that the Appellants  do  not  come
           within the relevant Immigration Rules as amended."


61. We observe that the appellants challenge to the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was limited, by section 84(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, to reliance on the ground that, "the  decision  is
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998". If  a  Tribunal
    concludes that the requirements of the Immigration Rules are not met it
    is incumbent upon it to complete the task required  of  it  by  statute
    i.e. to determine whether the  decision  under  challenge  is  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. The instant decision does
    not  disclose  a  discrete  conclusion  on  the  one  ground  that  the
    appellants  were  entitled  to  pursue  on  appeal;  neither  can  such
    conclusion be inferred from reading the FtT's decision in the round.

62. Although Judge Majid makes reference to section 117 of the 2002 Act  at
    [18] of his decision, such reference is not  made  in  the  context  of
    determining the appeal on human rights grounds outside the confines  of
    the Rules and in any event it is incomplete, and for the most part  the
    observations therein are incorrect in law. The failure of  Judge  Majid
    to reference, or summarise, the effect of section 117B(6) of  the  2002
    Act, a provision which should be at the heart of any decision  in  this
    appeal  made  on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the   Rules,   provides
    significant support for the conclusions that the Judge did not turn his
    mind to analysis of such ground and that, if he did, he failed to  take
    cognisance of a material matter.


63. In  any  event  the  decision  under  the  Immigration  Rules  is  also
    fundamentally  flawed.  First,  it  does  not  disclose  which  of  the
    immigration rules consideration was given to, nor does it  provide  any
    satisfactory reasons as why the requirements  of  those  (unidentified)
    rules were not met.


64. Insofar as the FtT's decision  purports  to  incorporate  any  reasoned
    analysis of the issues before it, this is contained at [20]  and  [21].
    Even superficial scrutiny of this reasoning identifies that Judge Majid
    failed  to  undertake  a  thorough,  if   any,   examination   of   the
    circumstances  of  the  minor  appellants,  failed   to   place   those
    circumstances in their proper legal context (and in particular it is to
    be observed that one of the children has lived in the United Kingdom at
    the relevant date for a period in excess of seven years and one  has  a
    statement of  educational  needs)  and  took  into  account  immaterial
    matters - such as the current fiscal crisis.


65. The losing party is entitled to know the basis upon  which  the  appeal
    was lost. It is axiomatic that this requires the decision  to  disclose
    sufficient reasons to enable such an understanding to be garnered  from
    it.  Judge Majid's decision in the instant case falls a long way  short
    of adhering to the aforementioned basic tenet of a lawful decision.

66. For the reasons given above, we find that the FtT's decision  discloses
    an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal  and  we
    set it aside. Given the fundamental nature of the errors identified  we
    conclude that it is necessary for this appeal to be remitted to the FtT
    to be determined afresh by a judge other than Judge Majid.



                                HU/13552/2015

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                     and
                                RAWAN KHATTAB

    Representation:
     For the Appellant:    Mr  T  Wilding,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer
    For the Respondent:   Mr A Moran, instructed by Alex Moran Immigration
& Asylum


67.  This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  Amman.   The
    respondent, whom we shall call 'the claimant', is a national of  Syria.
    She applied for, and  was  refused,  entry  clearance  to  join  Khalil
    Alathoub, her husband, who is in the United Kingdom and  is  recognised
    as a refugee.  The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal set out
    the facts and the claimant's case in some detail.  The Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision is challenged on the grounds that, contrary to  what
    he thought, there is ample and persuasive evidence  that  the  marriage
    between the claimant and  her  husband  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship, dating from before his flight, and that the  requirements
    of paragraph 352A(iv) (which was the sole ground of refusal)  are  met.
    Human rights grounds are also raised.

68. Despite Judge Majid's claim to have "adverted to the  main  reasons  in
    the Refusal  Letter  meticulously",  to  have  "carefully  perused  the
    Appellant's documents to reach my decision" and (again) that  he  "took
    into account the reasons in the Refusal Letter", his decision  contains
    no reference either to paragraph 352A or to the human  rights  grounds.
    He allows the appeal apparently on the  basis  that  the  claimant  has
    herself established a claim to asylum, although no evidence of that was
    led.  He asserts, incorrectly, that the  "Respondent  thinks  that  the
    option of internal flight within Syria is available to the  Appellant".
    The decision appears to be contained in the following sentence:


           "However I can give the benefit of my judicial discretion in
           this case because the Appellant cannot be deprived of compassion
           in the UK even in these hard economic times".

69. The decision contains a number of the other features we have identified
    above as common to most of Judge Majid's  decisions.   In  addition  at
    paragraph 7 the judge says that "he  is  alert  to  the  fact  that  my
    Decision in this case does not violate any of  the  following  specific
    legal principles".  This assertion and the  specific  legal  principles
    that follow occupy about one third of the six-page decision.  None  are
    relevant except a  factual  (not  legal)  observation,  apparently  not
    founded on evidence in the case under examination,  that  "Syrians  are
    maltreated by their own president".  Amongst the others are:

           "7. In reaching my Decision I am fully  conscious  of  the  fact
              that the overriding objective of the judicial function guides
              that judges in trying to pursue expedition and efficiency  in
              the disposal of cases should not sacrifice justice.   Thus  I
              am alert to the fact that my Decision in this case  does  not
              violate  any  of  the  following  specific  legal  principles
              applicable in this case and coming from  binding  precedents.
              These principles are:-
               ...

               (c) Executive discretion  is  not  noted  by  many  material
                  executives and in this respect they should be made  aware
                  of it because it can bring a lot of relief to individuals
                  who deserve fair exercise of discretion in their favour.

               (d) The celebrated British politician, Mr Tony Benn, in  his
                  own words, had "100%  success"  in  persuading  President
                  Saddam Hussain to  release  hostages  in  December  1990.
                  When the Iraqi Airways chartered plane landed at Gatwick,
                  applying the  law  literally,  the  Immigration  Officers
                  (IOs) at the airport, started to check the  passports  of
                  the hostages to verify whether  they  had  the  right  to
                  enter the UK.  Using his  executive  discretion,  a  Home
                  Office Minister (part of the eminent personages  who  had
                  come to welcome the hostages) stopped IOs  saying,  "They
                  have already suffered a lot; don't make them stand  in  a
                  queue  for  this  purpose".   Consequently,  no   further
                  passport was checked.
                ...

               (g) The Home Office is rapidly changing the rules  in  every
                  area and a judge would be unfair if he used  the  changes
                  to the detriment of a genuine Appellant". [The provisions
                  the judge  ought  to  have  been  considering  were  last
                  changed in September 2002].

70. The Entry Clearance Officer's grounds of  appeal  are  that  the  judge
    completely misapprehended the nature of the appeal, applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof to the issues he should have  been  determining,  had
    not addressed the  issues  under  appeal  and  as  a  result  proceeded
    unfairly, because the parties had no opportunity to address the  issues
    on which he appears to have decided the case.  Mr  Moran,  in  a  reply
    which we admitted out of time, conceded the grounds in  full.   In  the
    letter to which we have referred above, he  described  the  hearing  as
    "shambolic".

71. Whatever may be the accuracy of that description, we have no hesitation
    in agreeing with the parties that Judge Majid's decision  wholly  fails
    to deal with the issues under appeal.  There is almost nothing  in  the
    substantive parts of the decision that would have appeared in a  proper
    determination of the issues under appeal, and the decision itself at no
    point makes any determination of those issues.  We  set  it  aside  for
    error of law.

72. The parties before us agreed that this was a case in which it would  be
    appropriate for us to examine the issues ourselves.  We indicated  that
    we were inclined to agree with Mr Moran that the  evidence  before  the
    judge was sufficient to establish on the balance of probabilities  that
    the requirements of  paragraph  352A  were  met  at  the  date  of  the
    decision.  Mr Wilding did not oppose that view.

73. We therefore allow the appellant's appeal.



                                IA/00866/2016

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                     and
                            MARCIA CORRINE COMERY

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Adenakan, instructed by Morgan Pearce
    Solicitors

74. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference, we
    refer below to the parties as they were  in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal.
    The Respondent appeals against a decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
    Majid promulgated on  14  March  2017  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  29
    January 2016 refusing her human rights claim based on her  relationship
    with a British citizen and her private life established in the UK.


75. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica.  She entered the UK on 24 March
    2002 as a visitor and obtained further leave to  remain  as  a  student
    until 31 October  2003.   Thereafter,  she  overstayed.   She  made  an
    application for leave to remain on 11 May 2010 which was refused on  19
    February 2011 with no right of appeal.  The Appellant was  served  with
    notice of removal on 17 March 2015 whereupon she made the human  rights
    claim which is under consideration in this appeal.


76. The central issues in this appeal  were  whether  the  Appellant  could
    qualify under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  based  on  her
    relationship with a partner.  The Respondent did not  accept  that  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting and, in  any  event,  concluded
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  the  couple  continuing
    their relationship in Jamaica.  In relation to her  private  life,  the
    Appellant has not been in the UK for twenty years  and  the  Respondent
    did not accept that there was evidence that the  Appellant  would  face
    "very significant obstacles" to reintegration in Jamaica.  Nor did  she
    accept that there were any  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  the
    grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.


77. The Decision is largely discursive and, as noted at [43] above contains
    a lengthy passage bearing distinct similarities to that set out at [42]
    of our general decision  above.   The  central  reason  why  the  Judge
    allowed the appeal appears at [28] to  be  that  "the  Appellant  comes
    within the relevant immigration law as  amended  and  should  have  the
    benefit of discretion".  As we note at [23] of the Decision,  there  is
    no power to allow an appeal on the basis of discretion in a  case  such
    as this; the Appellant either meets the  Rules  or  her  case  must  be
    assessed under Article 8 ECHR and if appropriate  allowed  outside  the
    Rules.  The difficulty, as we have previously identified, is  that  the
    Judge does not specify under what provision the Appellant succeeds  nor
    why.  It is notable that, although the Judge  refers  to  having  taken
    account of "all of the oral and documentary evidence  as  well  as  the
    submissions at my disposal" there are no findings on the central issues
    whether the Appellant is indeed in a genuine relationship as she claims
    and  whether  there  would  be   insurmountable   obstacles   to   that
    relationship continuing in Jamaica.


78. The reasons given for concluding in the Appellant's favour are said  to
    be the Judge's "deliberations in the preceding  paragraphs".   However,
    for the most part, those paragraphs are general in nature and  have  no
    bearing on this Appellant's case.  The closest one comes  to  a  reason
    for finding in her favour is at [10] to [12] of the Decision where  the
    Judge refers in limited terms to the partner's eye problems  and  notes
    that that the Appellant gives "crucial help" to her partner.   This  is
    said to be a "dispositive factor".


79. Although Mr Adenakan sought to persuade us that any error of law in the
    Decision was immaterial, he was unable to direct us to any findings  or
    reasons which disclosed whether the Appellant's case is  allowed  under
    the Rules or outside them.  Although  at  [11]  the  Judge  appears  to
    indicate that the case "comes within the applicable rules", Mr Adenakan
    was constrained to accept that the Judge  failed  to  consider  whether
    there would be insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  in
    Jamaica.  His submission that the Judge's reference  to  the  Appellant
    offering care to her partner is a finding that she is in a genuine  and
    subsisting partner relationship with him is unpersuasive.  The  Judge's
    description of the relationship at [11] and [12] could equally apply to
    the relationship of carer  and  patient  (as  we  observed  during  the
    hearing).  The comments made at [14] and [15] of the Decision referring
    to "elderly dependent relatives" might indeed point in that  direction.
    Ultimately, we do not know since the Judge has failed to enunciate  his
    reasons for concluding as he does in the Appellant's favour.


80. Equally, if the appeal is allowed outside the Rules (as  the  reference
    to "discretion" might be intended to indicate),  then  the  Judge  also
    needed to assess the impact of section 117B,  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  He needed to take into account that the Appellant
    is an overstayer.  There is no such analysis in the Decision.


81. There is also reference at [13] of the Decision to there being "special
    arrangements' in the respect of Jamaica whereby a  person  of  Jamaican
    background can exceptionally  'switch'  even  though  they  come  as  a
    visitor".  The Judge does not there refer  to  any  document  and  even
    indicates that neither the Presenting Officer or anyone else  in  court
    knew about them.  We confess that we have no idea either  to  what  the
    Judge intended to allude and Mr Adenakan was unable  to  assist  us  in
    this regard.  The Appellant is factually  an  overstayer,  contrary  to
    what the Judge appears to have thought by reference  to  such  "special
    arrangements".


82. The Respondent's sole ground of appeal in this case is that no  reasons
    have been given for allowing the appeal.  She  says  simply  that  such
    reasons as are given do not enable her as the losing party to know  why
    she has lost (nor why the Appellant has won).   She  is  not  alone  in
    that.  The Respondent's ground is made out.  We are satisfied that  the
    Judge  failed  properly  to  direct  himself  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules, primary legislation  (section  117)  and  case  law.
    Much of  the  Judge's  reasoning  is  devoted  to  irrelevant,  general
    political comment which has no bearing on the issues.  He has failed to
    make findings on the central issues and even where  findings  are  made
    they are inadequately reasoned.  It is also for the Appellant's benefit
    that the Decision be set  aside  as   the  basis  on  which  a  Judge's
    decision is reached in the human rights context may have a  bearing  on
    the period and route of leave to be granted.


83. We find that the Decision discloses a material error of law and we  set
    it aside.    Given the fundamental nature of the errors  of  law  found
    and the Appellant's entitlement to have the facts of her claim properly
    determined, it is necessary for this appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for redetermination by a Judge other than Judge Majid.


                                IA/23617/2015

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                     and
                            JONES BOATENG-DANSOH


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the  Respondent:     Miss  D  Ofei-Knatia,  instructed  by  Genga  &  Co
solicitors

84. For ease of reference, we refer below to the parties as  they  were  in
    the First-Tier Tribunal.


85. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Majid, promulgated on 16 September  2016,  allowing
    the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  of  9
    June 2015 refusing his human rights claim.

86. The appellant is a national of Ghana, born 1 May 1965. He  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 17 May 1994 and claims to have  continuously  resided
    here since. He made an asylum clam upon  arrival,  which  he  "did  not
    pursue" and, subsequently, made an application  for  an  EEA  Residence
    Card on 2 September 2009, which was refused on a date not disclosed  in
    the Tribunal's papers. Thereafter the appellant  made  a  human  rights
    application under cover of a letter dated 1 April 2015. It was asserted
    therein that he had been in  a  relationship  with  a  British  citizen
    (Veronica Boakye) between 2000 and 2009,  and  that  there  were  three
    (British citizen) children born of the relationship,  (in  March  2002,
    March 2003 and January 2009, respectively). This relationship  had,  as
    of 1 April 2015, recently rekindled and the 'couple'  were  once  again
    living with each other.


87. In her decision of 9 June 2015, the Secretary  of  State,  inter  alia,
    concluded:


          i)  The  appellant  does  not  have  a  genuine  and   subsisting
             relationship with a British partner, he  and  Veronica  Boakye
             not having lived together in a relationship akin  to  marriage
             for the past 2 years. Therefore, the appellant does  not  meet
             the requirements of the 'partner route' under Appendix  FM  to
             the Immigration Rules;
         ii)  Although  the  appellant  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting
             relationship with his three children he  does  not  have  sole
             parental responsibility for them. He claims to live with  them
             and their mother. He cannot, therefore, meet the  requirements
             of the 'Parent route' under Appendix FM to the Rules;
        iii) It is not accepted that the appellant has lived in the  United
             Kingdom continuously for 20 years. He cannot, therefore,  meet
             the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the Rules;
         iv) It is not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very  significant
             obstacles to the appellant integrating into life in Ghana. The
             requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  are,  therefore,  not
             met; and
          v)  It  is  not  accepted  that  there   were   any   exceptional
             circumstances justifying the grant of leave to remain  outside
             the Rules.

88. Judge Majid's overarching conclusion  is  reflected  in  the  following
    passage:


         "[16] Accordingly, in view of my deliberations  in  the  preceding
           paragraphs and having taken into account all  of  the  oral  and
           documentary evidence as well as the submissions at my  disposal,
           cognisant of the fact  that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
           Appellant  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  the   balance   of
           probabilities, I am persuaded that the  Appellant  comes  within
           the relevant Immigration Rules as amended."

89. The grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal identifies  the
    core challenge thus:


           "3. The grounds on which permission to appeal is  sought  submit
           that the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that
           the Appellant satisfied the requirements for leave to remain  as
           a parent. Arguably the failure to  give  adequate  reasons  goes
           much wider than this. Arguably there is a failure  to  give  any
           clear indication of the basis on which the appeal was allowed."


90. Although not a point taken by the Secretary  of  State  before  us,  we
    observe that the appellant's challenge  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was limited, by section 84(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, to reliance on the ground that  "the  decision  is
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998".


91. It maybe that the Secretary of State did not seek to pursue this  point
    as a consequence of the combination of the appeal having  been  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules and the Secretary of State's position  that
    the  Rules  identify  the  public  interest   in   immigration   cases.
    Nevertheless, even if a Tribunal concludes that the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules are met it is still incumbent on it to  complete  the
    task required of it by statute - in this case to determine whether  the
    decision under challenge is unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998. The decision made on such issue should be explicit  in
    the FtT's decision. Judge Majid's decision does not disclose a discrete
    conclusion on this ground.


92. Moving on, given the  terms  of  paragraph  16  of  the  Judge  Majid's
    decision and terms of the grounds of  challenge,  it  is  necessary  to
    embark upon an analysis of the reasons  given  by  the  Judge  for  his
    conclusion that the appellant  "comes  with  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules". One would have anticipated, as an irreducible minimum, that the
    decision would be explicit in its identification as  to  which  of  the
    numerous immigration rules in play in the instant appeal the  appellant
    was found to have met. It is not.


93. Ms Ofei-Knatia did not seek  to  suggest  that  Judge  Majid  gave  any
    consideration to the Partner or Private Life Routes under the Rules she
    submitted,  however,  that  there  was  sufficient  in  Judge   Majid's
    reasoning to infer that he had allowed the  appeal  under  the  'Parent
    Route' (paragraph R-LTRPT of Appendix FM) - the appellant, by the  time
    of the appeal hearing before the FtT, having left the family home.


94. The relevant immigration rule (E-LTRPT 2.3): materially  requires  that
    the appellant demonstrate either that:


               i) He has sole  parental  responsibility  for  (one  of)  his
                  British citizen children; or,
              ii) That Ms Boakye is not  his  partner  (a  partner  for  the
                  instant purposes including a person  who  has  been  in  a
                  relation with the appellant for less than two years  prior
                  to the date of application).


95. If the appellant demonstrates either of  the  aforementioned  he  would
    also need to meet the requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1  of  the  Rules
    because of his immigration status (E-LTRPT.3.2.). In the  instant  case
    the material requirement therein is that:


         "(ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
         UK"


96. With this in mind we turn back to Judge Majid's decision. Paragraphs  1
    to 11 thereof are unremarkable - containing a summary  the  appellant's
    background, the evidence, the parties' submissions as well as a  number
    of legal self-directions - many of  which  have  been  the  subject  of
    analysis in our general conclusions above.

97. Judge Majid's 'findings'  begin  at  [12]  -  under  the  heading  "The
    Proceedings":


           "[12] In the documents it is clear that the biological  children
           of the Appellant need his care and he has left me  in  no  doubt
           that he is fully willing  to  give  this  to  them.  Their  best
           interests  alone  can  inspire   discretion   in   his   favour.
           Furthermore, one cannot overlook the fact that this is a complex
           case which should come to an end.


           [13] The son, [P] is linked to the Appellant.  I  gathered  from
           the  oral  evidence  that  he  is  fully  benefitting  from  the
           appellant's father figure status going to football matches."


98. These findings are immediately followed, under  the  heading  "Relevant
    Law", with self-directions as to the applicability of section 55 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 [14(a)] and the ratio  of
    the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4
    [14(b)]. The only further reasoning is to be found in paragraphs  14(c)
    and 15 of the decision:


          "[14(c)] ... The Home Office in this  case  has,  by  issuing  the
           Children's passports acknowledged  that  they  are  British.  In
           their case one may raise the rhetoric  question  "To  where  can
           they be deported?"


           [15] I cannot ignore  the  "legal  requirements"  stipulated  by
           immigration law.  It is incumbent upon me to advert to  the  new
           Rules giving respect to the intention of the  House  of  Commons
           dictated by the supremacy of Parliament.  The Appellant ought to
           benefit  from  the  relevant  Rules  since   the   compassionate
           circumstances of this case lead to  that  conclusion.  The  best
           interests of the three children with DNA evidence should not  be
           undervalued."


99. It is uncontroversial that Judge Majid failed to direct himself to  the
    terms of any of the relevant immigration rules. This is not, of itself,
    an error but no doubt contributed to the judge's failure  to  identify,
    or determine, the pertinent issues within each of these rules.


100. As we have alluded to above, it is not contended that Judge Majid  made
    any findings relevant to a consideration of  the  Partner  and  Private
    Life routes under the Rules. Nor, we find, does  the  judge's  decision
    disclose any conclusions on the key issues in dispute under the  Parent
    Route of Appendix FM. In particular, there is nothing  within  [12]  to
    [16] of Judge Majid's decision which, even  implicitly,  amounts  to  a
    finding that the appellant either has sole responsibility  for  one  or
    more of his children, or that Ms Boakye is not his partner for purposes
    of  the  relevant  immigration   rule.   Furthermore,   there   is   no
    consideration of whether the requirements of paragraph EX.1  have  been
    met.


101. The losing party, in this case the Secretary of State, is  entitled  to
    know the basis upon which she has lost the appeal. It is axiomatic that
    this requires the FtT's decision  to  disclose  sufficient  reasons  to
    enable such an understanding to be  garnered  from  it.  Judge  Majid's
    decision does not disclose such reasoning. It is impossible  to  elicit
    from Judge Majid's decision which of the immigration rules he concluded
    the appellant  met  the  requirements  of,  the  decision  contains  no
    findings of fact on relevant issues and, in so far as it does  disclose
    any reasoning such reasoning could not lawfully lead to the  conclusion
    reached.


102. Consequently, in addition to  the  errors  identified  in  the  general
    conclusions above - which also pervade the instant  determination,  and
    irrespective of the fact that Judge Majid did not  determine  the  only
    permissible ground of challenge before  him  i.e.  whether  the  SSHD's
    decision leads to a breach of section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act,  the
    decision is fundamentally flawed by legal error and  falls  well  below
    the standard one would expect of a First-tier Tribunal judge.


103. For the reasons given above, we find that the FtT's decision  discloses
    an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal  and  we
    set it aside. Given the fundamental nature of the errors identified  we
    conclude that it is necessary for this appeal to be remitted to the FtT
    to be determined afresh by a judge other than Judge Majid.


                                IA/30887/2015

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                     and
                                AMANDEEP KAUR

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ahmed, instructed by 12 Bridge Solicitors

104. For ease of reference, we refer below to the parties as  they  were  in
    the First-Tier Tribunal.

105. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  a  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid,  promulgated  on  5  October  2016,
    allowing the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 7 January 2015.

106. The appellant is a national of India, born 3 April  1986.  She  entered
    the United Kingdom (accompanied by her husband) on 4 February 2011 with
    leave conferred until 13 March 2012, the date on which she, also,  made
    an application for further leave, as a Tier 4 Migrant. This application
    was originally refused in a decision of the 4 May 2012 and on the  same
    date a decision was made to remove the appellant pursuant to section 47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


107.  Thereafter,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McMahon  allowed  an  appeal
    brought  by  the  appellant  on  the  basis  both  that  she  met   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and that there had been no  basis
    in law for the Secretary of State to make the removal  decision.  In  a
    decision of 14 February 2013, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Jordan  and  DUTJ
    Lewis) set aside the FtT's decision and, upon re-making it:


          i) dismissed the appeal against the decision to  refuse  to  vary
             leave  -  concluding  that:  (i)  the  requirements   of   the
             Immigration Rules had not been met and (ii) the  Secretary  of
             State's decision did not lead to a breach of Article 8  ECHR);
             and,
         ii)  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  decision  to  remove  the
             appellant  on  the  basis  that  such  decision  was  not   in
             accordance with the law;

108. The next relevant event is the decision under challenge  of  7  January
    2015, which states that it is  made  in  response  to  the  appellant's
    application of the 13 March 2012. By way of that decision the Secretary
    of State purports to "refuse to vary [the appellant's]  leave"  and  to
    make a "Decision to Remove" the appellant. The decision letter does not
    identify under the auspices of which legal provision  the  decision  to
    remove is made, nor does it pay any  regard  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision of 14 February 2013, which was, of course,  the  determination
    of the appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's  initial
    decision refusing to vary her leave.




109. Turning then to the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  Judge  Majid
    proceeded on the basis that the appeal was brought against the decision
    to refuse to vary  the  appellant's  leave.  This,  though,  cannot  be
    correct. The appellant's leave was due to expire on 13 March 2012.  Her
    leave was, however, extended by virtue of section 3C of the Immigration
    Act 1971 as a consequence of the making  of  the  application  to  vary
    leave on that date. It was further extended by  the  subsequent  appeal
    against the refusal of such application i.e. the decision to refuse  to
    vary leave. The appellant's section 3C leave came to end  on  the  date
    her appeal rights were initially exhausted, i.e. on or around  the  end
    of February 2013.

110. It is clear, therefore, the Secretary of State's decision of 7  January
    2015 'refusing to  vary'  the  appellant's  leave  did  not  bring  the
    appellant's leave to an end but rather it  was  brought  an  end  as  a
    consequence of the appeal process (relating to the decision  of  4  May
    2012) having been exhausted.  There is,  therefore,  no  route,  within
    section 82 of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  or
    otherwise, providing jurisdiction for the FtT to  determine  an  appeal
    brought against the decision of 7 January 2015  refusing  to  vary  the
    appellant's leave.


111. This though does not deprive the appellant  of  a  remedy  against  the
    actions of the Secretary of State. Section 82 of the 2002 Act (prior to
    its amendment by the Immigration Act 2014)  provided  for  a  right  of
    appeal against a removal decision.  The  decision  of  7  January  2015
    identifies that a decision to remove the appellant  was  made  on  that
    date, although it does not disclose the  legal  basis  upon  which  the
    Secretary of State purported to make such decision. Unfortunately, none
    of these issues were raised before, or considered by, Judge Majid,  who
    proceeded on the incorrect basis that the decision under appeal was the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to  vary  the  appellant's
    leave.


112. In any event, even if we were to assume (as the Judge Majid  did)  that
    the decision under appeal was that of the Secretary of  State  refusing
    to vary the appellant's leave, the decision on that  issue  is  replete
    with legal errors such that it must be set aside.


113. The Secretary of State founded her decision of 7 January  2015  on  the
    fact that the CAS supplied by the appellant with her application of  13
    March 2012 did not specify that the course that she  wished  to  pursue
    represented academic progression from the  course  she  had  previously
    undertaken. This is exactly the issue that the Upper Tribunal concluded
    in the Secretary of State's favour in its decision of 14 February 2013.




114. Before Judge Majid the appellant relied upon policy guidance issued  by
    the Secretary of State on 25 July 2016, headed "Tier 4  of  the  Points
    Based System", to support the contention that academic  progression  is
    not restricted to the study of a course of a  higher  level  than  that
    previously studied, but that it can  also  invoke  consideration  of  a
    combination of factors, including whether  the  taking  of  the  course
    supports career aspirations.  Mr Ahmed asserted before us,  in  support
    of his contention  that  the  Judge  Majid's  decision  should  not  be
    dislodged, that (i) the Judge  accepted  this  submission,  as  it  was
    entitled to do, and (ii) that the Judge  thereafter  concluded,  having
    considered the evidence before him, that the appellant had demonstrated
    academic progression.


115. If this is Judge Majid's reasoning process, then it is far  from  clear
    from the terms of his decision.  Insofar  as  there  is  any  reasoning
    disclosed in the Judge Majid's decision it is as follows:


          "[20] ... Judges like me should not allow an arbitrary  reason  to
          obstruct the perfectly  proper  educational  plans  of  a  genuine
          student - this student as the Appellant's bundle has confirmed has
          paid  �3000  for  the  qualification  she  is  undertaking  at   a
          particular college.


          [21] I accept the fact that the Upper Tribunal's decision  is  not
          binding on me. The appeal before me is  in  relation  to  evidence
          freshly submitted to me and I am free to take any view of  that  -
          either I accept the cogency of the evidence or reject  it;  it  is
          convenient for me to say here that all of the evidence leads me to
          accept the new evidence before me.


          [23] I  cannot  ignore  the  "legal  requirements"  stipulated  by
          immigration law.  It is incumbent upon me to  advert  to  the  new
          Rules giving respect to the intention  of  the  House  of  Commons
          dictated by the supremacy of Parliament. The Appellant can benefit
          from the Rules because she is a  genuine  student  who  should  be
          helped as articulated above.


          [24] Accordingly, in view of my  deliberations  in  the  preceding
          paragraphs and having taken into  account  all  of  the  oral  and
          documentary evidence as well as the submissions  at  my  disposal,
          cognisant of the fact that the burden of proof is on the Appellant
          and the standard of proof is the balance of  probabilities,  I  am
          persuaded that the Appellant comes within the relevant Immigration
          Rules as amended."


116. This reasoning, in addition to the errors  identified  in  our  general
    conclusions above which, for the most part, also pervade this decision,
    is also brimming with further legal  error,  the  most  significant  of
    which can be summarised thus:


              i)  The  Judge  failed  to  apply  the  starred  decision   in
                 Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702 to his considerations  (there
                 had already been  a  decision  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
                 exactly the  issue  that  fell  for  consideration  in  the
                 instant appeal);
             ii) The Judge  failed  to  direct  himself  to  the  applicable
                 requirements of the Immigration Rules,  and  in  particular
                 the requirements that it was said by the Secretary of State
                 that the appellant failed to meet;
            iii) The Judge misdirected himself when stating that because the
                 appellant 'is a genuine student' she could benefit from the
                 Rules.  The  Rules  plainly  required  the   appellant   to
                 demonstrate more than the  fact  that  she  was  a  genuine
                 student;
             iv) The Judge erred  in  directing  himself  that  it  was  his
                 function to 'help'  the  appellant.  His  function  was  to
                 determine the appeal before him impartially, not to  'help'
                 one of the parties to the appeal to succeed;
              v) Insofar as the Judge took account of  the  policy  guidance
                 identified above, he erred in so doing - such guidance post-
                 dating the decision under appeal.

117. For all these reasons,  we  find  that  the  FtT's  decision  discloses
    multiple errors of law capable of affecting the outcome of the  appeal,
    and we set it  aside.  Given  the  fundamental  nature  of  the  errors
    identified we conclude that it is  necessary  for  this  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the FtT to be determined afresh by a judge other than Judge
    Majid.

                                IA/31116/2015

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                     and
                              SANDRA BOPOLONGA


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Mpangi, Respondent's Partner

118. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For  ease  of  reference,
    we refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier  Tribunal.
    The Respondent appeals against a decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
    Majid promulgated on 24 October  2016  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  10
    September  2015  refusing  her  human  rights  claim   based   on   her
    relationship with Mr Mpangi who is a person settled in the UK and their
    two children and her private life established in the UK.


119. The Appellant is a national of DRC.  She entered the UK on  21  January
    2005 with leave to remain as  a  spouse  until  11  January  2007.   An
    application made on 12  January  2007  for  indefinite  leave  in  that
    category was refused on 7 March 2007.  Thereafter, she overstayed.  She
    made an application for leave to remain on the basis of her family  and
    private life on 20 February 2015 leading to the decision under appeal.


120. The issues which required determination in this appeal are whether  the
    Appellant can meet Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  based  on  her
    relationship with her partner and/or their  children.   The  Respondent
    rejected the application based on the Appellant's relationship with her
    partner because she did not accept that it had subsisted for two  years
    prior to the  application.  In  particular,  she  did  not  accept  the
    evidence of a marriage said to have taken place in DRC in 2004  because
    the Appellant did not produce the original certificate.  The Respondent
    rejected the application based on the Appellant's relationship with her
    children because the Appellant shares parental responsibility for  them
    with her partner. The Respondent also  decided,  when  considering  the
    case outside the Immigration Rules, that the family could  relocate  to
    DRC.


121. The Judge allowed the appeal.  The main reason for doing so appears  at
    [20] of the Decision where he describes the children's  best  interests
    as a "knock-out blow".  As we observe at  [21]  above  in  relation  to
    another appeal, that  is  an  incorrect  statement  of  the  law.   The
    children's best interests are  a  primary  consideration  but  are  not
    paramount and are capable of being outweighed by other matters.   Here,
    the Appellant's overstaying  is  relevant  but  that  factor  finds  no
    mention in the Decision.


122. Mr Mpangi, who spoke on the Appellant's behalf, asked us to uphold  the
    Decision.  He produced to us the originals of  the  copy  documents  on
    which the Appellant relied in her application to evidence the  marriage
    having taken place.  As we observed in the course of the hearing, there
    may  be  some  issues  in  relation  to  those  documents  but  it   is
    inappropriate for us to comment further; in  light  of  our  conclusion
    that this appeal must be remitted, it will be  for  another  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to adjudicate on what those show.  As  Mr  Wilding  also
    pointed out in reply, even if  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  Mr
    Mpangi is as she  claims,  the  Judge  would  still  need  to  consider
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM  and  whether  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life  continuing  in  DRC.   That  is  because  the
    Appellant had  no  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  when  she  made  her
    application. The Judge made no finding on that issue.


123. At [22] of the Decision, the Judge purports to  apply  the  Immigration
    Rules to the Appellant's case and to find them satisfied.  He does  not
    cite the rule which he there purports to apply.  Nor  does  the  appeal
    succeed under the Rules if the children's best interests are the driver
    for allowing the appeal.  As Mr Wilding pointed out in his submissions,
    those may be reason to allow the appeal outside the Rules but since the
    Appellant is not the children's sole carer she cannot succeed under the
    parent route within the  Rules.   Unfortunately,  due  to  the  Judge's
    failure to advert to the rule he has in mind, we, as both parties,  are
    in the dark as to why the Judge thought  that  the  Appellant's  appeal
    could succeed under the Rules.  As we note  in  our  general  decision,
    this is a common failing.


124. The Respondent's sole ground of appeal alludes to the lack  of  reasons
    for allowing the appeal.  That ground is  made  out.   It  is  entirely
    unclear why the Judge allowed  the  appeal.   If  the  children's  best
    interests are in fact that reason, the Judge has fundamentally erred in
    his understanding of the importance to be accorded to those  interests.
    There is no attempt to factor in the public interest.


125. The Decision therefore discloses a material error of law and we set  it
    aside.    Given the fundamental nature of the errors of law  found  and
    the Appellant's entitlement to have the facts  of  her  claim  properly
    determined, it is necessary for this appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for redetermination by a Judge other than Judge Majid.

                        IA/31918/2015; IA/31924/2015

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                     and
                  EMELIA BOATENG AND CHARLES NUAMAH BEMPONG

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms M Harris, instructed by Rahman & Co solicitors

126. This is an appeal brought by the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
    reference, we refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier
    Tribunal. In a decision promulgated  on  24  October  2016,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Majid allowed appeals against the Secretary  of  State's
    decisions of 15 September 2015 refusing both  Ms  Boateng  ("the  first
    appellant") and  Mr  Bempong  ("the  second  appellant")  a  Derivative
    Residence Card.


127. The appellants  are  nationals  of  Ghana  and  assert  that  they  are
    married. They are the parents of a British citizen child, born in 2004.
    By the time of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  core
    issue in dispute between the parties was that of the responsibility for
    this child's care, it being asserted that the  appellants  shared  such
    responsibility equally.


128. By regulation 15A(4A) of  the  2006  Regulations  an  applicant  for  a
    Derivative Residence Card must, inter alia, be the "primary carer" of a
    British citizen child. Primary carer is defined in regulation 15A(7) as
    follows:


           "(7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another  person
           if
             (a) P is a direct relative or legal guardian of  that  person;
             and
             (b) P -
                (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility  for  that
             person's care; or
                (ii) shares equally the  responsibility  for  that  person's
             care with one other person who is not an exempt person"


129. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal submit,  inter  alia,  that
    Judge Majid erred in failing  to:  (a)  engage  with  the  reasons  for
    refusal; (b) make a finding on the core issue of whether either of  the
    appellants is the primary carer to their child  (or  whether  they  are
    both primary  carers);  and,  (c)  provide  adequate  reasons  for  his
    conclusions.

130. The overarching  conclusions  of  Judge  Majid  are  reflected  in  the
    following paragraphs of his decision:


         "[23] I cannot  ignore  the  "legal  requirements"  stipulated  in
           immigration law. It is incumbent upon me to advert  to  the  new
           Rules giving respect to the intention of the  House  of  Commons
           dictated by the  supremacy  of  parliament.  The  Appellant  can
           benefit from the relevant  Rules  because  the  evidence  at  my
           disposal inspires me to allow this appeal which is eminently  in
           the interests of the children and their  parents.  I  can  never
           forget the fact that it is better  for  children  to  have  both
           parents living with them and also the evidence  at  my  disposal
           shows that they have British nationality. With  the  Nationality
           Act 1981, nationality is conferred upon anyone due to birth  and
           therefore if the children's father tell me that he is British  I
           cannot accept this without further legal investigation.


         [24] Accordingly, in view of my  deliberations  in  the  preceding
           paragraphs and having taken into account all  of  the  oral  and
           documentary evidence as well as the submissions at my  disposal,
           cognisant of the fact  that  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
           Appellant  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  the   balance   of
           probabilities, I am persuaded that the  Appellant  comes  within
           the relevant Immigration Rules as amended."


131. Nowhere in these paragraphs does the Judge identify that  the  relevant
    legal regime underpinning the instant appeals is to  be  found  in  the
    2006 EEA Regulations; indeed, the only mention of these Regulations  is
    to be found in paragraph 17 of  his  decision,  in  which  there  is  a
    criticism of the Presenting Officer's cross-examination.


132. Such a failure is not of itself  sufficient  to  demonstrate  that  the
    Judge did not apply his  mind  to  the  correct  considerations.  When,
    however, it is taken in conjunction with: (a) the fact that the appeals
    were allowed on the basis that the appellants came "within the relevant
    Immigration Rules" and not that they met the requirements of regulation
    15A of the 2006 Regulations - or some other  kindred  expression;  and,
    (b) the mis-characterisation of the issue in dispute  at  [16]  of  the
    Judge's decision (in which it is said that the main issue  "is  whether
    the husband was the primary carer of the  children  and  therefore  the
    result of the appeal hangs on the evaluation of their best  interests")
    we are led inexorably to the conclusion that the Judge failed to  apply
    the correct legal regime to its considerations.

133. Ms Harris seeks to sweep aside these criticisms by  reminding  us  that
    the appellants gave evidence, by way of witness statements  and  orally
    at the hearing before the FtT, as to their respective  responsibilities
    in the care of their child. She submits that on a proper reading of the
    Judge Majid's decision the appellants were found to be truthful in that
    evidence and, consequently, the Judge must have made a finding  to  the
    effect that the appellants share equally the responsibility  for  their
    child's care. For this reason, it is said, the decision  to  allow  the
    appeal cannot be impugned.


134. We reject this submission. First, there is no finding  in  the  Judge's
    decision,  either  explicit  or  implicit,  that  the  appellants  gave
    truthful evidence in all regards. If there is an argument that positive
    credibility findings are  implicit  in  Judge  Majid's  decision,  that
    argument cannot go beyond what was necessary for the Judge to determine
    the issue that he wrongly thought was before him.

135. In any event, even if we are wrong in this  and  the  Judge  found  the
    appellants to be credible in the entirety of  their  evidence,  such  a
    finding does not ineluctably lead to a conclusion that the requirements
    of regulation 15A(7) of the 2006 Regulations are met. There is still an
    assessment required, on the accepted evidence, of whether  one  of  the
    parents had  primary  responsibility  for  the  child's  care  or  that
    responsibility is "share[d] equally".  That  assessment  has  not  been
    carried out by Judge Majid.


136. There are also numerous other errors  to  be  found  in  Judge  Majid's
    decision. There is, once  again,  an  inappropriate  reference  to  the
    decision in Gondolia, observations in relation to  which  have  already
    been made in our general conclusions above. The Judge also devotes four
    paragraphs of reasoning to "serious allegations of fraud" made  against
    the appellants. No such allegations have been made.  The  Secretary  of
    State's case, as set out in the decision letter, is that the appellants
    had not produced sufficient evidence to demonstrate that they  met  the
    requirements of the 2006 EEA Regulations.


137. When the decision is read as a whole, and in its proper context, it  is
    beyond dispute that the losing party, in this  case  the  Secretary  of
    State, is unable to understand  the  basis  upon  which  she  lost  the
    appeal. It is plain that Judge Majid did not correctly  understand  the
    issue that was in dispute between the parties and,  as  a  consequence,
    his decision provides no reasons as  to  why  such  issue  fell  to  be
    decided in the appellants' favour.


138. For these reasons, we find that the FtT's decision discloses  an  error
    of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal  and  we  set  it
    aside. Given  the  fundamental  nature  of  the  errors  identified  we
    conclude that it is necessary for this appeal to be remitted to the FtT
    to be determined afresh by a judge other than Judge Majid.


                                IA/32046/2015

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                     and
                                XIAOMEI WANG

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Record, instructed on a direct access basis

139. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For  ease  of  reference,
    we refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier  Tribunal.
    The Respondent appeals against a decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
    Majid promulgated on 11 October  2016  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  17
    September  2015  refusing  her  human  rights  claim   based   on   her
    relationship with her partner Mr Wen Li who is a person settled in  the
    UK, and their two children.


140. This is the case to which  we  refer  at  [33]  and  following  of  our
    general decision. It is not therefore necessary for us  to  recite  the
    facts or the issues with which the Judge needed to grapple.


141. As we note at [35] of our general  decision,  the  Judge  has  made  no
    finding in relation to the alleged deception, this being a  case  where
    the Respondent asserted that the Appellant  had  obtained  her  English
    language certificate by use of a proxy test taker.  There  is  also  no
    reference to the  question  whether  the  Appellant  meets  the  income
    requirements of the Rules, or finding on it.


142. As in other cases, the Judge appears to determine  the  appeal  in  the
    Appellant's favour  because  of  the  children's  best  interests.   He
    appears to find at [24] of the Decision, that, because the Appellant is
    "fully committed to the best interests of her children" she can succeed
    under the Rules.  In common with other appeals  before  us,  the  Judge
    fails to give any indication which rule he considers  he  is  applying.
    As we also observe at [43] of our general decision, the  Judge  wrongly
    cites Pokhriyal as authority for a  proposition  to  which  it  has  no
    application.  The Judge's conclusion appears  to  be  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed  under  the  Rules  based  on  some  unspecified  and
    unreasoned exercise of his discretion.  The outcome  itself  may  be  a
    permissible one when the best interests of the  children  are  factored
    into the equation.  That is though an assessment to be made outside the
    Rules, not an exercise of discretion.   It  is  therefore  inconsistent
    with the finding at [24] that the Appellant meets the Rules.  There  is
    no discretion to be exercised in the application of the Rules.   Either
    the Appellant meets the Rules or she does not.


143. Further, as we observe at [35] of our general decision, if and  insofar
    as the Judge considered that the appeal should be allowed  outside  the
    Rules, it was incumbent on him to conduct a  proportionality  exercise.
    He could not do so without reaching a  finding  whether  deception  had
    been exercised by the Appellant.  Nor could  he  do  so  without  first
    determining whether the Appellant could meet the Rules,  in  particular
    the income threshold.  As we note above, he did not make  any  findings
    on  those  issues.   Those   matters   would   be   relevant   to   the
    proportionality assessment, particularly taking  into  account  section
    117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  to  which  no
    reference is made (either expressly or implicitly).


144. The Respondent's sole ground of appeal is that the Judge  has  provided
    inadequate reasons for allowing the appeal.  That ground is  made  out.
    We, like the Respondent, find ourselves unable to discern  whether  the
    appeal was allowed under the Rules or outside them and, if so, based on
    what findings or for what reasons.  In this particular case, it  is  of
    equal importance to the Appellant to have findings  of  fact  made,  in
    particular in relation to the allegation of deception.  As we noted  in
    the course of the hearing, if the allegation  of  deception  cannot  be
    established, it will be also to the Appellant's advantage in the longer
    term to have a clear finding that this is the case.


145. The Decision therefore discloses a material error of law and we set  it
    aside.    Given the fundamental nature of the errors of law  found  and
    the Appellant's entitlement to have the facts  of  her  claim  properly
    determined, it is necessary for this appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for redetermination by a Judge other than Judge Majid.


                                IA/32286/2015

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                     and
                            ESTHER YAH-OMA OKPALA

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms  J  Chandrasingh,  of  Royal  College  of  Nursing
Information
                  Advice Service

146. This is an appeal brought by the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
    reference, we refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier
    Tribunal. In a decision promulgated  on  24  October  2016,  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Majid  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of  State's  decision  of  21  September  2015  refusing  her
    application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

147. The appellant is a national of Nigeria,  born  on  10  June  1974.  She
    entered the UK in June 2007 as a student and,  it  appears,  has  since
    remained here lawfully. Her three children reside with her  in  the  UK
    (born in Nigeria on  19  May  2001,  18  May  2003  and  29  May  2005,
    respectively). Two  of  these  children  lawfully  entered  the  UK  in
    February 2010, and the third in July 2010  at  the  same  time  as  the
    appellant's now estranged husband.

148. By way of the rule 24 response received by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  22
    June 2017 the appellant accepted that: (i)  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision should be set aside; and, (ii) the fundamental nature  of  the
    errors therein required the appeal to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be determined afresh by a different judge.  We  concur,  as
    did Mr Wilding.


149. Although, as a consequence of the concession made by the appellant,  we
    need not set out in detail the  nature  of  the  errors  in  the  FtT's
    consideration of the appeal, we do consider it appropriate to summarise
    them.


150. We have already set out, in our general conclusions above, a number  of
    passages from Judge Majid's decision  in  this  appeal  (see  [19]  and
    [21]). The observations made in [28] to [31] above also relate  to  the
    instant case. We do not repeat these observations here, but  they  form
    part of our consideration of the lawfulness of the Judge's decision.


151. In addition, this is yet another case in which Judge Majid purports  to
    allow the appeal solely on the  basis  that  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in circumstances where  the  only
    ground of appeal available to the appellant was that the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was unlawful under Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998.  There is an even greater irrationality in such a approach in the
    instant case because the appellant accepted  before  Judge  Majid  (and
    continues to accept) that she  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.


152. The errors that can be  found  in  this  decision  do  not  end  there,
    however. Given the concession made by the  appellant  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  given  the  clear
    errors we have already identified above, rather than  expend  any  more
    unnecessary judicial ink  in  providing  a  detailed  analysis  of  the
    further errors we simply summarise them thus:


           i)   Judge Majid erred in directing itself  at  [22],  [29]  and
              [30] of his decision, that the immigration rules in  play  in
              the instant appeal contain a discretion which he was entitled
              to exercise for himself;


          ii) Judge Majid misdirected ihimself in paragraph  12(a)  of  his
              decision by treating the best interests of  the  children  as
              being a "knock-out" factor. The children's best interests are
              a primary consideration  but  are  not  paramount.  They  are
              capable of being outweighed by other matters (see  Zoumbas  v
              SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 at [10(2)]); and,

         iii) In any event, the Judge's  decision  fails  to  disclose  any
              lawful analysis of the children's best interests;


153. For the reasons given above, we find that the FtT's decision  discloses
    multiple errors of law capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal
    and we set it  aside.  Given  the  fundamental  nature  of  the  errors
    identified we conclude that it is  necessary  for  this  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the FtT to be determined afresh by a judge other than Judge
    Majid.


                                IA/32901/2015

                        SAILESHKUMAR KHANTIBHAI PATEL
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Otchie, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

154. The Appellant appeals against a decision of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Majid promulgated on 4 October 2016  ("the  Decision")  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated  14
    August 2015 refusing him leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.




155. The Appellant is a national of India.  The Appellant entered the UK  as
    a student on 10 March 2011.  His leave in that category was extended to
    30 October 2014.  He made an in-time application  on  29  October  2014
    which was refused by the decision under appeal.  The Respondent refused
    the application on  the  basis  that  the  Certificate  of  Sponsorship
    ("COS") on which the Appellant relied in  his  application  was  false.
    The application was therefore refused under paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules") on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had
    exercised deception.  As a result, the Appellant was given zero  points
    for sponsorship, appropriate salary and maintenance and therefore  also
    failed to satisfy paragraph 245HD of the Rules.  He  was  also  refused
    because he did not have a relevant qualification for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 245HD(d) of the Rules.


156. The central issue for the Judge to determine were  accordingly  whether
    the Appellant had exercised deception.  As  we  note  at  [26]  of  our
    general decision, the Judge was required to determine  this  issue  for
    himself based on the evidence before him.  True it is in this case that
    he does refer to the correct burdens and standards of proof at [15]  of
    the Decision.  However, when it comes to  determining  the  issue,  the
    Judge says this:


         "[17]    Clear and convincing evidence is required  for  the  Home
           Office to allege deception or any other moral turpitude  against
           an Appellant.  Such evidence is available for the Respondent  to
           make the negative decision in this case and therefore I am bound
           to dismiss this appeal.
           [18]   I cannot ignore the "legal requirements" stipulated by
           immigration law.  It is incumbent on me to advert to the new
           Rules giving respect to the intention of the House of Commons
           dictated by the supremacy of Parliament.  The Appellant cannot
           benefit from the relevant Rules because the evidence he had
           presented to the Respondent has led it to make the negative
           decision."


157. In relation  to  the  Judge's  prior  consideration  of  the  evidence,
    paragraph [14] of the Decision is capable of  amounting  to  a  finding
    that the Respondent has discharged her burden.  Based on  the  evidence
    recited at [11] of the Decision, that finding  would  be  open  to  the
    Judge.  However, contrary to  the  self-direction  which  follows,  the
    Judge fails to take into account at [17] of the Decision, whether  what
    is said by the Appellant as recorded at [13] satisfies  the  burden  on
    the  Appellant.   The  Judge  makes  no  finding  as  to  whether   the
    Appellant's explanation is credible.  He appears to find at  [18]  that
    deception  has  been  exercised  because  the  Appellant  produced  the
    evidence on which the Respondent relied (i.e. the COS).   But  that  is
    not the test.


158. The Judge also suggests at [19] in his conclusions that the  burden  is
    on the Appellant to the standard of a balance of  probabilities.   That
    is both wrong and contrary to  his  earlier  self-direction  (at  least
    insofar as deception is concerned).  As  we  observe  at  [22]  of  our
    general decision, if the  reasoning  in  the  Decision  were  otherwise
    sound, we might be inclined to view this as an immaterial  error  given
    the earlier self-direction.  As it is though, although  the  Judge  has
    earlier directed himself properly in accordance with relevant case  law
    as to the burdens and standards of proof in a deception case, there  is
    little sign that the Judge has thereafter applied  the  relevant  test.
    Certainly, if he has, there is no evidence of his reasoning or findings
    leading him to the ultimate conclusion that he was bound to dismiss the
    appeal.


159. As Mr Wilding points  out,  even  leaving  aside  the  COS  issue,  the
    Appellant fails in this case  unless  he  can  provide  evidence  of  a
    qualification meeting the requirement  of  paragraph  245HD(d)  of  the
    Rules.  However, the errors of law in  the  Decision  remain  material.
    The Appellant is entitled to a reasoned determination of the  deception
    issue not least because that has an impact on applications he may  wish
    to make in the future, applying paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules.


160. The Decision therefore discloses a material error of law and we set  it
    aside.    Given the fundamental nature of the errors of law  found  and
    the Appellant's entitlement to have the facts  of  his  claim  properly
    determined, we agree with the parties that it  is  necessary  for  this
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for redetermination by
    a Judge other than Judge Majid.



                                OA/07779/2015

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NIGERIA
                                     and
                       ELIZABETH ALAGO OLAIYE STEPHEN

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

161. This is an appeal by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  ("the  ECO").   For
    ease of reference, we refer below to the parties as they  were  in  the
    First-Tier Tribunal. The Respondent appeals against a decision of First-
    Tier Tribunal Judge Majid promulgated on 8 August 2016 ("the Decision")
    allowing the Appellant's appeal against the  ECO's  decision  dated  23
    March 2015 refusing her entry for settlement with her British  national
    partner.   The Appellant is a national of Nigeria.


162. There were two issues in this appeal for the Judge to  determine.   The
    first was  whether  the  Appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with her sponsor.  The second was  whether  the  sponsor's
    income meets the relevant threshold.  If the Appellant did not meet the
    Rules, then it was also necessary to determine whether her human rights
    would be breached by the refusal to allow her to enter.


163. In this case, one of the Respondent's grounds relates to the  procedure
    adopted by the Judge at  the  hearing.   It  is  said  that  the  Judge
    "appeared to sacrifice his  independence".    That  is  a  particularly
    troubling allegation.  For  that  reason,  by  directions  sent  on  28
    February 2017, Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Zucker  ordered  that  the
    parties should produce at  the  hearing  all  notes  and/or  record  of
    proceedings made by them or their representatives at the hearing before
    Judge Majid.  The Respondent has produced her notes.  There has been no
    response from the Appellant or her sponsor.


164. By a letter received on 8 June 2017, the sponsor requested a change  of
    the hearing date on 27 June 2017 on the basis that he lost  his  mother
    on 20 May 2017 and had to travel to Nigeria for the burial  and  church
    services afterwards and would not be back in the UK until 6 July  2017.
     By notice sent on 15 June 2017 ("the Notice"), the  Tribunal  informed
    the Appellant that the request would be considered only on  receipt  of
    the booked air tickets for  the  trip  to  Nigeria.   No  response  was
    received.


165. In light of the Appellant's (or sponsor's) failure to comply  with  the
    Directions or to respond to the Notice, we determined that  it  was  in
    the interests of justice to proceed in the sponsor's absence.  We  also
    noted that, if we reached a conclusion that the Decision should be  set
    aside and the appeal be  remitted,  it  would  be  in  the  Appellant's
    interests to have that done  as  soon  as  possible  to  facilitate  an
    earlier redetermination of her appeal.  We therefore indicated that  we
    would determine the Respondent's appeal based on her  grounds  and  all
    the materials on file.

166. In relation to the first of those  grounds,  the  legal  representative
    withdrew from the hearing before Judge  Majid.   That  is  for  reasons
    recorded at [4] of the Decision.  In short, the  Judge  says  that  the
    representative "took a dislike" to the Judge and indicated that neither
    he nor the sponsor could understand the Judge's questions.  There is an
    issue raised by the Respondent  based  on  her  notes  of  the  hearing
    whether what the Judge says about the questioning (that he was  not  in
    fact asking questions) is accurate.  We do not need to reach  any  view
    about what occurred though since the procedural unfairness relied  upon
    by the Respondent arises from what happened subsequently.


167. Understandably perhaps, the Judge, finding himself left only  with  the
    sponsor in person, wished to assist  him.   That  is  perfectly  proper
    within certain bounds.  There is however a line  which  should  not  be
    crossed between helping a litigant in person to put  forward  his  case
    and putting forward  his  case  for  him.   In  this  case,  the  Judge
    indicated at [4] of the Decision that "[his  i.e.  the  Judge's]  legal
    help to him would become apparent in the  submissions".   That  comment
    then leads on  to  a  passage  at  [12]  which  is  the  focus  of  the
    Respondent's complaint where the Judge said "I submitted on  behalf  of
    the Sponsor as per my promise."


168. Taking the side of one of the parties is contrary  to  the  requirement
    for judicial independence.  Whilst the Judge may not have  intended  to
    cross the boundary of what is appropriate and what he says occurred may
    simply  be  badly  expressed  and  contrary  to  his   intention,   the
    combination of what is said at [4] and [12] of the Decision gives  rise
    to the inference that  the  Judge  improperly  took  the  side  of  the
    Appellant and in so doing breached judicial independence.


169. That is itself sufficient reason to set aside the  Decision.   However,
    we also find that ground two is made  out.   The  section  headed  "The
    Relevant Law" is anything but relevant.  As we  note  at  [32]  of  our
    general decision, there is reference to "compassionate facets"  without
    any clarity as to what those "facets" are.  This  is  also  the  appeal
    incidentally which, at [13], makes reference  to  paragraph  320  which
    apparently has no relevance to the case at all.  There is reference  to
    the Forrester case concerning discretion.  Discretion does not arise at
    all in relation to whether the Appellant meets the Rules.  That was the
    first issue for the Judge to determine.  He has entirely failed  to  do
    so.


170. The reasons why the  Judge  apparently  concludes  in  the  Appellant's
    favour appear to be those set out at [15] to [16] of  the  Decision  as
    follows:-


         "[15]     Even  though  immigration  control  is  strict  in  this
           country, no appellate judge has ever said that  one  should  say
           goodbye to compassion.  Thus I am minded to give the benefit  of
           my  judicial  discretion  to  this  Appellant.   If  a   child's
           relationship with his/her parent can be regarded as a "Number  1
           family" consideration, a husband's relationship  with  his  wife
           should also be considered with care.
         [16] I  cannot  ignore  the  "legal  requirements"  stipulated  by
           immigration law.  It is incumbent on me to  advert  to  the  new
           Rules giving respect to the intention of the  House  of  Commons
           dictated by the supremacy of Parliament.  This Appellant  should
           be allowed to join her husband who,  going  by  the  content  of
           documents at my  disposal,  has  been  fully  committed  to  her
           welfare.  It is to his credit that the Respondent has not raised
           any objection to the fact that the sponsoring husband meets  the
           legal requirement of being settled and resident in the UK."


171. Whilst the Judge is right to point to the need to have  regard  to  the
    Rules, he completely fails to remind himself of the provisions of those
    Rules.  Had he done so, he would have noted that the central issues  in
    this  case  were  the  genuineness  of  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and her sponsor and whether the sponsor could meet the income
    threshold requirements.  The Judge's focus on discretion instead of  on
    the Rules has led him into the error of failing to make any findings on
    the central issues.  If his focus on discretion is intended to indicate
    that he allowed the appeal based on Article 8 ECHR,  then  there  is  a
    failure by the  Judge  to  assess  proportionality  in  the  particular
    context of a finding about the ability of the sponsor to  maintain  the
    Appellant.


172. As we noted above, the Decision must be set aside based on the  conduct
    of the hearing in this case.  The Respondent's second ground concerning
    the substantive consideration is also made out.   The Judge has  failed
    to make relevant findings and failed to provide  adequate  reasons  for
    his conclusion.


173. The Decision therefore discloses a material error of law and we set  it
    aside.    Given the fundamental nature of the errors of law  found  and
    the Appellant's entitlement to have the facts  of  her  claim  properly
    determined, it is necessary for this appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for redetermination by a Judge other than Judge Majid.



                                RP/00104/2016

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                     and
                              MANZOOR SHINWARI

Representation:
For the Appellant:            Mr T Wilding, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer
For  the  Respondent:   Mr  Basharat  Ali,  instructed  by  Aman  Solicitors
                     Advocates     (London) Ltd


174. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  The respondent,  whom  we
    shall call "the claimant", is a national of Afghanistan.  He arrived in
    the United Kingdom as a minor and claimed asylum   He said that he  was
    born in 1993 (making him 15 at the date of his claim) and that he had a
    fear of persecution from the Afghan authorities and  from  the  Taliban
    because of having run away from the latter and because of his  father's
    involvement in Hezb-e-Islami  and  subsequent  death.   His  claim  was
    refused: the Secretary of State did not believe either his story or his
    claimed age.  He appealed, and the matter came before Judge Herbert  in
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in January 2010.

175. Judge Herbert heard, and assessed, the  claimant's  evidence.   He  did
    not believe the claimant's claim as to  his  age:  he  thought  it  was
    likely that the claimant would attain the age of 18  during  2010.   He
    was, therefore still a minor, and his evidence had to be assessed  with
    that in mind.  He did not believe the claimant's story: he thought that
    the documentation said to support it had been concocted for the purpose
    of the claim.  He accepted that the claimant's father might  have  been
    killed by the Taliban, but said there was "serious doubt" about whether
    he had been a commander as the claimant claimed; he decided  that  even
    making allowances for the  claimant's  youth  and  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof applicable in asylum claims,  the  claimant  had  not
    established a fear of persecution for the reasons he claimed.

176. Bearing in mind, however, his conclusion  as  to  the  claimant's  age,
    Judge Herbert applied the decision of the AIT in LQ [2008] UKAIT 00005:
    if the claimant were to be returned at the date of the hearing he would
    be at risk as a lone minor.  He therefore allowed the appeal  for  that
    reason alone, indicating that the claimant was entitled  to  protection
    until he reached his eighteenth birthday.

177. The Secretary of State acted  on  the  determination  and  granted  the
    claimant refugee status on 17 February 2010.   The  grant  was  due  to
    expire in January 2015.  We do not know the reason for  the  length  of
    the grant, but it has to be remembered that the claimant's age had  not
    been the subject of a full fact-finding determination and no  doubt  it
    was safer to grant for a period that would certainly cover the whole of
    the remaining part of the claimant's minority.  It is worth emphasising
    at this point that there has never  been  a  decision,  either  by  the
    Secretary of State or by a judge, that the claimant is or ever has been
    at risk for any reason except as an unaccompanied minor.

178. On 7 January 2015, before the expiry of his leave, the claimant  sought
    its extension.  That application was refused,  and  in  addition  on  4
    August 2016 the claimant's refugee status was  revoked  on  the  ground
    that having reached the age of 18, in the words of  art  1C(5)  of  the
    Refugee Convention, "the circumstances in connexion with which  he  was
    recognised as a refugee have ceased to  exist".   It  was  against  the
    decision revoking his refugee status that the claimant appealed, and it
    was that decision that Judge Majid  had  to  consider.   The  claimant,
    assisted by an opinion of the UNHCR, argued through his  representative
    that a change of circumstances had for these purposes to be a change in
    the country and could not  be  a  change  in  the  individual,  however
    durable.

179. In his decision,  although  claiming  to  have  read  the  reasons  for
    refusal and all  other  documents  with  care,  Judge  Majid  makes  no
    reference  to  the  issue  requiring  determination,  which   was   the
    autonomous international meaning (see R v SSHD  ex  parte  Adan  [2000]
    UKHL 67) of art 1C(5) of the Refugee  Convention;  accompanied  by  the
    question whether, if  in  principle  the  claimant's  status  could  be
    revoked, he were now for some reason other than his minority  at  risk,
    so that he should continue to be treated as a refugee.   The  following
    rather confused account of the issues appears at paragraph  14  of  his
    decision:

           "14. Due to Judge Herbert's findings, it is clear that the  Home
              Office had granted the Appellant refugee status and leave for
              5 years.  This leave automatically  leads  to  the  permanent
              indefinite leave to remain (ILR) but the Home Office did  not
              do this in his case.  That kind of status is withheld if  the
              Appellant is guilty of some serious misconduct and there is a
              "fundamental and durable" change in the circumstances of  the
              Appellant.  In  this  case,  the  Appellant  in  his  Witness
              statement specifically says that he has committed no  offence
              and has been a good person in various ways.  The Home  Office
              cannot point to evidence to show why  this  Appellant  should
              not be given the usual ILR."

180. There are two serious  mistakes  in  that  paragraph,  the  word  "and"
    rather than "or" in the third sentence, and  the  last  sentence  which
    shows that despite his claim to have studied the papers, the judge  had
    no idea at all what the Secretary of  State's  position  was.   In  the
    succeeding paragraphs the judge refers  to  the  point  raised  by  the
    UNHCR, but again  it  is  seriously  misstated:  the  point  about  the
    difference between personal and  country  changes  is  wholly  omitted;
    again it is said that the Home Office had no evidence of a "fundamental
    and durable" change in the claimant's  circumstances,  although  it  is
    difficult to see that  ceasing  to  be  a  minor  cannot  be  described
    precisely in that way.  Anyway, the judge seems to make no  attempt  to
    decide what article 1C(5) means.

181. Then there is this:

          "19. In addition to the dispositive reasons brought to  my  notice
              by  Judge  Herbert,  I  must  indicate  one  exceptional  and
              compelling circumstance.  I am sure everyone would admire the
              Appellant's mother who permitted him to leave Afghanistan  on
              his own for his survival because the Hezb-e-Islami had killed
              his father and, as cogent evidence persuades me, this violent
              group had indicated  that  they  were  now  after  the  young
              Appellant.  It would not be fair to take a chance with Hezb-e-
              Islami who are notorious for their misdeeds.

           20.   Having regard to the dictum given in Paragraph  21  I  have
              good reason to allow this appeal.

           21.  The use of discretion was examined by the  HC  in  the  case
              Teisha Forrester v SSHD [2008] EWCH 2307.  Sullivan J  (later
              on promoted to an LJ and Senior President of  all  tribunals)
              did not dispute the  SSHD's  contention  that  the  decisions
              accorded with the Rules, technically, but  pointed  out  that
              that was not the end of the matter because  the  SSHD  had  a
              discretion which had  to  be  exercised  with  a  modicum  of
              intelligence, common sense and humanity."

182. The first part of paragraph 19  appears  to  have  no  bearing  on  the
    claimant's status at all.  The second part  appears  to  incorporate  a
    finding ('cogent evidence persuades me') that although the claimant was
    not  at  risk  from  Hezb-e-Islami  at  the  time  of  Judge  Herbert's
    determination, he is now.  The determination reveals no  trace  of  the
    evidence supporting that  finding.   Despite  the  fact  that  if  that
    conclusion  were  sound  the  appeal   would   succeed,   Judge   Majid
    specifically says that he is allowing the appeal for a wholly different
    (and unlawful) reason: that the Secretary of State has a discretion  to
    act outside the Immigration Rules, none of which were in any real sense
    in issue in this appeal.  This is the decision which contains the  long
    passage set out above, and also the incorrect statement of the standard
    of proof in asylum appeals.

183. The Secretary of State's grounds of  appeal,  on  the  basis  of  which
    permission was granted, assert that the decision fails to deal with the
    principal point at issue as detailed in the reasons for refusal,  fails
    to grapple with the fact that the claimant is no longer a minor and (if
    we may summarise) continues the conclusions of  Judge  Herbert  without
    relating the facts to the date  of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Majid.
    There is also a complaint that the judge  expressly  did  not  put  any
    concerns to the Presenting Officer and (whatever they  were)  does  not
    appear to have set relevant concerns out in his decision either.

184. On behalf of the claimant Mr Ali did his very best to  persuade  us  to
    uphold the determination, but there can be no doubt that it is  riddled
    with errors of law.  It contains no proper discussion of, or answer  to
    the questions posed by the refusal decision and the  UNHCR's  position,
    and is written in such a way as to suggest very clearly that the  judge
    was unaware of this issue.  If the assertion we have set out  above  is
    supposed to be a finding,  on  evidence  before  the  judge,  that  the
    claimant is at risk, the reasoning  is  hopelessly  inadequate  in  the
    light of Judge  Herbert's  decision,  which  Judge  Majid  purports  to
    follow, that the claimant had failed to establish the factual basis for
    his claim in 2008.  This is not a case where it would be right  to  say
    that the errors in the decision do not matter  because  the  result  is
    correct: there is no basis for a  conclusion  either  that  the  appeal
    should have been allowed or that it should have been dismissed.

185. We find error of law and set aside the decision of  Judge  Majid.   The
    question of the interpretation of art 1C(5) of the  Refugee  Convention
    is appropriate for determination in this Tribunal and we shall  adjourn
    this appeal for that purpose before deciding what action to take  under
    s 12(2)(b) of the 2007 Act.



DECISIONS

KHATTAB: HU/13552/2015

For the reasons set out above and as we announced at the hearing, we set
aside the decision of Judge Majid promulgated on 23 May 2017.  In this
case, we re-make the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.


MM: AA/06906/2014
EDO AND OTHERS: HU/01879/2015; HU/01881/2015; HU/01882/2015; HU/01883/2015
COMERY: IA/00866/2016
BOATENG-DANSOH: IA/23617/2015
KAUR: IA/30887/2015
BOPOLONGA: IA/31116/2015
BOATENG AND BEMPONG: IA/31918/2015
WANG: IA/32046/2015
OKPALA: IA/32286/2015
PATEL: IA/32901/2015
STEPHEN: OA/07779/2015

For the reasons set out in the individual decisions in these cases and in
our general decision, we set aside each of the decisions of Judge Majid in
each these cases.  For the reasons given in our individual decisions, these
appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a
Judge other than Judge Majid.

SHINWARI: RP/00104/2016

For the reasons set out above we set aside the decision of Judge Majid.
The appeal is adjourned for further consideration in the Upper Tribunal.



                                                                       [pic]



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 23 August 2017




