
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06256/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 25 April  2014                               |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     IK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I have been requested to make an anonymity  direction  in  this  appeal
    and, given the age of the appellant, I consider it  appropriate  to  do
    so. Therefore, unless and until  the  Tribunal,  or  other  appropriate
    Court, directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No report
    of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify   the
    appellant. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt
    of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 14 June 2013 and claimed asylum  the  following  day.   The
    Secretary of State refused this application by way of a decision  dated
    27 June 2013.  On the following day the Secretary  of  State  issued  a
    decision to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom and it  is  as
    against this decision that he appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe on 4
    February  2014  and  dismissed  on  all  grounds  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 17 February 2014.

 4. Before the First-tier Tribunal there was dispute between the parties as
    to the appellant's age.  The Secretary of State found the appellant  to
    have been born in 1995, making him aged  19  as  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant asserted that he
    was 14 years old in 2012, which would have made him  either  15  or  16
    years old as of the date of hearing.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found the appellant to be 16  years  old  [30].
    Having done so it  went  on  to  consider  the  account  given  by  the
    appellant as to the circumstances that it was said led to  him  fleeing
    from his homeland.

 6. In paragraph 31 of its determination the tribunal states as follows:

         "I have taken his age into account in considering the evidence  and
         the answers he gave in interview."

 7. Thereafter the tribunal made  reference  to  the  vague  and  unhelpful
    answers given by the appellant of his journey to  the  United  Kingdom,
    concluding that his failure to claim asylum  en  route  to  the  United
    Kingdom was a matter that damaged his  credibility  [31].  It  further,
    inter alia, found it surprising that the appellant had  never  been  to
    the mosque adjacent to his house prior to the incident which he  claims
    caused him to flee Afghanistan in fear of his  life  and  that  he  had
    failed to adequately explain why he should suddenly  have  entered  the
    mosque and acted in a manner which he now claimed put his life at  risk
    [32].  Looking at the appellant's evidence  as  a  whole  the  tribunal
    concluded that he had fabricated his account in order to  secure  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal by way of a decision dated 17 March 2014, giving  the  following
    reasons for so doing:

         "2.  It is arguable that following the finding the Appellant was  a
             minor,  with  insufficient  evidence  before  him  as  to  the
             Appellant's family as at the date of hearing, the  Judge  went
             on to find that he could be returned safely to his  family  in
             Afghanistan.  Further, that the Appellant, being a minor,  was
             a vulnerable witness and, that as such, allowance should  have
             been made for the answers given by him in interview, where  he
             was interviewed as an adult, when considering the  Appellant's
             overall credibility."

 9. As can be identified from the terms of the  grant  of  permission,  the
    appellant seeks to challenge the First-tier Tribunal's  conclusions  as
    to the truthfulness of the account he gave on the basis  that,  amongst
    other things, it failed to take lawful account of his age  when  coming
    to such conclusions.

10. Having given careful consideration to the determination as a whole, and
    having heard detailed oral submissions from  both  Mr  Chelvan  and  Mr
    Jack, I conclude that the appellant is correct in his  submissions  and
    that the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions as to the credibility of the
    appellant's evidence are fundamentally flawed by legal error.

11. Although the First-tier  Tribunal  observed  in  paragraph  31  of  its
    determination that it had given consideration to  the  appellant's  age
    when assessing the truthfulness of his account, there is no  expression
    of this consideration, whether implicitly or explicitly, thereafter  in
    the determination. There is no  express  reference  in  the  conclusory
    paragraphs to, or apparent allowance for, the  significant  consequence
    of the appellant having been interviewed as  an  adult  i.e.  that  his
    interview was undertaken absent the robust  safeguards  that  are,  for
    good reason, put in place when children are  interviewed.  In  addition
    there is no indication in the determination that the hearing itself was
    conducted in a manner which was compliant with the "Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 of  2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant  guidance",  nor  is   there   anything   implicit   in   the
    determination which suggests that the  First-tier  Tribunal  took  this
    guidance into account.

12. I further find it of some significance  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    held against the appellant the fact that he failed to claim  asylum  en
    route to the United Kingdom.  The appellant  travelled  to  the  United
    Kingdom under the care of an agent, or at  least  that  is  his  claim.
    Given that the appellant is a minor and travelled to the United Kingdom
    under the care of an adult it is in my view  perverse  to  treat  as  a
    matter adverse to his credibility his failure to claim asylum en route,
    absent good reason to do so. The  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    does not allude to such a reason being present in the instant case.

13. Furthermore, when assessing the credibility of the appellant's evidence
    as a whole, there is nothing in the First-tier Tribunal's determination
    which is suggestive of the fact that it took into account, as a  matter
    probative of the truth of the appellant's account of the  events  which
    led him to flee Afghanistan,  the  fact  that  he  had  given  truthful
    evidence as to his age.

14. For all these reasons I conclude that Mr  Chelvan  is  correct  in  his
    submission that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to  take
    adequate and lawful account of the appellant's age when coming  to  its
    conclusions on matters central to his claim.  Accordingly I  find  that
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error on a point of
    law such that it is to be set aside.

15. Having considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement of 25 September 2012, I am satisfied  that  the  nature  and
    extent of the judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for the
    decision in the appeal to be remade is such that, having regard to  the
    overriding objective in Rule 2 of  the  2008  Procedure  Rules,  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for
    determination.

16. The only finding of the First-tier Tribunal which is to be saved is the
    finding made as to the appellant's age.  Other than this the appeal  is
    to be determined de-novo by a judge other than Judge Broe.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 2 May 2014



































