
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/06109/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City House           |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7th April 2015                    |On 15th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                    K T J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Chaggar (Counsel, instructed by Hasan
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The background to this case is set out in the determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju of the  23rd  of  February  2014.  For  the
    reasons set out the Appellant's asylum appeal  was  dismissed  but  the
    appeal was allowed under Article 8. By notice of the 6th of March  2014
    the Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal challenging the findings made in respect of Article  8.  There
    was no challenge by the Appellant to the findings made  in  respect  of
    the asylum claim.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne on the 26th of March 2014 on the basis  that  it
    was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  given  excessive
    weight to the delays that had occurred in the case and the finding that
    removal would be unjustifiably harsh was not justified on the reasoning
    provided.

 3. The first hearing before the Upper Tribunal took place before me on the
    20th of  November  2014  at  Sheldon  Court  in  Birmingham.  Following
    submissions made by the Appellant's representative and the Senior  Home
    Office Presenting Officer I indicated that so  far  as  the  Article  8
    findings were concerned the determination did contain an error of  law.
    At the hearing the determination was set aside and the  case  adjourned
    for re-hearing on that aspect  of  the  case  with  the  Appellant  and
    Secretary of State to serve evidence in advance of the renewed hearing.

 4. The hearing was listed for the 7th of April 2015 at City  Centre  House
    in Birmingham. At the hearing Ms Chaggar for  the  Appellant  indicated
    that his instructions were to withdraw his appeal. By rule  17  of  the
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules such an application can be made  orally,
    as here. The principles to be considered in such circumstances are  set
    out in the  case  of  SM  (withdrawal  of  appealed  decision:  effect)
    Pakistan [2014] UKUT 64 (IAC).

 5. Applying the principle that in immigration cases the Secretary of State
    ought to be the primary decision  maker  in  immigration  cases  it  is
    appropriate that the Appellant's application to withdraw his appeal  is
    allowed. The effect of that  action  is  that,  there  having  been  no
    challenge to the dismissal of his asylum appeal, the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju to dismiss the asylum appeal remains.

 6. So far  as  Article  8  is  concerned  that  part  of  Judge  Lagunju's
    determination was set aside at  the  first  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The Secretary of State's decision on the Appellant's  Article
    8 aspect of his application was set out in the Refusal  Letter  of  the
    14th of June 2013 at paragraphs 35 to 58. The reasons set out are  now,
    effectively, unchallenged and form the basis of the  decision  in  this
    case in respect of Article 8.

 7. The hearing was concluded with the Appellant's appeal  being  withdrawn
    and with my indicating  that  there  would  be  a  short  determination
    setting out the consequences of the proceedings.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involved  the
making of an error on a point of  law  in  respect  of  the  position  under
Article 8 of the ECHR, the decision in that respect was set aside.

The extant appeal by the Appellant has been withdrawn.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

I setting aside the First-tier Tribunal determination and the  appeal  being
subsequently withdrawn by the Appellant I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 7th April 2015

