
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ/DH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06024/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January, 4 April, 8 August & 23 October  |On 5 October 2014             |
|2014                                          |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                    mtms
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel (for the hearings on 8
                    January and 4 April 2014)
     Ms C Physsas, Counsel (for the hearing on 6 August 2014)
     Mr P Turner, Counsel (for the hearing on 23 October 2014)
     All Counsel instructed by Messrs Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (for the hearings on 8 January and 23 October 2014)
     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (for the hearing
                    on 4 April 2014)
     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (for the hearing on
                    6 August 2014)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  of  Tamil
     ethnicity whose true identity is disputed by the  Respondent  but  who
     claims to be MTMS born on 3 July 1976, against  the  decision  of  the
     Respondent dated 15 April 2011 to refuse to him the  grant  of  asylum
     under paragraph 336 of the Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended)  and
     also to issue directions under  Section  10  of  the  Immigration  and
     Asylum Act 1999 to remove him to Sri Lanka.  The  immigration  history
     of the Appellant, as claimed by him, is that he left Sri  Lanka  on  6
     March 2011 from Colombo Airport and travelled with an  agent  using  a
     German passport that the agent provided to him and that  he  travelled
     on a direct flight to the United Kingdom  arriving  here  on  7  March
     2011.  The Appellant claimed asylum on 31 March 2011  using  the  name
     MTMS and date  of  birth  3  July  1978.   This  is  disputed  by  the
     Respondent, who contends that the Appellant was issued  with  a  visit
     visa for the UK valid from 5 November 2008 to 5 May 2009 in  the  name
     of KRPM (KM) born on 3 July 1976.

2.     The Appellant claims to hail from Kalmunai.  His father owned a  rice
     mill and supplied rice to the LTTE.   After  his  death  in  2006  the
     Appellant took over the ownership of the rice mill  and  continued  to
     supply rice to the LTTE, delivered once every  two  weeks  or  once  a
     month.  The Appellant would receive instructions  over  the  telephone
     from one of two people,  Kala  and  Rohan,  advising  him  as  to  the
     location to where the rice was to be delivered, usually Batticaloa and
     Kaluvanchikudy, from where the LTTE would transfer the rice  from  the
     Appellant's vehicle to their vehicle.

3.   It was the Appellant's account that he  began  to  suffer  problems  in
     2008 when he was an election candidate for the Independence  Party  as
     Assistant Secretary in his local area of  Kalmunai.   He  had  been  a
     member of the Independence Party for approximately three months  prior
     to the election.  The Appellant lost the election and following it, he
     was arrested by the police at his home and taken  to  Kalmunai  police
     station where he was kept for one day and interrogated.

4.   The Appellant claimed that his brother-in-law had  contacts  with  some
     police officers as a result  of  which  the  Appellant  was  released,
     though his fingerprints and photographs were taken and he was asked to
     sign a piece of paper on his release.

5.   The Appellant continued at interview that two days after  his  release,
     and when not at home, members of the Pillayan Group came to his  house
     and told the Appellant's family that they wanted to speak to  him.  In
     consequence, his brother-in-law advised the Appellant not to remain to
     stay at home, and took  him  to  Colombo,  some  375  kilometres  from
     Kalmunai.  The journey by van took some six and a half to seven hours,
     passing through checkpoints, in relation to which the Appellant showed
     his ID card and was allowed to pass.

6.   Once in Colombo the Appellant stayed with his  brother-in-law's  friend
     for five months without problems.  However, he was informed  that  the
     Pillayan Group  had  continued  to  visit  the  Appellant's  house  in
     Kalmunai, approximately four times,  in  an  effort  to  discover  his
     whereabouts.

7.   The Appellant claimed that his brother-in-law had a  house  in  Colombo
     to where he moved after five months in 2009.  Whilst  living  at  this
     address, there was a  round-up  in  the  area  and  many  people  were
     arrested including the Appellant.  He was  taken  to  Maradana  police
     station and questioned and his fingerprints were  again  taken,  after
     which he was released.  He could not recall the  exact  date  of  this
     arrest.

8.   The Appellant then went to live at a rice  shop  in  Colombo  that  his
     brother-in-law owned.  He did not suffer any further problems at  that
     address until 11 February 2011 when by chance  he  met  a  man  called
     Maran who was a former  LTTE  member.   At  interview,  the  Appellant
     explained that he asked Maran where he lived and  expressed  the  view
     that he thought the LTTE had been defeated.  The  Appellant  told  him
     about the problems that he had suffered that had led him  to  move  to
     Colombo.

9.   After this  meeting,  the  Appellant  returned  to  his  shop  but  the
     following day the army and the police came to the  shop  and  arrested
     him.

10.  The Appellant was later informed by his brother-in-law, that Maran  had
     given information about him to the police, as he was  now  identifying
     people with links to the LTTE, to the police and the Sri Lankan  Army.



11.  The Appellant claimed that he was  taken  to  Maradana  police  station
     where he was questioned about; when he came to Colombo;  what  he  had
     been doing in Kalmunai; whether he had supplied the  LTTE  with  rice;
     all of which the Appellant denied.

12.  The  Appellant  was  told  that  the  authorities  were  aware  of  his
     involvement with the election and asked him about people that he  knew
     in the LTTE and as to their whereabouts.  He was then taken to a  room
     where "youngsters" were kept.

13.  The Appellant claimed to have been held for six days during which  time
     he was threatened and told to provide information about the LTTE.  One
     day, an officer slapped his face and he was told  to  lie  down  on  a
     table and his hands were tied together, his mouth was covered  with  a
     cloth and he was repeatedly interrogated.

14.  The Appellant claimed that he was beaten severely all  over  his  body,
     including his ears and his back and he fainted.

15.  It was the Appellant's account that he suffered  ill-treatment  on  two
     occasions in detention and claimed to have scars on his back  and  his
     legs.

16.  It was the Appellant's account at interview, that on the sixth  day  of
     that detention, an officer came and told him that  his  brother-in-law
     had made arrangements to facilitate the Appellant's  escape  and  that
     the following day he was to go to the kitchen where  arrangements  had
     been made with the people  who  brought  food,  to  help  him  escape.
     Accordingly the Appellant went to the kitchen the  following  day  and
     two men hid him in a large container and took him  to  their  vehicle.
     After half an hour's drive the vehicle stopped and the  Appellant  saw
     his brother-in-law in a van and he went with him.  His  brother-in-law
     had paid 5 lakhs to the police to secure his release.

17.  Thereafter the Appellant stayed with an agent in Colombo until he  came
     to the UK.   The  brother-in-law  had  paid  the  agent  25  lakhs  to
     facilitate the Appellant's journey to the United Kingdom.

18.  In her Letter of Refusal dated 15 April 2011, the  Secretary  of  State
     referred to her discovery of a visa for the  UK  on  5  November  2008
     applied for using the name KM and a date of birth as 3 July 1976  that
     was accompanied by a valid Sri Lankan passport.  She concluded that in
     light of the fact the Appellant had provided  no  evidence  to  verify
     that his identity was actually that of MTMS born on 3  July  1978,  it
     was considered that the identity the Appellant had used to  apply  for
     his visa in 2008 namely that of KM, was his true identity.

19.  In the alternative, if as the Appellant claimed he had entered  the  UK
     on 7 March 2011 using a German passport that did not  belong  to  him,
     then it was considered that this behaviour fell under Section 8 of the
     Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  and
     that as a result his credibility had been damaged.

20.  It was also noted that the Appellant had  been  in  the  UK  for  three
     weeks prior to claiming asylum.

21.  Further, given the Appellant's claim that in  Colombo  he  stayed  with
     his brother-in-law's friend for  five  months  without  suffering  any
     problems until the claimed four visits of the Pillayan  Group  to  his
     home in Kalmunai to discover his whereabouts, that the  fact  that  he
     had remained in Colombo for such a long  time,  and  mindful  that  he
     would have been required to register with the police  in  Colombo,  it
     followed that if the Pillayan Group or the government had any interest
     in him as he claimed, that it was inconsistent that  they  would  have
     been unable to find out his  whereabouts  and  that  he  was  able  to
     continue living in Colombo for such a long  length  of  time  with  no
     problems.

22.  Insofar as the Appellant's arrest in 2009 was concerned, even  if  this
     account was accepted, it was clear that he was arrested as part  of  a
     general round-up in Colombo amongst many other people and as such,  it
     did not indicate that the Sri Lankan authorities had any  interest  in
     him, given that he was  released  immediately  without  any  reporting
     conditions.   It  was  further  noted  that  after  this  arrest,  the
     Appellant went to live at a rice shop in Colombo that his  brother-in-
     law owned and he did not suffer any further problems until 11 February
     2011, following the Appellant's meeting with a man named Maran.

23.  In light of the fact that the Secretary of State  did  not  accept  the
     Appellant ever had any connections with  the  LTTE  or  that  the  Sri
     Lankan authorities would have any interest in him, it  was  considered
     that his credibility having been damaged, it followed this part of his
     claim was not accepted.

24.  It was not accepted that the Appellant was  arrested  and  detained  in
     February 2011, and even if the claim were credible, it was  considered
     by the Secretary of State, that if the police were willing to  release
     the Appellant on the payment of a bribe, that this would suggest  that
     they had no real interest in him.

25.  As to the Appellant's scars on his body, no evidence had been  provided
     of these scars or that such claimed scarring was caused in the  manner
     described.  In that  it  was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
     detained, it was therefore not accepted that the scars he  claimed  to
     have, were caused by the Sri Lankan authorities whilst in detention.

26.  The Secretary of State considered, what was then the  relevant  country
     guidance case of TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri Lanka  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
     00049, that held inter alia, that events since the military defeat  of
     the LTTE in May 2009, had not aggravated the likely  approach  of  the
     Sri Lankan authorities to return failed asylum seekers who were Tamils
     and that if anything, the level of interest  in  them  had  decreased.
     The principal  focus  of  the  authorities  continued  to  be  persons
     considered to be  either  LTTE  members,  fighters  or  operatives  or
     persons who had played an active role in the International Procurement
     Network responsible for financing the LTTE and ensuring  that  it  was
     supplied with arms.  Thus, it was  considered  the  Appellant's  claim
     that he was of continued interest to the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  on
     return to Sri Lanka was inconsistent with that country guidance.

27.  The Secretary of State proceeded to consider the factors identified  to
     established risk on return as held at the time in the country guidance
     decision in LP (Sri Lanka) CG [2007] UKAIT 00076 and having considered
     them, concluded that the Appellant would not be at risk on  return  to
     Sri Lanka.

The Proceedings

28.  This is an appeal which has somewhat of  a  history.   The  Appellant's
     appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State was dismissed by
     the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 25 August 2011, following  upon
     which, the Appellant made a successful application for  the  grant  of
     permission to appeal that decision.  It was considered  arguable  that
     the First-tier Judge erred in misunderstanding  that  the  Appellant's
     evidence was that he stood as an independent candidate,  not  that  he
     was a member of the "Independence Party" that the Judge had found  did
     not exist.  It was also considered that the Judge  arguably  erred  in
     law in failing to assess the risk  to  the  Appellant  on  return,  by
     reference to the background material and country guidance to which  he
     had been referred by the Appellant's Counsel.

29.  There followed an error of law  hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
     McGeachy who in a decision promulgated on  19  December  2011  and  in
     agreement  with  the  parties'  representatives,  found  there  to  be
     material errors of law and that the decision of the FtJ should be  set
     aside,  not  least  for  the  reasons  identified  in  the  grant   of
     permission.

30.  There followed a full rehearing of the appeal before UTJ  McGeachy  who
     in a determination promulgated in April 2012 dismissed the  appeal  on
     both asylum and human rights grounds.

31.  Following UTJ McGeachy's refusal to grant permission to appeal  to  the
     Court of Appeal, and the subsequent refusal of permission  by  Jackson
     LJ on 21 November 2012, but following an oral hearing before Rix LJ on
     25 February 2003, it was ordered that permission to appeal be  granted
     to be listed before three Lord Justices.  The essential basis for that
     grant related to what was claimed to be an erroneous approach  by  the
     UTJ to the medical evidence submitted  by  the  Appellant  as  to  the
     nature of and cause of his scarring, prepared by  Professor  S  Lingam
     and dated 18 June 2011.  It was contended that  the  UTJ's  conclusion
     that the Appellant was not above arranging for himself to be beaten by
     a third party so that he would have scars  in  order  to  support  his
     asylum claim, was unlawful and that the  UTJ's  consideration  of  and
     reasoning in relation to the medical evidence, that  had  led  him  to
     form an adverse view of the  Appellant's  claim,  was  irrational.   A
     remittal of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought.

32.  Professor Lingam's report stated that on examination eight  scars  were
     found on the Appellant's body, six on his back and two on his  calves,
     that was said to be typical of deliberately inflicted wounds caused by
     beatings.

33.  Lord Justice Rix in his judgment had inter alia this to say:

          "The expression 'typical' was used by Professor Lingam with a mind
          to the Istanbul Protocol, in which it is the highest  but  one  of
          the  categories  of  terminology  there  used.   Nevertheless,  as
          Professor Lingam no doubt accurately says, one cannot  distinguish
          between deliberately caused scarring, dependent upon whether  that
          deliberate  wounding  has  been  done  either   by   the   Colombo
          authorities (which is MS's  case)  or  (in  the  Upper  Tribunal's
          conclusion, having rejected MS's credibility)  that  he  had  paid
          someone else to inflict the wounds upon him.  He could not inflict
          all the wounds himself because six of them are on his back.  ...


          It seems to me that although this  is  ultimately  a  question  of
          fact, the submission is that the rejection of the scarring  report
          is  perverse  or  irrational  or  arrived  at  in  a  procedurally
          incompetent manner and that in those  circumstances  there  is  an
          important point of principle or practice or some other  compelling
          reason why  permission  should  be  given  even  subject  to  that
          difficult second appeal test, in  order  to  bring  this  question
          before the Court of Appeal.  I have waivered in  my  view  of  the
          matter, because ultimately we are discussing questions of fact  on
          which the Tribunal's findings are not  susceptible  to  challenge,
          for  an  appeal  could  only  be  on  a  question  of  law.    But
          nevertheless it seems to me that, put in a way that  Ms  Jegarajah
          has put it, against the background that she has explained  to  me,
          there is at least a compelling other reason why permission  should
          be granted.


          It can be understood that a person who is in truth  in  danger  of
          persecution in his own home country may, in order to  escape  that
          danger, be prepared to have wounds  and  scarring  inflicted  upon
          himself by his own instigation.  It is more difficult  to  suppose
          that someone would do so on the hypothesis  (which  is  the  Upper
          Tribunal's hypothesis in the light of its finding  of  a  lack  of
          MS's credibility) that the claimant is  not  in  danger,  for  the
          prize of a false claim to asylum.  (Emphasis added).


          In these circumstances I will grant permission to appeal."

34.  It would be as well for the sake of completeness to  refer  to  another
     aspect of Rix LJ's judgment when he had this to say:

          "The subject matter of the appeal is essentially  a  factual  one,
          which is whether (the Appellant's) case of beatings and torture on
          being picked up by the authorities in Colombo in  2011  is  to  be
          believed.  It arises  against  the  unpromising  background  of  a
          fraudulent application for a visa to this country in what is  said
          to be a false name in 2008.   Whether  it  was  a  false  name  or
          whether it was his real name  is  in  issue  in  the  proceedings.
          However it is  accepted  that  that  was  MS's  application  in  a
          different name.  He has his photograph in  a  passport  which  was
          used to obtain a visa.  It is in issue as to whether he  used  the
          visa to come to this  country  in  2008.   Although  there  is  no
          evidence that he did, one might expect the matter to be capable of
          being dealt with one  way  or  the  other  by  evidence  from  the
          Secretary of State on that question.  There is  no  evidence  from
          the Secretary of State either way, but nevertheless  the  Tribunal
          inferred explicitly, without evidence, that he did  come  to  this
          country in 2008.  He may be assumed on  that  hypothesis  to  have
          been here ever since." (Emphasis added).

35.  In the event however and by an  order  of  consent  dated  22  November
     2013, the Appellant's appeal was remitted to the  Upper  Tribunal  for
     reconsideration.

36.  When this matter first came before me for that  purpose  on  8  January
     2014, the promulgation in what became known as the Tribunal's decision
     in KV (Scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230  (IAC)
     was imminently awaited.  It was understood that the central  issue  in
     the appeal of KV was that of scarring and whether it was  possible  to
     distinguish between scarring that had been caused in order to  advance
     an asylum claim or scarring caused by state torture.   There  were  of
     course, other issues,  not  least  a  consideration  of  the  Istanbul
     Protocol in light of "self infliction" claims.

37.  Ms Jegarajah pointed out, that given that the Respondent  continued  to
     maintain the core elements of the Appellant's  account  including  his
     detention and torture had  been  fabricated,  the  medical  report  of
     Professor Lingam assumed a critical role in assisting the Tribunal  in
     determining whether the Appellant was a victim of torture.   This  was
     an issue that needed to  be  resolved  and  hence  the  importance  of
     consideration of  the  pending  decision  in  the  case  of  KV.   She
     therefore  sought  an  adjournment  which  I  recorded  was   strongly
     supported by Mr Avery  for  like  reason.   I  therefore  granted  the
     adjournment request and relisted the matter for mention only before me
     on  4  April  2014.   On  that  occasion  I  was  informed  that   the
     promulgation of the decision in KV was in fact still awaited.   I  was
     given to understand that following its receipt and consideration,  the
     Respondent  might  review  her  position  and  if  in  favour  of  the
     Appellant,  the  Tribunal  and  the  Appellant  would  be  immediately
     notified.

38.  When the matter came back before me on 6 August  2014  for  substantive
     hearing,  I  was  informed  by  Ms  Physsas,  who  on  this   occasion
     represented  the  Appellant,  that  she  had  a  supplementary  bundle
     comprising a statement from the  Appellant's  brother-in-law  who  had
     specifically come over to the United  Kingdom  from  Sri  Lanka  on  3
     August in order to give oral evidence in support  of  the  Appellant's
     appeal and that he was due to return to Sri Lanka on 8 August.  I  was
     handed a copy of his passport and travel itinerary and a copy  of  the
     Appellant's driver's licence.  I arranged for a  further  copy  to  be
     provided to Mr Melvin who on this occasion represented the Respondent.



39.  Two days prior to this hearing and with  a  covering  letter  from  the
     Appellant's solicitors  dated  25  July  2014,  a  further  bundle  of
     documents was served upon the Tribunal that  included  inter  alia,  a
     further statement from the Appellant signed and dated  by  him  on  25
     July 2014; a letter from a Mr M Iynullah described as an  attorney-at-
     law in Sri Lanka and dated 19 July 2014 certifying that the  Appellant
     was the holder of an ID card and a passport and a driving licence  and
     a birth certificate in the name of MS and that  the  Appellant  hailed
     from a respectable family in Kalmunai, District of Ampara, Sri  Lanka.
     Mr Iynullah certified "that the  originals  of  those  documents  were
     shown to me in proof of those details".

40.  Also within the bundle, were copies of the  Appellant's  purported  Sri
     Lankan passport; his driving licence, his birth certificate and a Deed
     of Gift  (the  latter  piece  of  evidence  being  something  which  I
     understood was before previous Tribunals in this case).

41.  The bundle also included Professor Lingam's report;  a  medical  report
     from Mr Andres I Martin, a Consultant in Emergency Medicine, dated  10
     July 2014 and; a series of what were described as  Sri  Lankan  Police
     Message Forms, variously dated between 21  May  2008  and  12  January
     2014, this being evidence not previously produced in  earlier  appeals
     in this case.

42.  At the outset of the hearing, I received from Mr  Melvin  his  skeleton
     argument/written submissions, but it became readily  apparent  at  the
     outset, that this was prepared by him, in  ignorance  of  the  further
     bundle of documents above described, that Mr Melvin told me was not in
     his file and he had not seen before.  Indeed I had to arrange with  my
     clerk for a copy of that bundle to be provided to him.

43.  The matter does not end there, because at the outset of the hearing,  I
     was informed by Ms Physsas (who in fairness explained to me  that  she
     had only been instructed in this case the night before) that  she  had
     in her possession a further supplementary bundle that clearly  neither
     the Tribunal nor the Secretary of State had seen.   This  comprised  a
     statement from Mr MFA, claiming to be the  Appellant's  brother-in-law
     dated 4 August 2014 that I was told, supported the Appellant's account
     of his past experiences in Sri Lanka.  Attached to his statement,  was
     a copy of the brother-in-law's passport and  the  Appellant's  driving
     licence, the original of which I was told was in the  brother-in-law's
     possession and which he was ready to produce.  I was cross-referred to
     the Appellant's fresh statement which explained at  page  3  paragraph
     10, as to why the original had not been produced and the fact that  as
     Ms Physsas understood through her  instructing  solicitors,  that  the
     Appellant's brother-in-law MFA had explained that he  was  fearful  of
     carrying the original of that passport through customs in Sri Lanka.

44.  I confirmed to the parties  that  the  anonymity  direction  previously
     made remained in place and would do so throughout the course  of  this
     appeal.

45.  Not  surprisingly,  Mr  Melvin  was  clearly  put  out  by  the  sudden
     production of all  of  this  evidence,  not  least  the  supplementary
     evidence and the notification of the  Appellant's  brother-in-law  who
     had not only provided a statement but was in the building to give oral
     evidence.  He considered this was an abuse of the process and that  in
     effect, the Appellant's conduct had amounted to an ambush of both  the
     Tribunal and the Secretary of State.  He strenuously urged me to grant
     an adjournment request, explaining that he needed to explain  the  new
     documents and formulate possibly new arguments on that basis.  He also
     needed to consider the ramifications of the new medical report.

46.  Further and insofar as the brother-in-law's evidence was concerned,  he
     needed to track through the past evidence  of  the  Appellant  in  the
     course of his appeal in order to determine what  was  said  about  the
     brother-in-law's role within the Appellant's account and to compare it
     with the evidence now produced by him.  There was no evidence  so  far
     as Mr Melvin knew, to establish that the  person  waiting  outside  to
     give evidence was indeed the Appellant's brother-in-law.

47.  Mr Melvin said to me "I can think of a hundred questions that  I  might
     want to ask".  He explained that for the brother-in-law's evidence  to
     be given now, would leave him in a wholly unprepared position and  one
     of  unfairness,  particularly  in  circumstances   when   the   cross-
     examination that might be conducted would in effect  be  so  conducted
     with one arm tied behind his back.

48.   I  rose  in  order  to  give  Ms  Physsas  the  opportunity  to   take
     instructions  from  the  Appellant's  brother-in-law  solely  on   the
     question of whether he could return at a subsequent date to give  such
     evidence.  In so doing I reminded Ms Physsas the onus of proof was  on
     the Appellant.

49.  On my return to the hearing room, Ms Physsas informed  me  that  having
     spoken to the Appellant's brother-in-law, she was able to confirm that
     he would be able to return to the United  Kingdom  to  give  evidence.
     Apparently his present visa  for  this  purpose  expired  sometime  in
     January 2015.  He could return provided  that  he  had  at  least  one
     month's notice in order to make the necessary  arrangements  for  this
     purpose.

50.  Nonetheless Ms Physsas asked me to consider whether the  brother-in-law
     could give his evidence today whilst appreciating the difficulties  in
     that regard mindful not least of  Mr  Melvin's  representations.   She
     also asked that in the event that the evidence could not be taken that
     day and the adjournment request was granted,  that  the  Secretary  of
     State would ensure through the court,  that  once  her  investigations
     into the veracity of the documents produced  had  been  completed  and
     particularly if it resulted in the Secretary of  State  taking  a  new
     position, that the Appellant's solicitors should be notified, so as to
     save the Appellant's purported brother-in-law the need  to  return  to
     the United Kingdom to  give  evidence.   In  any  event  it  would  be
     appreciated that the results of the  Secretary  of  State's  enquiries
     were made known to the Tribunal and the Appellant before  the  resumed
     hearing.  There was no objection to handing to the Secretary of  State
     the originals of such documents that were presently in the Appellant's
     possession, for the Respondent's examination.

51.  I reminded Ms Physsas of the  requirements  of  Rule  15(2)(a)  of  the
     Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008 in terms  of  any  application  to
     admit fresh evidence.  In considering that application, I bore in mind
     that no objection was raised by Mr Melvin to  the  production  of  the
     evidence, provided the Secretary of State was given a  reasonable  and
     ample  opportunity  to  consider  it  before   proceeding   with   the
     substantive hearing.

52.  There was no doubt that the manner in  which  this  evidence  had  been
     produced, not least the evidence now before me, was most  regrettable.
     I consider that Mr Melvin was perfectly entitled in such circumstances
     to make his adjournment request which was  entirely  reasonable  given
     what had taken place.  The Secretary of State  was  a  party  to  this
     appeal and was entitled to the same  sensitivity  that  the  Appellant
     would expect to receive from the Tribunal.  Fairness in the  interests
     of justice therefore demanded that I grant his request.  In so  doing,
     I made it clear that my permission was to  enable  the  Respondent  to
     consider the new  evidence  now  served  upon  the  Tribunal  and  the
     Secretary of State  and  to  enable  her  to  make  enquiries  of  the
     documentation in terms of, for example, the driving  licence  and  the
     Police Report Forms as to their  veracity.   It  was  right  that  the
     Secretary of State should have the  time  and  proper  opportunity  of
     considering these documents.  Further, at the last minute  Ms  Physsas
     produced her skeleton argument, again  a  document  that  neither  the
     Tribunal nor indeed Mr Melvin had yet had an opportunity to  consider.
     It was right to say that Mr Melvin's skeleton argument was also served
     on the day of the hearing.

53.  Insofar as the evidence of  the  Appellant's  purported  brother-in-law
     was concerned, I was gratified to learn that he would be in a position
     to return and I was therefore able to tell  the  parties  that  I  had
     ascertained from the Tribunal listing (mindful that Mr Melvin  had  in
     any event told me that the Secretary of  State  would  need  at  least
     eight  weeks  to  consider  the  veracity  of  the  documentation  now
     produced) that the hearing in this matter could be restored before  me
     on 23 October 2014.  That would therefore be the date of  the  resumed
     hearing and I decided in all the circumstances and given  the  history
     of this matter to allocate a time estimate of  one  day  in  order  to
     hopefully ensure that the hearing and oral evidence could  be  adduced
     on that date and without the need for further adjournments.

54.  In the circumstances I gave Mr Melvin permission, if the  Secretary  of
     State so chose, to produce and serve upon the Tribunal  and  upon  the
     Appellant any further evidence upon which she might seek to rely.   In
     particular I directed that the Secretary of State serve no later  than
     ten days before the restored hearing, if not  sooner,  both  upon  the
     Tribunal and the Appellant's solicitors, the results of her  enquiries
     into the veracity of the documents the  Appellant  had  now  produced.
     Further, if in the  light  of  those  enquiries  and  any  review  the
     Secretary of State might undertake, she  altered  her  position,  then
     similarly the Tribunal should be notified as soon as possible.

55.  I was able to clarify  with  the  parties  that  the  original  of  the
     documents were to be handed to Mr Melvin as part  of  the  process  of
     checking their veracity.  This was done with  the  permission  of  the
     Appellant who confirmed that he had no objection  to  those  originals
     being handed over for this purpose.

56.  Those documents are as I have above referred.

57.  Mr Melvin confirmed to  me  that  these  were  all  the  documents  the
     veracity of which would be checked, some of which would be sent to the
     Entry Clearance Officer.

58.  I reminded Ms Physsas that one of the originals  missing  was  that  of
     the 2006 passport  of  the  Appellant  where  only  a  copy  had  been
     provided.  It was of course a matter for the  Appellant  on  whom  the
     burden of proof lay, as to whether he was able to or wished to produce
     the original.  It  was  an  evidential  matter,  but  in  fairness,  I
     suggested to Ms Physsas that this might be a  matter  that  should  be
     considered between the Appellant and his  legal  representatives,  but
     that was a matter for them.

59.  I was told by Mr Melvin that the birth certificate produced  was  still
     only a copy.  The Appellant stated that he had  the  original  of  his
     birth certificate at home in Sri Lanka but he was able  to  obtain  it
     and would ensure it was produced as quickly as possible.   I  made  an
     appropriate anonymity direction in accordance with the requirements of
     Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
     2005.

60.  Upon resumption of the hearing of this appeal on  23  October  2014,  I
     read over to the parties my contemporaneous record of the  proceedings
     of 6 August 2014.  In that regard I observed to Mr Avery, that despite
     Mr Melvin's assurances that formed the basis upon  which  I  had  been
     persuaded by him to adjourn the last hearing and to  make  appropriate
     directions, the Secretary of State had failed to serve the results  of
     her enquiries into the veracity  of  the  documents  provided  by  the
     Appellant upon the Tribunal and upon the Appellant.  No indication had
     been given as to the present stance of the Secretary of State in light
     of the new documentation served prior to the resumed hearing  of  this
     appeal.

61.  Mr Avery informed me that the  Appellant's  driving  licence  had  been
     referred to the National Document Fraud Unit  to  see  if  they  could
     authenticate it but unfortunately they had been unable to do so due to
     insufficient specimen material to compare the driving licence and were
     unaware of the issue procedures in Sri Lanka for driving licence.

62.  He accepted that no enquiries had been made in relation  to  the  other
     documents, for example as to the veracity of  the  the  Police  Report
     Forms.

63.  He explained that it appeared that the original  birth  certificate  in
     the name of MS was produced to the Secretary of State on 16  September
     2014 but appreciated that it had not been checked he explained "due to
     lack of time".

64.  Mr Turner who now represented  the  Appellant,  informed  me  that  the
     original of the Appellant's brother-in-law's  passport  had  that  day
     been handed to Mr Avery.

65.  Mr Avery informed me as follows:

          "The Secretary of State continues not to accept that the Appellant
          is MS as claimed.  It remains the view that it is KM as  addressed
          in the refusal letter of 15 April 2011.


          As regards the Appellant's scarring - we  say  the  latest  report
          takes us no further than the previous one.  The  medical  evidence
          has in any event to be seen in the context of the  evidence  as  a
          whole and it remains the Secretary of State's  position  that  the
          Appellant  could  not  have  sustained   his   scarring   in   the
          circumstances he claims, because we maintain, that he arrived here
          in 2008 as KM and has been in the UK ever since.


          Much of Mr Melvin's previous skeleton  argument  remains  relevant
          not least in relation to the current case law."

66.  Mr Turner informed me that it remained the  Appellant's  case  that  he
     never came to the UK until 2011.  He was as claimed MS.  The Appellant
     did sustain the scarring in the circumstances described and the  issue
     fell to be decided.  He maintained that the Appellant's  identity  had
     been established and it was for the Respondent to  show  that  he  had
     been here under a different name since 2008.

67.  Mr Avery responded that the  Secretary  of  State's  position  remained
     that the Appellant's account at its highest, although dependent on  my
     findings, would not necessarily render him  to  be  at  real  risk  on
     return to Sri Lanka.

The Evidence of the Appellant

68.   The  Appellant  began  his  oral  evidence  by  maintaining  that  his
     statement signed and dated 25 July 2014 was true and was to be adopted
     as part of his  evidence-in-chief.   In  that  statement,  and  having
     maintained that he was MS born on 3 July 1978 in Sri Lanka as claimed,
     he stated that he had left Sri Lanka on  6  March  2011,  arriving  at
     London Heathrow Airport on 7 March and claiming asylum in the UK on 31
     March 2011.

69.  The day following his arrival in the United Kingdom,  he  sought  legal
     advice  from  a  firm  of  solicitors  Messrs  Krish  Solicitors,  who
     contacted the Home Office and an appointment was  made  for  31  March
     2011 for the Appellant to attend the Home  Office  in  Croydon  for  a
     Screening Interview. On arrival at Heathrow, the agent who accompanied
     him, gave the Appellant a German passport and they both  went  through
     immigration control  separately.  The  Appellant  could  not  remember
     whether he was asked to fill in a landing card when  he  went  through
     immigration control because he was "under immense stress".  The  agent
     met with him on the other side and took the  passport  from  him.   On
     leaving the airport, the Appellant was  introduced  to  someone  whose
     name he could not recall,  who  took  him  "to  some  people  from  my
     village.  They were the ones that took me to Krish Solicitors to  seek
     legal advice".

70.  Having set out the correct spelling of his  full  name,  the  Appellant
     explained that the only time he used a different name was in 2009 when
     he applied for a visa with the intention of coming to the UK.  At  the
     time he used the alias KM.  He used this name  because  that  was  the
     name that was used by the agent who obtained  the  passport  for  him.
     The Appellant applied for a visa because "I was having problems in Sri
     Lanka, because of my support for the LTTE and I wanted to go somewhere
     safe".

71.  The Appellant claimed in his statement, that the passport and the  visa
     were arranged by an agent who  in  turn  had  been  organised  by  his
     brother-in-law.

72.  The Appellant continued that the agreement between  his  brother-in-law
     and the agent was that there  would  be  a  payment  for  the  agent's
     services amounting to 20 lakhs.  The agent had then made  arrangements
     for the Appellant to apply for a visa to the UK and then told him that
     a visa had been granted, upon which, the Appellant was  asked  for  35
     lakhs to help him get out of Sri Lanka.  The Appellant continued:

          "At the time we did not have enough money and could  not  pay  him
          what he demanded.  The agent had kept the passport and  the  visa.
          However I never saw for myself  whether  a  visa  to  the  UK  was
          endorsed in the passport or not."

73.  The arrangement with the agent had been that he would be paid  once  he
     had helped the Appellant leave the country, which was  why  the  agent
     was not paid for the work that he did  in  obtaining  a  passport  and
     helping to obtain a visa.  However when he had raised his  costs,  the
     Appellant's brother-in-law decided not to pay the agent.  At the  time
     the Appellant agreed with his brother-in-law "because I  felt  that  I
     could continue living in Colombo".

74.  When the Appellant left Sri Lanka to come to the UK in 2011 it  was  at
     a time when he knew he could no longer remain safely in Sri Lanka.

75.  At paragraph 9 of his statement, the Appellant explained  that  he  had
     applied for two passports in his own name of MS in Sri Lanka  in  2001
     and then in 2006.  Each passport issued was valid for five years.  The
     first passport was numbered M2017706 and was valid  from  9  May  2001
     until 9 May 2006.  He had used  this  passport  to  travel  to  India.
     There was attached to his statement a copy of that  passport  and  the
     endorsed visit to India in the bundle of documents  submitted  on  the
     Appellant's behalf.  The second passport was issued in  2006  and  was
     valid until 2011.  The Appellant had used this passport to  travel  to
     Mekkah for the Islamic Pilgrimage in  2006  which  he  visited  for  a
     period of two weeks.  The Appellant stated that  he  was  also  issued
     with a Sri Lankan driving licence number A014114768 and an  ID  number
     781850284V.

76.  The Appellant explained  that  he  did  not  provide  evidence  of  the
     passport for the driver's licence issued in his name in support of his
     previous appeal, because he had not been advised  and  was  not  asked
     whether he had been issued with any such documents in his given  name,
     either by the Home Office or by  his  previous  solicitors.   However,
     whilst preparing for this appeal, his new solicitors had explored  the
     matter with him and the Appellant had as a result  realised,  that  he
     might have the evidence with  his  family  in  Sri  Lanka.   For  this
     reason, he contacted them  and  was  forwarded  copies  of  his  first
     passport, his driver's licence and the letter from Mr Iynullah  a  Sri
     Lankan lawyer who confirmed that he had seen the  originals  of  those
     documents.  The Appellant's family had informed him  that  they  could
     not locate his second passport.

77.  The Appellant  continued  in  his  statement  that  as  he  was  facing
     problems in Sri Lanka he was advised by the agent that he  should  not
     use his own name which was why he then applied for  a  passport  under
     the name of KM.

78.  When he applied for his first passport and  the  second  passport,  the
     Appellant had  to  produce  his  birth  certificate  and  a  character
     reference from the village officer,  who  was  someone  that  had  the
     knowledge of those living in the village.  The Appellant also provided
     a completed application form that was witnessed by a lawyer/justice of
     the peace and the fee for the passports.   The  Appellant  was  issued
     with these passports on the same day as  he  applied.   The  Appellant
     continued at paragraph 12 of his statement:

          "As I said, I provided the agent with my  photograph.   I  do  not
          know how  he  obtained  the  passport  or  what  documentation  he
          provided to be able to obtain a passport in  name  of  (KM).   The
          only time I saw the passport obtained by the agent was on the  day
          that I attended the Visa Application Centre in Colombo.  I do  not
          know whether that passport was genuine or fake."


79.  The Appellant explained that  when  he  made  the  application  to  the
     British High Commission in 2009,  he  attended  the  Visa  Application
     Centre in Colombo where his fingerprints were taken and  the  relevant
     fee for the application was paid.  This was the process that had to be
     followed.  At the time of  the  application,  the  Appellant  did  not
     submit any documents other than those that were arranged by the agent.
      The agent gave him the file only on the day that he attended the Visa
     Application Centre and so he did not have time  to  look  through  the
     file to see what documents were submitted.

80.  The Appellant explained that the agent waited  outside  while  he  went
     inside to lodge the application.  He was not interviewed  in  relation
     to the application and he was then issued with a receipt and  told  to
     collect his documents within 21 days.  The  agent  in  fact  took  the
     receipt off of the Appellant which was why he was the one who was able
     to collect the passport  and  any  visas  from  the  Visa  Application
     Centre, on the Appellant's behalf.

81.  The Appellant stressed that the only thing  that  he  provided  to  the
     agent, was his photograph, that the Appellant assumed, enabled him  to
     obtain a passport and to prepare the visa application.

82.  The Appellant continued that when  he  attended  the  Visa  Application
     Centre to apply for a visa to the United Kingdom, he  was  accompanied
     by a woman who claimed to be his wife.  She was there on the advice of
     the agent, who told him that if they applied as husband and  wife  for
     the purpose of a honeymoon, there was more  chance  of  the  Appellant
     being issued with a visa.  The  Appellant  had  no  idea  as  to  what
     happened to the woman thereafter.  He claimed that the  only  time  he
     had met her  was  on  that  day  when  they  both  attended  the  Visa
     Application Centre.  He had not seen or heard from her since.

83.  At paragraph 16 of his statement, the Appellant continued  to  maintain
     that he arrived in the UK for the first time on  6  March  2011,  even
     though he had applied for a visa to enter the UK as a visitor in 2009.



84.  The Appellant continued that his father used to own a rice  mill  where
     he was supplying rice to the LTTE.  It was his understanding this  had
     been a longstanding arrangement, although he  was  not  aware  of  the
     exact details of  the  arrangement.   Nonetheless  the  Appellant  had
     continued that arrangement after his father had passed away and he had
     taken over ownership of the rice mill.  He supplied rice to  the  LTTE
     once a month or every two weeks as instructed.  When he first  started
     supplying rice to the LTTE, there were no problems,  but  towards  the
     end of 2008, the  police  came  to  know  of  this  arrangement.   The
     Pillayan Group used to be a part of the LTTE but then  they  separated
     and joined an alliance with the authorities. It  was  the  Appellant's
     understanding that they provided the police with the information about
     his supplying of rice to the LTTE.

85.  The Appellant claimed that he also made financial contributions to  the
     LTTE on three occasions before his problems  with  the  police  began.
     The total contributions made between 2005 and 2008 was 3  lakhs  which
     was equivalent to �1,500.  Anyone supporting the LTTE in  the  village
     was making  financial  contributions  to  them.   These  matters  were
     mentioned in the course of the Appellant's Screening Interview.

86.  The Appellant continued that he became a  member  of  the  Independence
     Party in 2008.  It was formed in 2008, three months prior to the local
     elections.  The party leader was Jameel Hassan.  He claimed the  party
     was formed by those who supported the LTTE.  It had been suggested  to
     the  Appellant  that  LTTE  members  should   stand   as   independent
     candidates.  Because he had their support the Appellant decided to  do
     as the LTTE suggested and  he  stood  as  a  candidate  in  the  local
     elections and was appointed Assistant Secretary to a  Mr  Mansoor  who
     was the deputy leader of the Independence Party.

87.  The Appellant maintained that had he won the election,  he  would  have
     continued to support the LTTE "and would have listened  to  what  they
     wanted.  However I lost the election".

88.  The Appellant continued that the  Independence  Party  was  very  small
     with only 30 members comprising mainly young Muslim men who  supported
     the LTTE.  Once the election was  lost,  the  Appellant  claimed  that
     police began looking for the members of his party  and  it  was  as  a
     result that they all dispersed and that was the end of the Party.   It
     had only  been  active  for  three  to  four  months  before  everyone
     dispersed.

89.  The Appellant claimed that within two days of the election  results  he
     was arrested by the police and taken to Kalmunai  police  station  and
     detained  for  one  day  during  which  time  he  was  taken   to   an
     interrogation room and questioned about his support of the LTTE and as
     to  his  supply  of  rice  to  them.   He  maintained  that   he   was
     "continuously  interrogated  by  three  different  people"  and   then
     released following the intervention of his brother-in-law.

90.  Two days after returning to his home, the police came  again  and  took
     him to the police station where he was  detained  for  a  further  two
     days.   Again  he  was  taken  to  the  same  interrogation  room  and
     interrogated by three people who threatened him and told him that they
     had confirmation that he was supporting the LTTE and  wanted  to  know
     what other plans he had with them.  On the second day his  brother-in-
     law was again able to effect his release by bribing a police  officer.



91.  On release from detention, he returned home and some two or three  days
     later, the Pillayan Group came to the house.  Fortunately at the time,
     the Appellant was not at home but  they  spoke  with  the  Appellant's
     sister and told her that they wanted the Appellant to go and see  them
     at their headquarters.  The Appellant explained that  he  was  "scared
     for my life and scared that the Pillayan Group would come back to take
     me".  As a result he went to Colombo and stayed with a friend  of  his
     brother-in-law's for five months before moving to his brother-in-law's
     house in Colombo.

92.  The Appellant explained that his family in Sri Lanka consisted  of  his
     elder brother, elder sister, younger brother, brother-in-law  and  his
     elder sister's two children all of whom had left Kalmunai to  live  in
     Colombo.  The reason was due to the Appellant's support for  the  LTTE
     and the continued harassment by the police and the Pillayan  Group  in
     consequence.  They had decided that to get on  with  their  own  lives
     they needed to leave Kalmunai.  In  fact,  said  the  Appellant,  "the
     police had been visiting my family every so often and  they  had  been
     leaving letters asking me to attend the  police  station.   My  family
     have now forwarded some of these letters  which  are  appended  to  my
     bundle".

93.  The Appellant at paragraph 25 of his statement  claimed  that  when  he
     first arrived in the UK and claimed asylum, he had no  documents  with
     him but managed to obtain  evidence  through  his  brother-in-law  who
     forwarded them to him by post.  At the time he left Sri Lanka  he  was
     in fear of his life and did not think to collect relevant documents to
     bring with him.

94.  The Appellant continued that he  was  arrested  by  the  police  on  12
     February 2011 in Colombo.  Before that arrest he had met with  an  ex-
     LTTE member known as Maran  by  chance  on  11  February  2011.    The
     Appellant continued at paragraph 26 of his statement:

          "We talked about the problems that I had because of my support for
          the LTTE and he told me about the problems that he had.   I  later
          learned from my brother-in-law that the police officer who  helped
          me escape detention had told him that the information about me  to
          the police was provided by Maran."

95.  At paragraph 27 of his statement the Appellant explained as follows:

          "27.    When I was arrested on 12 February 2011  I  was  taken  to
              Maradana police station.  I was then questioned  about  being
              in Colombo and they  told  me  that  they  knew  that  I  was
              supporting the LTTE and that I was  supplying  rice  to  them
              while I was in Kalmunai.  They kept asking  me  to  tell  the
              truth about being in Colombo.  I was  questioned  five  days.
              On the sixth day of interrogation when I kept refuting  their
              claims about my involvement with the LTTE and my  reason  for
              being in Colombo, the interrogating officer then hit me  hard
              on both ears.  I became dizzy and they then pulled me up  and
              put my face down on a table where  they  then  handcuffed  my
              hands to the cuffs attached to the table.  They again told me
              to tell the truth or that they would beat me.   They  started
              to beat me on my back and my legs.  Then I started to  scream
              and they  put  a  cloth  in  my  mouth  to  prevent  me  from
              screaming.  I cannot remember how long I had  to  suffer  the
              beating before I lost consciousness.  When I  came  round,  I
              was in a different room lying in the dark in the corner and I
              was feeling immense pain on my back and my  legs  because  of
              the beatings.  I was bleeding and I was wearing just my  vest
              and underpants.  I remember at the time  that  they  beat  me
              that I was fully clothed, but as a result of the  beating  my
              clothes were torn and discarded."

96.  It was the Appellant's  understanding  that  the  Respondent  had  been
     accusing him of paying someone to inflict those  injuries  on  him  or
     inflict them on himself.  He maintained that he had no reason to  harm
     himself and scar himself for life.  He continued:

          "I am a religious man and I respect my religion and my faith.   My
          religion forbids me from purposely inflicting pain  on  myself  or
          others.  It took nearly a month for my wounds to heal and for  the
          pain to subside.  There is no way that I would inflict  this  pain
          and suffering on myself.


          The scars that I have suffered as a result of the  torture  I  was
          subjected to is not just on my body.  Every  time  I  think  about
          what I was subjected to I feel depressed."

97.  The Appellant concluded his statement by insisting that he  feared  for
     his life and safety in Sri Lanka.  He explained that in 2009  when  he
     thought that he could continue to live  in  Sri  Lanka,  he  made  the
     decision to do so when presented with  a  choice.   However  following
     February 2011 and the torture to which he was subjected,  he  did  not
     believe that he could continue "any form of life in Sri  Lanka  or  be
     safe there.  Therefore I felt that I had no choice but  to  leave  Sri
     Lanka".

98.  In oral evidence and in his evidence-in-chief, the Appellant was  asked
     about his ID and as to what he said happened to him in Sri  Lanka,  in
     particular in February 2011.  In that regard the  Appellant  continued
     to strenuously maintain that his true name and identity  was  that  of
     MS.

99.  The Appellant was shown his original passport and  maintained  that  it
     belonged to him and showed his name  as  MS.   He  repeated  that  his
     brother-in-law brought it over to him from Sri  Lanka  on  20  October
     2014.

100. The Appellant was shown the original of his  birth  certificate  and  a
     translated copy and confirmed this  was  obtained  in  Sri  Lanka  and
     translated into English and posted to him.

101. The Appellant was shown an original of the Deed of Gift and  maintained
     that it was a gift from his father to him.

102. He was shown Mr Iynullah's letter  of  19  July  2014  and  the  police
     report from Kalmunai police station dated 15 March 2013 that  bore  an
     illegible signature purportedly from the chief inspector of the police
     station and stated as follows:

          "This is to inform that (MS) of (there  followed  the  address  in
          Kalmunai) that he should attend to the Crime  Branch  of  Kalmunai
          Police Station on 17 March 2013 at 14.30 hours.


          PC Arunu Sembiratne 22782."

103. The Appellant stated that he had  seen  this  document  and  it  was  a
     letter received "by my people at home.  It is a police letter".

104. The Appellant, consistent with his statement, explained as  to  how  he
     came by all these various documents that included  the  Police  Report
     Forms with their certified translations and listed over pages 48 to 59
     of the Appellant's bundle as dated 12 January 2014, 15 March 2013,  20
     June 2012, 20 November 2011, 27 February 2010, and 21 May 2008.

105.  The  Appellant  was  shown  the  original  claimed  birth  certificate
     together with its translation that showed a date of registration as 13
     August 1978.

106. As regards the absence of an ID card, the Appellant explained  that  he
     lost it in that before he left Sri Lanka on 6 March 2011:

          "I had my national ID at home.  Later I was told  they  could  not
          find it.  'They' means my sister informed  me  that  it  had  been
          misplaced."

107. The Appellant was referred to his statement  and  the  account  of  his
     detention and ill-treatment in February 2011 and was  asked  to  "tell
     the Tribunal  a  bit  more  about  your  experience".   The  Appellant
     explains as follows:

          "In 2011, it was on 11 February 2011, the person by  the  name  of
          Maran who had been an LTTE supporter - after a long time,  he  met
          me in Colombo.


          I knew him from when I was living in  Kalmunai.   We  chatted  for
          sometime.  He asked me why I'd moved to Colombo  and  I  told  him
          that due to the problems I had had, I moved to Colombo and was  in
          hiding.  He also told me the problems he had in the past and  then
          he left me.


          I met him not far from where  I  was  living,  near  the  shopping
          centre in Old Moor Street near Subrims Traders.   He  spotted  and
          recognised me.  We chatted for about twenty minutes.  He  told  me
          he would get in touch with me again.  Also he asked me where I was
          living in Colombo.


          The following day the police came and arrested me.   I  was  taken
          away and detained at Maradana police  station.   He  did  not  say
          where maybe because he was also with the Pillayan Group.  He  said
          he was also hiding in Colombo like me.


          Maran was shorter than me - dark complexion and he would part  his
          hair this way (the Appellant then  demonstrated  to  the  Tribunal
          with his hands from right to left)."


108. The Appellant was then asked to provide details of the way in which  he
     was ill-treated whilst in detention.  He stated as follows:

          "I was in detention.  I was interrogated and asked why  I  was  in
          Colombo.  I told them I  was  living  with  my  brother-in-law  in
          Colombo.  They alleged that I had been found to be supplying  rice
          and other materials to the LTTE when I was in Kalmunai  that  they
          had found out about my activities in Kalmunai and they knew why  I
          had made the trip to Colombo.


          The questioning and interrogation lasted for about five days.   On
          day six a senior police officer took me to a dark room and  I  was
          beaten and asked to tell the truth.  I was beaten so severely that
          I became unconscious and they dragged me out of the room,  put  me
          on a table and I was pinned to that table.  Both hands were locked
          to the table, it was like  handcuffs.   After  that  I  could  not
          remember how they beat me."

109. At this point I noticed that the Appellant became animated and then  he
     continued:

          "I was unconscious.  When I regained consciousness  I  realised  I
          had been left in the room and I was kept in that room only with my
          pants and a torn vest.


          I remained lying in that room and two days later a police  officer
          came and told me that arrangements had been made for me to  escape
          and explained to me what I ought to do.  That  there  would  be  a
          vehicle carrying big pans and pots that they used in  the  kitchen
          and I should get into one of those big pots and hide in such a way
          that nobody should see me.


          That's what happened later.  The lorry took me out.


          Again I was transferred to another vehicle at a place that I could
          not remember and from there I was taken to a house - not my house,
          one that belonged to a friend of my brother-in-law.  My brother-in-
          law came to visit me on the same day and he said they  were  going
          to take me to the hospital.  The man and the woman living  in  the
          house were present.


          They suggested to my brother-in-law that it would be risky to take
          me to  the  hospital.   Instead  they  wanted  to  treat  me  with
          homeopathic medicine - herbal - and they brought it and applied it
          to my body all over.  It was some sort of ointment.  They massaged
          it all over my body and I slept that night and  my  brother-in-law
          assured me that he would find a way to send me abroad,  explaining
          it would not be safe for me to continue to live in Sri Lanka.


          Because I also feared that police would come back  and  arrest  me
          and ill-treat me, I begged my brother-in-law to send me abroad  as
          soon as possible.


          I later learned from my brother-in-law that the  officer  who  had
          facilitated my escape from detention urged him to send  me  abroad
          as soon as possible.


          My brother-in-law later told me this was the same day while I  was
          being massaged."


110. The Appellant was shown his passport that on page  2  showed  a  number
     LO677168 extended up to 09/05/2010.  He was asked to what this related
     and explained that he did not know anything about  that  passport  and
     what they did on it.

111. I noted that what then followed, was a series of questions and  answers
     concerning the passport and  this  particular  entry,  which  had  the
     effect, in no sense the fault of Mr Turner who was doing his best,  to
     create what appeared to  me  in  the  Appellant's  mind,  a  state  of
     confusion.  By way of  example  the  evidence  in  this  regard  as  I
     recorded it, was overall as follows:

          "This isn't my first passport.   I  had  another  passport  before
          this.  I have had only one passport the one in my hand.  Yes I had
          another passport at the moment this is the only passport I have.


          I obtained one passport before later I renewed this passport there
          was another passport that was issued to me after this passport and
          that got lost."


112. At this stage the Appellant told me he felt dizzy and I granted  him  a
     five minute break to get some  fresh  air.   Upon  resumption  of  the
     hearing the Appellant told me that he felt much better.  The  question
     concerning the number of passports the Appellant held continued.

113. In this regard the Appellant stated that he had had in  his  life,  two
     passports including the one that he was presently holding.  The  first
     had been issued in 2001.  The Appellant then  explained  that  he  had
     obtained a passport in 1996 when he  was  about  to  travel  to  Saudi
     Arabia and upon that passport's expiry, the date of which he  was  not
     sure he thought 2009, but again was not sure, he applied and  obtained
     the passport that he now held in order to travel to India.  When  that
     passport was expiring it was extended.  No other passports  had  since
     been issued to him.

114. In view of this confusion  he  was  referred  to  paragraph  9  of  his
     statement in which he had  explained  that  he  had  applied  for  two
     passports in his own name in Sri Lanka in 2001 and 2006 each  passport
     being valid for five years, the first M2017706 was valid  from  9  May
     2001 until 9 May 2006.  This was the passport he had used to travel to
     India.  The second passport was issued in 2006 and valid  until  2011.
     He had used  this  passport  to  travel  to  Mekkah  for  the  Islamic
     Pilgrimage in 2006 and was there for two weeks.

115. In that he had stated that he had a passport issued  in  2006,  he  was
     asked to explain the difference,  in  that  he  had  just  given  oral
     evidence that he obtained a passport in 1996 and not 2001 as stated at
     paragraph 9 of his statement.  The Appellant responded:

          "This is my passport when I did travel to Saudi Arabia and I don't
          know how it is different in the statement I can't explain."


116. When asked if he obtained a third passport in 2006 as mentioned in  his
     statement the Appellant explained:

          "This passport was renewal of the passport that I obtained in 2006
          and there was another passport that was lost.  That third passport
          was issued to me and was misplaced.  It is also issued  to  me  in
          2002 and that passport was lost."

117. At this point of his evi,  I  noted  that  the  Appellant  was  visibly
     paling and he told me:

          "I'm not feeling well and that's why I ask  for  a  break.   I  am
          really shaking and I am not in good health.  I need some fresh air
          to clear my head."

118. In acknowledging that  the  Appellant  indeed  did  not  look  well,  I
     granted this further break.  Indeed I decided  that  it  would  be  an
     appropriate moment to rise for the luncheon adjournment and  that  the
     hearing would resume at 2.15pm.

119. Upon the resumption of the hearing, the Appellant assured  me  that  he
     now felt much better and was able to proceed with his evidence.

120. He explained that he was mistaken when  he  talked  about  obtaining  a
     passport in 1996 in that he had become confused.  In referring to  the
     passport he now held in his hand the Appellant continued:

          "This is the only passport  I  have  now.   I  mentioned  about  a
          subsequent passport that I  call  the  third  passport  which  got
          lost."

121. Upon cross-examination, the  Appellant  was  referred  to  the  various
     documents now produced and was reminded that this case  went  back  to
     2011 and that he had been legally  represented  ever  since  and  that
     there had been two previous hearings where he had given evidence.   He
     was asked in such circumstances as to why it was, that these documents
     were not produced until August 2014.

122. In response, the Appellant repeated that  his  former  lawyer  had  not
     required him to produce the documents.  It was only when  he  obtained
     new  legal  representation  that  he  was  asked  for  them.   He  had
     instructed his current solicitors in the latter part of 2013.

123. The Appellant was further extensively questioned about the  history  of
     his passports.  It was put to him that one of the entries  on  page  2
     related to a previous passport and bore a different  passport  number.
     He was asked to explain.  The Appellant responded as follows:

          "I am unable to explain anything about that.   This  is  the  only
          passport I currently have and about the previous passport -  I  am
          not in a position to answer that question  -  this  was  my  first
          passport."

124.  The  Appellant  was  reminded  that  the  Secretary  of   State   held
     documentary evidence showing that he applied to  come  to  the  UK  in
     2008.  In that regard the Appellant was shown a copy of  the  relevant
     2008 application details showing the application had been made to  the
     BHC in Chennai.  The application disclosed that the  "biometrics"  had
     been received on 25 September 2008 and; checks were  completed  on  29
     September 2008.  Further, that on 5 November 2008,  an  English  check
     was performed.  On the same date it  was  recorded  that  a  visa  was
     issued and in the "Notes" column the following was stated:

          "05/11/2008-11-10-43 ... spouse eight days honeymoon trip/HGL conf
          and travel itinerary seen - M and A met by self - ap's own funds -
          good circumstances - satisfied  genuine  -  originals  checked  by
          Colombo 05/11/2008."


125. There further appeared an  application  of  the  Appellant's  purported
     wife Fathimanasrin Abdul Rozack.

126. Mr Avery continued that the Appellant had to go  to  the  Embassy  with
     some documentation with their application.   The  Appellant  confirmed
     that to be correct and stated that he recorded it was in the year 2008
     but he could not remember the date or the month.

127. He was referred to what he said about this matter  at  paragraph  7  of
     his statement although stating  the  year  was  2009.   The  Appellant
     repeated he did not remember the month or the year.

128. The Appellant insisted that the only document that he provided  to  the
     agent was the photograph that he acknowledged was that which  appeared
     on the 2008 application form.  He could not remember  the  exact  date
     when the photograph was provided.

129. As far as the election was concerned he remembered  the  date  to  have
     been May 2008 although he was not sure about the day.

130. The Appellant was referred to a copy of the passport that was  attached
     to the application that showed it to have been issued on 22 April 2008
     and it was pointed out to him that that was before  the  election,  to
     which the Appellant responded that he was no  longer  sure  about  the
     date of the election.  All he could say was "they took my photo but  I
     cannot comment on  the  issue  date  of  the  passport  or  when  that
     application was submitted to the passport".

131. The  Appellant  nonetheless  acknowledged  that  it  was  difficult  to
     reconcile the dates with his account.  This was  not  because  he  was
     making up his story.  He insisted "I told you the truth".

132. The Appellant was taken through his account of the circumstances  under
     which the agent having  first  asked  for  a  fee  of  20  lakhs  then
     increased it to 35 lakhs that his brother-in-law refused to  pay.   He
     explained that there were two  reasons  "firstly  we  were  not  in  a
     position to raise that increased amount and secondly my brother-in-law
     told us that the situation in Sri Lanka was getting back to normal".

133. The Appellant confirmed that his brother-in-law was a  businessman  who
     owned a rice trading company.  His brother-in-law took the  view  that
     he was already hiding in Colombo and  he  could  therefore  manage  to
     remain in Sri Lanka.  When it was put to the Appellant that given that
     his meeting with Maran postdated his arrest in Colombo in  a  round-up
     in 2011, it was difficult to understand why he should have  considered
     himself to be in hiding if he had already been arrested by the  police
     and had his ID examined, why it was, if he was  being  truthful  about
     his problems in Kalmunai and from the Pillayan Group looking for  him,
     that none of these things surfaced upon his arrest in  the  course  of
     the round-up.  The Appellant responded that was  because  the  Colombo
     police were not aware of his activities in Kalmunai.  The  Appellant's
     problems only cropped up after his meeting with Maran who had informed
     upon him.

134. When asked as to how it was that he had known Maran before meeting  him
     by chance in Colombo the Appellant explained that this was because:

          "I'd  been  supplying  rice  I  came  to  know  him.   Maran   was
          responsible for placing the orders.  He would speak to me  on  the
          phone and instruct me to supply to certain people like  Rohan  and
          Kala ..."

135. The Appellant continued that Maran  was  "responsible  for  buying  and
     distributing rice and other food items".  He had not mentioned Maran's
     role in buying rice from him in Colombo because he was not asked about
     his role and therefore did not elaborate.

136. The Appellant stated he did  not  know  whether  Rohan  and  Kala  were
     members of the LTTE but that they possibly might be.

137. When asked as to why he had not mentioned Maran in the  course  of  his
     asylum interview the Appellant explained "I was a bit  tensed  at  the
     Home Office interview and may have forgotten to mention  about  Maran.
     I could not recollect him at the time.  I failed to mention about him.
      That's all I can say".

138. When it was put to the Appellant  that  "the  whole  business  of  your
     arrest in February 2011 is just a fabrication" the Appellant responded
     "not so - it happened - that's why I explained about it and I told the
     truth.  There was no need for me to fabricate anything.   All  that  I
     have said was true".

139. There was no re-examination.

140. The Appellant then explained to me that Maradana was  the  district  of
     the police station to which he was taken in Colombo.

141. The Appellant proceeded to further explain  the  circumstances  of  his
     detention and ill-treatment.  He told me as follows:

          "There was a room they called "Investigation Room".  I  could  see
          it written on the top of the door.


          I was questioned and interrogated in that room and then  taken  to
          another room to be detained.  The other room  was  not  far  -  an
          adjoining room.  I had to walk through  the  corridor  to  another
          room - not far.  That was the room I was held.  I was held in that
          room for four days and  beaten.   Beaten  in  that  room.   I  was
          alone."

142. When asked to describe the room the Appellant began to do so using  his
     hands in order to be descriptive.  He continued:

          "From this desk where I am sitting to the wall behind  me  and  it
          was a square room.  It had two large tables - about four metres  -
          four by four.  Only one chair.  I could  not  sleep  properly.   I
          wasn't allowed to sleep.  I was always asked to sit in that corner
          continually.  Only when questioned would they switch on the light.
           I've got nothing else to say about that room.


          There were no windows.  I could see over the door.  An  iron  gate
          with a grille.  When they were questioning me they would switch on
          the light and it was visible.  It was like  a  cell  door,  not  a
          wooden door."

143.  In  light  of  this   further   detail,   I   invited   the   parties'
     representatives to ask any further questions of the Appellant if  they
     so wished.

144. In response Mr Turner asked if there were any other objects at  all  in
     the room.  At this I  recorded  the  Appellant  became  animated.   He
     continued:

          "Yes.  I could see these iron rods and metal poles and chains  and
          other things with which they beat people.  They were kept  in  the
          room.  Near the wall in the corner in a cabinet.  The front of the
          cabinet and grille so  that  I  could  see  the  rods  inside.   I
          couldn't count there were so many.  Sorry  only  one  cabinet.   I
          cannot remember if they used any objects from the cabinet as I was
          unconscious - but I imagine they had used these weapons once."

145.  In  response  to  Mr  Turner's  further  questioning,  the   Appellant
     confirmed that he was beaten in that room.  When asked how many times,
     he stated he could not answer  that  question  because  he  could  not
     remember how many times.  He was not beaten every day "but  every  day
     they were in and out questioning me - bullying me".

146. The Appellant recalled that he was actually  beaten  on  two  days,  he
     thought the third and fourth days.

147. On further cross-examination, the Appellant stated he was detained  for
     five days and that the beatings to his recollection he thought, was on
     the last day and the day before.

148. In that regard the Appellant  was  referred  to  paragraph  27  of  his
     statement, in which inter alia, he had stated that he  was  questioned
     for five days and that it was on the sixth day of  interrogation  when
     he kept refuting their claims about his involvement with the LTTE  and
     his reasons for being in Colombo, that the interrogating officer "then
     hit me hard on both  ears".   The  Appellant  had  then  proceeded  to
     describe the ill-treatment that followed (see above).

149. It was put to him that the Appellant referred to six days and  that  it
     was on the sixth day that he was beaten and that this  was  completely
     different from  what  he  had  just  stated  in  oral  evidence.   The
     Appellant responded that when he was taken to the  police  station  he
     was questioned and that he now believed it was on the last day and the
     day before that he was beaten.  The Appellant continued:

          "All I can say is that I was interrogated and on the  last  day  I
          remembered being beaten with a metal rod and  I  remembered  being
          beaten the day before as well."

The Evidence of MFA

150. MFA began his evidence by adopting as true and as part of his  evidence
     his statement that was signed and dated by him on  4  August  2014  to
     which was attached a copy of his passport and the entries therein.

151. In his statement he gave his address (that  I  noted  was  the  address
     given by the Appellant in his evidence) and that he was born on 7 July
     1973.  He was the Appellant's brother-in-law.  He had arrived  in  the
     UK on 1 August 2014 and would be returning to Colombo on 8 August.  He
     was a businessman in Sri  Lanka  and  a  wholesale  supplier  of  rice
     covering the whole of Sri Lanka.

152. He had formerly lived in Kalmunai but had moved  to  Colombo  with  his
     wife and two children as well as his wife's two brothers  and  sister.
     This was because they were being harassed by the police  because  they
     wanted MS, the Appellant.  The police would  constantly  come  to  the
     house asking for MS and as to his whereabouts.  They would come at any
     time, day or night.

153. MFA explained that the Appellant used to supply rice to  the  LTTE  and
     in 2008 he stood for local elections at the suggestion  of  the  LTTE.
     He had lost the election and  two  days  later  was  arrested  by  the
     police.  MFA was not at home when the Appellant was arrested  but  was
     informed upon his return by his wife.  The Appellant was then released
     on the same day and told MFA that they had taken statements from him.

154. MFA's statement continued with his confirmation that the Appellant  had
     never married and had no children.  He had always been  known  by  his
     name MTMS, the full details of which where spelt out in his brother-in-
     law's statement.

155. MFA continued that even though the family were living  in  Colombo  the
     police continued to leave letters at the house in Kalmunai looking for
     the Appellant but that those  letters  were  forwarded  to  him  by  a
     neighbour in Kalmunai informing him the police were still visiting the
     brother-in-law's address.

156. The statement continued that the Appellant was at  home  for  the  next
     two to three days before being arrested again by the police  but  that
     on this occasion MFA was at home.  He asked the police why  they  were
     arresting the Appellant again and was told that they were  taking  him
     away as they wanted to question him some more due to  his  involvement
     with the LTTE.

157. MFA was worried for his safety and wellbeing  and  kept  thinking  what
     could be done to help him.  He knew a police officer in Kalmunai  whom
     he contacted to see if he could get the information and was told  that
     the police were looking to keep the Appellant  on  remand.   Following
     upon this  information  MFA  became  increasingly  worried  about  the
     Appellant's safety and he went to the police station and spoke to  the
     Chief Inspector of Police.  Following that meeting the  Appellant  was
     released.  MFA did not pay a bribe on this occasion  because  he  knew
     the Chief Inspector.  He  thought  that  Chief  Inspector  decided  to
     release the Appellant "out of respect for me".

158. MFA now understood the Appellant thought that he had paid  a  bribe  to
     get him released however when he was  arrested  in  Kalmunai  MFA  did
     intervene but paid no bribes.

159. MFA explained that after the Appellant's release,  he  understood  from
     the family that the Pillayan Group visited the house looking  for  the
     Appellant.  MFA was not there  at  the  time  but  believed  that  the
     Appellant was also not there when they came to the house.

160. After this, the family decided for the safety of everyone, that it  was
     best  for  the  Appellant  to  go  somewhere  else.   MFA  then   made
     arrangements for him to go to Colombo and he was  able  to  stay  with
     MFA's friend in Colombo for a while, before moving into the house that
     MFA owned in Colombo.

161. MFA's statement continued, that even before the Appellant was  arrested
     in Colombo in 2011, he was  still  worried  for  his  safety  and  was
     thinking that it was best if the Appellant were  to  leave  Sri  Lanka
     altogether to go somewhere safe.  It was for that reason that he spoke
     with an agent and made arrangements with the agent to try and get  the
     Appellant out of Sri Lanka.

162. At paragraph 12 of the statement MFA continued:

          "I made an agreement with the agent for 2 million  Rupees  to  get
          (MS) to anywhere in Europe but the agent said  he  would  try  and
          send him to London.  At this time I did  not  pay  the  agent  any
          money.  The agreement  was  that  after  (the  Appellant)  reached
          Europe or wherever the agent was taking him then I would  pay  the
          money.  The agent then told me that he needed photographs of  (the
          Appellant) and that he would then arrange the necessary documents.
           As far as I  understood  it,  the  agent  arranged  for  all  the
          documents and he then took (the Appellant) to apply for a visa  at
          the British High Commission in Colombo.  However, the  agent  then
          told us that all the documents were ready and (the Appellant)  was
          issued with a visa and he would take him out of Sri Lanka as  long
          as we paid him 3,500,000 Rupees.  The reason the  agent  gave  the
          increase in his price was that it was not easy to arrange all this
          and he wanted more money.  Neither (the Appellant) nor I  saw  any
          of the documents or  the  visa  that  was  issued  to  him.   (The
          Appellant) and I then discussed the increase in the agent's  price
          and I told (the Appellant) that I could not afford the increase in
          fee that the agent was asking for and (the Appellant) agreed  that
          he would remain in Sri Lanka, at that time.  When I refused to pay
          the agent he kept all the documents."

163. MFA's statement continued that in 2011 the Appellant  was  arrested  in
     Colombo.  MFA was at work at the time when he received a call from his
     wife and told that the Appellant had not returned home.   Due  to  the
     problems he had had before, MFA decided to go to  the  police  station
     just to make general enquiries and when  he  got  to  Maradana  police
     station and gave the Appellant's name and told them that  he  had  not
     come home and was missing, "the  police  officer  at  the  front  desk
     checked their records and then told me that he has been  arrested  and
     that he was at the police station".

164. MFA's statement continued, that he came out of the police  station  and
     contacted his wife to tell her that her brother had been arrested  and
     that he had spoken to the officers and was told that he was in trouble
     and it was unlikely the police would release him.

165. Thereafter MFA attended the police station  daily  to  make  enquiries,
     but they would  not  allow  him  to  see  the  Appellant  and  he  was
     constantly told that they were not going to release him.

166. Although he could not recall when it was, on one day, he spoke with  an
     officer he had known before and was told "off the  records  that  (the
     Appellant) had been badly beaten".

167. Through this officer, MFA managed to  speak  with  one  of  the  senior
     officers at the station to plead  the  Appellant's  case  to  get  him
     released.  He met with this senior officer three  or  four  times  and
     when MFA realised that the only way to get the Appellant released  was
     to a bribe, he informed this officer that he was willing to pay him to
     get the Appellant released.  MFA explained:

          "The reason I offered to pay a bribe is because this officer  kept
          hinting during previous meetings that he may be  willing  to  help
          release (the Appellant) if I paid him.  I eventually agreed to pay
          him 500,000 Rupees (approximately �2,500)."

168. On returning home and obtaining the money to pay the  officer,  he  met
     him again and  was  told  that  the  officer  would  arrange  for  the
     Appellant to get out of the prison "somehow".

169. When MFA saw the Appellant after his release from prison, he was  in  a
     bad state.  At paragraph 17 of his statement MFA continued:

          "He looked very disturbed and distressed and he was in  a  lot  of
          pain and he had wounds on his back and legs.  When  I  saw  him  I
          knew I could not take him to hospital as  he  would  get  in  more
          trouble, therefore I got him some  medication  to  help  with  the
          pain."

170. MFA continued  in  his  statement,  that  following  his  release,  the
     Appellant stayed with a friend of his.  On the day of the  Appellant's
     release, MFA received a call  from  the  officer  he  had  bribed,  to
     confirm that the Appellant had been taken out of prison and  was  also
     told the Appellant should not stay at MFA's house and to  try  to  get
     him out of Sri Lanka as soon as possible.  The officer told  MFA  that
     the Appellant had been recorded as an escapee and that he would be  in
     trouble if caught.

171. It was for that reason that MFA  made  arrangements  with  a  different
     agent to try to get the Appellant out of Sri Lanka  and  to  take  him
     somewhere safe, anywhere in Europe, and it was this  agent  that  made
     the necessary arrangements that brought the Appellant to the UK.

172. MFA's statement at paragraph 20 concluded as follows:

          "I further confirm that (the Appellant) recently contacted  us  in
          Colombo and asked us to locate his passport and driver's  licence.
          Looking through his documents,  I  found  the  passport  that  was
          issued to him in 2001 and his Sri Lanka driver's licence.  I  then
          took these documents to a lawyer in Colombo who saw  the  original
          and made copies and provided a letter to confirm that he had  seen
          the originals."

173. In oral evidence, MFA was immediately offered by Mr Turner  for  cross-
     examination.

174. When asked as to how he came to bring the  documents  on  the  previous
     hearing in August he responded:

          "I knew the appeal hearing was forthcoming and  also  because  the
          police were looking for him in Sri Lanka, so I  decided  to  bring
          these documents in support  of  his  claim  because  he  would  be
          arrested if he was to return to Sri Lanka...  He asked me if there
          were any documents and if so I should  bring  them.   This  was  a
          month before my last visit in July 2014."

175. When asked as to why he had not brought the Appellant's passport  after
     that, occasion MFA explained:

          "When I was here last time, I learned that it  was  necessary  for
          him to produce his passport - that is why on the  second  visit  I
          decided to bring his passport."

176. MFA explained that he did not know what the Home Office's attitude  was
     to the Appellant's claim to be MS.  The Appellant's solicitors had not
     told him what documents to bring but he had got hold of the  documents
     now produced.  Whatever documents he could obtain he brought with him.

177. Further in cross-examination, MFA confirmed that to his  knowledge  the
     Appellant had been arrested twice in  Kalmunai  and  that  the  recent
     arrests were at his address in Colombo.

178. MFA was aware as to the reason in terms of the authorities interest  in
     him in Kalumnai, because the Appellant was running a rice mill that he
     owned and had been supplying rice to the LTTE.  The  police  had  thus
     assumed that he had some links with the LTTE.

179. When asked if MFA had tried to arrange for the  Appellant  to  come  to
     the UK before he arrived here in 2011, MFA confirmed that he  had.  It
     was however his recollection that it was in the same year in 2011  but
     they were unsuccessful but on the second occasion it  was  successful.
     As to the first occasion he did not remember the date or month because
     "It was some time ago".  He did however recall the second time was  in
     March 2011.

180. When asked why the arrangements had not worked the first time, the  MFA
     repeated what he has said in his statement and indeed consistent  with
     what had been described by the Appellant in his evidence  and  written
     statement though of course, there was a difference in the recollection
     of the year.

181. MFA confirmed that the agent had taken a photo of the Appellant and  he
     also recalled the agent taking the Appellant to  the  Embassy  on  the
     first occasion.  The agent had done everything MFA had asked in making
     an application for a visa.  He did not however know what type of  visa
     he had obtained.  MFA's concern was only that the Appellant should get
     out of Sri Lanka.

182. MFA repeated that to the best of his  knowledge  and  recollection  the
     first attempt was in early 2011.

183. But when it was put to him that  the  Appellant  had  stated  that  the
     first attempt was in 2008 MFA responded:

          "He has had problems in 2008 - that is true.  After that  in  2011
          he left the country."

184. MFA insisted that it was not until 2011 that the Appellant came to  the
     United Kingdom.  He stated "It's a fact".

185. When asked if he  was  in  any  way  involved  in  an  attempt  by  the
     Appellant to gain entry clearance to the UK in 2008 MFA responded:

          "I tried many times to send him abroad for his safety and  I  have
          been trying since 2008."


     MFA could not remember if he had sought out an agent for help in 2008.


The Parties' Submissions

186. Despite the lateness of the hour, I informed the  parties  that  I  was
     content to hear their respective submissions in  order  to  bring  the
     hearing to its conclusion.

187. In the event and in the course of Mr Avery's  closing  submissions,  Mr
     Turner intervened, to say that given the time  and  the  tenor  of  Mr
     Avery's submissions, he asked  on  reflection,  if  he  could  instead
     provide his submissions in response, in writing in relation  to  which
     he undertook to have them delivered to me  immediately  following  the
     weekend.  Mr Avery stated that he was content with this and  I  agreed
     that he should nonetheless continue to conclude his submissions to me.

188. At the close of Mr Avery's submissions, I informed  the  parties,  that
     upon my receipt and consideration of Mr Turner's written  submissions,
     I would proceed to prepare and determine this appeal.

189. Mr Avery relied on the Secretary of State's Letter of  Refusal  and  Mr
     Melvin's written submissions which  predated  the  new  evidence.   He
     continued  to  maintain  that  the  Appellant  and  his  witness  were
     "completely incredible"  and  that  their  accounts  were  "completely
     fictitious".  Their evidence was contradictory.

190. Mr Avery continued that by way of  example,  the  Appellant's  evidence
     over his passport was "a complete shambles".  His  oral  evidence  was
     not consistent with what he had  said  in  his  statement  as  to  his
     passport.

191. This appeal had been in  litigation  since  2011  and  there  had  been
     substantive hearings twice before  August  of  this  year  when  extra
     evidence was produced.

192. Mr Avery submitted the Appellant had a fundamental problem in  that  he
     applied in 2008 for entry clearance.  The  ECO  had  checked  all  his
     documents.  He had gone to the British High  Commission  himself.   He
     had done the biometrics and all the documentation presented was  found
     to be in order.  It was noted that the Appellant's case was  that  all
     the documentation was false.

193. On the contrary submitted Mr Avery, it was the subject  of  a  thorough
     investigation of the facts that led to the grant of entry clearance to
     the Appellant in what the Secretary of State maintained was  his  true
     identity as KM.

194. The problem was that one set of documents the Appellant  had  produced,
     must be false and thus the Appellant had a credibility problem.

195. Whilst he anticipated that Mr Turner would submit  that  there  was  no
     evidence that the Appellant entered the UK in 2008  as  KM,  Mr  Avery
     maintained that the reality was,  that  there  was  evidence  that  he
     obtained an entry clearance as a visitor.  It was  unlikely  that  the
     Secretary of State would have kept a record.

196. Indeed Mr Avery told me that he had taken the  trouble  to  investigate
     the matter and there was no such record.  He maintained  however  that
     "If you obtain entry clearance as a visitor, the fact is, that  unless
     there  is  something  that  raises  a  suspicion  on  behalf  of   the
     Immigration Officer, it is unlikely he would bother to keep a record."

197. Mr Avery continued that the dates for the visa application in 2008  and
     the passport used for that, were issued prior to the  election  taking
     place that the Appellant claimed  was  the  trigger  for  his  initial
     problems  with  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka.   According  to  the
     documentation the passport was issued on 22 April 2008.  The elections
     took place on 10 May.  It was highly significant, in that whatever was
     going on had nothing to do with elections  and  that  this  completely
     undermined the Appellant's account of the problems he claimed to  have
     had that forced him to move to Colombo.

198. Mr Avery submitted that on the Appellant's own evidence,  when  he  was
     first arrested in Colombo, the authorities completely failed  to  link
     him with any problems in his home area even though his ID  card  would
     have shown from where he hailed.

199. The Appellant had  described  in  some  detail  in  his  evidence  when
     initially interviewed, his involvement in supplying rice to the  LTTE.
     He had mentioned two people, apparently in the LTTE with whom  he  had
     contact in connection with this supplied rice, but despite  saying  in
     his oral evidence that this was how he knew the  man  Maran,  whom  he
     claimed had informed on him, the Appellant had  completely  failed  to
     mention this in his account of his  dealings  with  the  LTTE.   This,
     submitted Mr Avery, was hard to explain as to why the Appellant  would
     not mention the person who was responsible for his  arrest  and  would
     fail to mention any previous dealings with him, when he had given  his
     account of those dealings.

200. Mr Avery continued that  there  was  then  the  issue  as  to  why  the
     Appellant would tell Maran he was in hiding when clearly he  was  not,
     because he had earlier been arrested and released.

201. Mr Avery continued that  there  was  then  "the  thorny  issue  of  the
     Appellant's ill-treatment".  He maintained that the  Appellant's  oral
     evidence was inconsistent with itself.  At one stage the Appellant had
     stated he was beaten on the third and fourth days of  detention,  then
     the fourth and fifth, then the last day before  released  and  in  his
     statement, the sixth day and this statement did not mention any  other
     beatings.

202.  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  setting  aside  the  issue  of  the  entry
     clearance, the evidence of the Appellant's claimed difficulties in Sri
     Lanka were not credible.

203. Mr Avery continued that there was a clear problem with the evidence  of
     the Appellant's brother-in-law in that he was clear that  in  2011  he
     had made two attempts to get the Appellant to the UK.   The  first  of
     those mentioned in the description and the problems that the Appellant
     described had taken place in April.  The only answer  the  brother-in-
     law had given on that point was  clearly  not  credible.   Whilst  one
     could expect some variation of the date "we are talking about the year
     here".

204. Mr  Avery  submitted  that  apart  from  the  general  issue  regarding
     documentation, there were also other notes said to be  of  the  police
     notes produced which despite the fact that the Appellant was  arrested
     twice in Colombo and on his evidence the second time he  was  detained
     for a significant period of time and only released  on  a  bribe,  the
     police were apparently  still  looking  for  him  in  Kalmunai.   This
     submitted Mr Avery simply made no sense.

205. Mr Avery submitted that the fact was,  that  the  Appellant's  evidence
     was "completely at odds with the documentary evidence".  The Appellant
     was not a credible witness and this must impact on the  weight  to  be
     attached to the documents that he had produced.   In  that  regard  Mr
     Avery referred me to the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed.

206. Mr Avery continued the Appellant had  two  sets  of  documents  one  of
     which clearly followed.  The Secretary of State continued to  maintain
     that he was not MS but KM and that it would follow that his account of
     events in 2011 could not be  true,  because  the  Secretary  of  State
     maintained that in that period, the Appellant was  in  the  UK  having
     arrived here some time in 2008.

207. Mr Avery concluded that even if I accepted that the  Appellant  was  MS
     as claimed, his account still did  not  stand  up  to  scrutiny.   The
     Appellant was still an  incredible  witness  and  indeed  the  medical
     evidence had to be regarded in that light.   The  Secretary  of  State
     continued to maintain that the scars that the Appellant bore were self-
     inflicted.

208. When I enquired of Mr Avery  whether  he  had  put  that  fact  to  the
     Appellant in the course of his  lengthy  cross-examination,  Mr  Avery
     responded "I put it to him that his account was not true".

209.  True  to  his  word,  Mr  Turner's  "supplementary  submissions"  were
     received immediately following  the  weekend  and  I  have  taken  the
     opportunity to carefully consider them.  As  they  were  described  as
     supplementary, I would point out that I have also thus  taken  account
     of the prior skeleton argument authored by his  colleague  Ms  Physsas
     dated 6 August 2014.

210. In summary,  her  contention  was  that  the  Appellant's  account  was
     consistent with the background  material  and  the  country  guidance.
     Further that the medical reports by Mr  Martin  and  Professor  Lingam
     corroborated  the  Appellant's  account  of  torture.   There  was  no
     evidence that the scars were caused by a third party with consent.

211. Ms Physsas had referred to the relevant risk categories  as  identified
     in GJ (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  319  (IAC)
     and clarified in MP and NT (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

212. In Mr Turner's supplementary submissions he  pointed  out  this  was  a
     case that turned on credibility.  It was  the  Appellant's  case,  not
     least for the reasons set out in Ms Physsas' skeleton  argument  that,
     if found credible, as Mr Turner submitted the Appellant  should,  that
     he would be at risk if returned  to  Sri  Lanka  and  nothing  in  the
     Reasons for Refusal Letter nor Mr Melvin's skeleton  argument  and  Mr
     Avery's submissions, undermined that submission.

213. Whilst there were some discrepancies in the  Appellant's  evidence  and
     indeed that of his brother-in-law, these were not of a magnitude  that
     ought to lead to an adverse credibility finding.

214. Whilst it was the Secretary of State's case, indeed a key plank in  her
     case, that the Appellant's account was untrue and that the scars  must
     have been self-inflicted with his  consent,  there  were  two  medical
     reports that pointed to the scars being inflicted and being consistent
     with the Appellant's account.

215. The Secretary of State had  never  questioned  the  Appellant  on  this
     issue and certainly did not put to him that he  had  commissioned  the
     scars, but simply that the Appellant's account was a fabrication.

216. As to the Appellant's true identity, the Secretary of State was  unable
     to state whether the documentary evidence provided both in respect  of
     his identity and  from  the  police  was  false.   The  Appellant  had
     provided sufficient evidence to show to the relevant standard of proof
     that he was who he claimed to be.  There was no real challenge to  the
     veracity of those documents.

217. It was clear that it was  more  likely  than  not  that  the  Appellant
     entered the United Kingdom in 2011 rather than 2008.

218. In conclusion, this was a case in which there was in  addition  to  the
     oral evidence, a wealth of  documentary  evidence,  to  establish  not
     least to the relevant standard, that the Appellant was whom he claimed
     to be and that he arrived  in  2011  and  that  his  account  of  ill-
     treatment by the Sri Lankan authorities was credible.  I  was  invited
     to attach significant weight to  the  two  medical  reports.   It  was
     submitted  notwithstanding  the  difficulties  with  aspects  of   the
     Appellant's evidence, that he should be found credible  and  that  his
     appeal ought to succeed.

The Legal Framework

219. The burden of proof is upon the Appellant to a standard  defined  as  a
     reasonable degree of likelihood.  The question is answered by  looking
     at the evidence in the round and assessing  it  at  the  time  of  the
     hearing of the appeal.  It follows that in considering the Appellant's
     particular circumstances, I have to consider to the requisite standard
     of  proof,  whether  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  the  Appellant   has
     established a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  under  the  Refugee
     Convention and whether on return there  are  substantial  grounds  for
     believing that he would face a real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm
     within the meaning of 399C of the  Immigration  Rules  and/or  whether
     there are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  on  return  the
     Appellant would face a real risk to his life (Article 2 of  the  ECHR)
     or being exposed to treatment contrary to  Article  3  of  ECHR.   The
     standard of proof  in  determining  the  likelihood  of  risk  of  the
     Appellant's protected rights under Articles 2 and 3 is  the  same  low
     standard as it is for persecution for a Refugee Convention reason.

220. In reaching my conclusion, I have  borne  in  mind  the  provisions  of
     paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules that deals with  the  approach
     to  past  persecution  and  paragraph  339O   relating   to   internal
     relocation.

221. In terms of my credibility assessment, I have reminded myself the  fact
     that an Appellant's account might appear inherently unlikely does  not
     mean that it is  untrue.   In  real  life  the  improbable,  even  the
     incredible, sometimes does happen (see Gheisari [2004] EWCA Civ 1854).

222. Upon my consideration of the documents the Appellant has  submitted  in
     support of his account, I have been mindful of the guidance within the
     starred decision of the Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 439  as
     to  the  approach  that  a  decision-maker  should  take  as  to   the
     reliability of documents.  It would  be  an  error  of  law  for  that
     decision not to be followed and considered  in  all  those  very  many
     cases, indeed the very considerable majority, where the issue  is  not
     whether the document in question is forged or authentic but whether it
     is reliable or not.  This direction is vital.  The  document  produced
     might be on the right paper, even with the right stamp or a  signature
     but might be unreliable because of  the  way  in  which  it  was,  for
     example, procured.

223. I have reminded myself that in general,  the  weight,  if  any,  to  be
     given to expert evidence is a matter for the Judge and  such  evidence
     must be approached with appropriate care.

224. I have also been  mindful  of  the  guidance  of  the  Tribunal  in  KV
     (Scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT  00230  (IAC)  who
     inter alia observed that as was clear from a  number  of  authorities,
     whilst it was  not  the  role  of  a  medical  expert  to  assess  the
     credibility of a patient's asylum claim, it was part of their role  to
     assess clinical plausibility.  In the context of a medical  report,  a
     doctor's task was to assist the asylum decision-maker by  bringing  to
     bear his or her medical expertise.  He or she  was  not  conducting  a
     free-ranging assessment as to the credibility of the claimant's story.
      This point is equally reinforced by established case law.

225. The Tribunal pointed out, that the production of a  favourable  medical
     report did not create a shift in the evidential burden of  proof,  but
     was capable of being probative of an asylum claim.

226. Courts and Tribunals greatly valued medical reports  in  asylum  cases.
     They could not be accorded some hallowed status and  the  weight  they
     possessed was very much a function of the extent to which the clinical
     evidence enabled them to make positive  findings  about  causation  of
     injuries as well as the individual quality they possessed.

227. In terms of scarring, when preparing  medico-legal  reports,  a  doctor
     should not feel obliged;  to  reach  conclusions  about  causation  of
     scarring that went  beyond  their  own  clinical  expertise.   It  was
     necessary to consider all possible causes of scarring.

228. Whilst if best practice was followed, medico-legal reports  would  make
     a critical evaluation of the claimant's account of  scarring  said  to
     have been caused by torture, such reports could not be equated with an
     assessment to be undertaken by decision-makers in a legal context,  in
     which the burden rested on the claimant and when one of  the  purposes
     of questioning was to test a  claimant's  evidence  so  as  to  decide
     whether (to the lower standard) it was credible.

229. The Tribunal further observed that the Istanbul Protocol as revised  in
     2004, had come to occupy a central role  in  cases  in  which  medical
     evidence was sought to support claims made by asylum applicants,  that
     they had been ill-treated by  the  authorities  in  their  country  of
     origin.

230. In paragraph 17 of KV and in relation to assessment of  physical  scars
     or lesions, it was stated at paragraph 187 of the Protocol, that there
     were five degrees of consistency in an ascending scale:

          "For each lesion and for  the  overall  pattern  of  lesions,  the
          position should indicate the degree of consistency between it  and
          the attribution:


          (a) not consistent, the lesion could not have been caused  by  the
              trauma described;


          (b) consistent with: the lesion could  have  been  caused  by  the
              trauma described, but it is non-specific and there  are  many
              other possible causes;


          (c) highly consistent: the lesion could have been  caused  by  the
              trauma described and there are few other possible causes;


          (d) typical of: this is an appearance that is usually  found  with
              this type of trauma, but there are other possible causes;


          e) diagnostic of: this appearance could not have  been  caused  in
             any way other than that described."

Assessment

            The Medical Evidence

231. I begin with the report of Professor S Lingam dated 18 June 2011.

232. Professor Lingam describes himself as  having  worked  over  the  seven
     years up to the date of his report as a  First  Contact  Physician  in
     Harley Street and that he is the Executive Medical Director of Medical
     Express Clinic.  For this reason he did two masters (MSc)  modules  in
     Neurology  and  in  Musculo-skeletal  Medicine  that  included  trauma
     medicine.

233. Over the years he has  specifically  trained  himself  in  medico-legal
     report writing.  He belonged to the Medico-legal Society and  attended
     meetings at the Royal Society of Medicine.  He stated that he was also
     "trained by the Judiciary on industrial injuries and on recognition of
     dating scars and injuries" and that he had been  sitting  as  a  panel
     member on industrial injury cases and had acquired in-service training
     and  experience.   He  examined  patients   (Appellants)   to   assess
     industrial injuries at the Appeals Tribunal.  Two years prior  to  his
     report, he was appointed as a Regional Medical  Appraiser  and  stated
     that he did appraisals of other  doctors  working  for  the  Tribunals
     Service.

234. I note from Professor Lingam's thorough and detailed  report,  that  it
     includes colour close-up  pictures  of  the  Appellant's  scarring  to
     illustrate the clinical presentation and features of the scars.

235. Under the sub-heading "Causation and Consistency" Professor  Lingam  in
     summary considered inter alia that:

          "The appearance of these eight scars which are all  hyperpigmented
          indicate that the injury was caused by beating and lacerations  as
          a result of such beatings. ...  The  scars  on  this  patient  are
          typical of scars from severe  beating  and  laceration.   ...  The
          bruises here ...  indicate  that  the  primary  event  is  beating
          causing  superficial  lacerations.   This  finding  is  clinically
          typical with the history provided.  The appearances of course  are
          typical for scarring as a result of beating leading to superficial
          lacerations (it is for this reason I have come to  the  conclusion
          that the primary event is beating). ...


          The typical scar appearance of beating is clearly evidence in each
          of these scars so on clinical grounds, I  have  to  conclude  that
          beating or skin laceration  is  the  primary  mechanism  of  these
          scars.   This  is  based  on  the  finding  of   hyperpigmentation
          ..................... without hyperpigmentation in all  the  scars
          which is so typical of healing in wounds caused by beating  and/or
          superficial laceration, and cannot be anything else.  This I  base
          on my own clinical experience and on reading the  literature.   As
          the scarring is within the  last  six  months,  i.e.  the  patient
          having stated they were caused  some  four  months  ago,  after  a
          careful and both clinical examination of the scarring, I am of the
          clinical  view,  after  assessing  the  pigmentation  and  healing
          process of the scars, that the  patient's  account  of  the  scars
          being caused some four months ago is typical with the age  of  the
          scarring.


          I am confident on a clinical basis to reach  the  conclusion  that
          the  primary  event  causing  the  scars  are  the   beating   and
          superficial laceration as described.  This is based on the typical
          appearance of the scars."

236. I pause there, because although mindful that this report  predates  the
     guidance in KV (above), it would  appear  to  have  been  prepared  in
     accord with the five degrees of consistency in an ascending  scale  as
     stated at paragraph 187 of the Istanbul Protocol.

237. In summary, it would appear that Professor Lingam  concluded  that  his
     examination of the Appellant's scar was in accord with (c) namely that
     the lesion could have been caused by the trauma  described  and  there
     were few other possible causes.

238. My view in this regard is reinforced by the fact that Professor  Lingam
     continued by considering whether there might be alternative causes for
     these scars.  In that regard  he  explained  why  he  "ruled  out  the
     possibility of self-inflicted injuries because some of the  scars  the
     areas are located in areas which are not reachable by him particularly
     the scars on the back".

239. Secondly, the  Professor  considered  whether  the  scars  were  caused
     deliberately to mislead.  Again he stated "I have ruled that there  is
     no  way  that  I  can  scientifically  differentiate  between   wounds
     inflicted  deliberately  from  the  wounds  inflicted  from  the  said
     trauma."  Thirdly, the Professor then considered if these were  caused
     by a medical condition or a surgical procedure.   In  that  regard  he
     stated "I have clinically ruled that no medical condition  could  have
     caused the scarring described in this report."

240. Professor Lingam continued that he had also  explored  the  Appellant's
     personal history and whether he could  have  sustained  such  scarring
     during his ownership and involvement with the family's rice mill.   He
     had not been provided with any such history of accidents  or  injuries
     during the Appellant's involvement nor had he been provided  with  any
     history of accidents at home or while studying.

241. For the avoidance of doubt,  Professor  Lingam  then  referred  to  the
     terminology used in his reports as per the Istanbul Protocol as I have
     identified above.  Notably Professor Lingam continued:

          "In  conclusion  therefore  the  findings  are  clinically  highly
          consistent with  injuries  due  to  superficial  lacerations  from
          beatings and healing by natural  means.   I  have  considered  the
          scars from other causes as discussed but  in  balance  I  consider
          that these scars are from the trauma as explained by the patient."

242. Such a conclusion accorded with (c) of the Protocol.  Professor  Lingam
     further  pointed  out  that  his  interview  and  examination  of  the
     Appellant lasted nearly three hours. He continued:

          "I noted that the patient was very slow to respond and very  vague
          at answering questions.  This is not due to a cultural or language
          issue but I came to the opinion this may be due to poor memory and
          concentration featuring as part of his stress."

243. The Professor reaffirmed in his conclusion that  "The  scars  from  his
     beating are typical with the history provided by the patient.  I could
     not explain these other than by  the  traumas  as  described  in  this
     report."

The Report of Mr Andres I Martin Consultant in Emergency Medicine  Dated  10
July 2014

244. This report followed Mr Martin's examination of  the  Appellant  on  26
     June 2014.

245. Mr Martin is a fellow of the Royal College  of  Surgeons  of  Edinburgh
     and a fellow of the College of Emergency  Medicine  both  obtained  in
     1996.  He has considerable surgical experience not  least  in  plastic
     surgery and in the burns unit at Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton and
     describes the fact that he has intensive  care  experience  and  holds
     postgraduate qualifications in surgery  and  emergency  medicine.   He
     enrolled with the  Joint  Committee  of  Higher  Medical  Training  in
     February 1998 and achieved full accreditation in emergency medicine in
     January 2002.  He is currently on the GMC specialist register.

246. He describes in his CV that he has broad general  training  in  surgery
     with particular experience in fractures and plastic surgery  including
     wounds, burns, soft tissue injuries, fractures and head injuries.   Mr
     Martin is currently the Clinical Director of  the  Emergency  Medicine
     Services at the Royal Free Hospital.  He states  in  the  medico-legal
     field his principal areas of interest are head injuries,  soft  tissue
     injuries and sprains including whiplash injuries,  wounds,  burns  and
     fractures.  Further  he  has  acquired  a  substantive  experience  in
     preparing medico-legal reports on cases of allegations of torture.  He
     has seen hundreds of  cases  and  is  able  to  compare  patterns  and
     different mechanisms of injury able to give an expert opinion on their
     causation.  He has also periodically researched the literature in this
     field to keep up-to-date on latest developments.

247. Mr Martin began his report by  dealing  with  the  examination  of  the
     seven scars to the Appellant's back and to what he described as "faint
     oblique elongated scars" to the Appellant's lower limbs.

248. Mr Martin considered that the appearance of the scars was

          " .. typical of injuries caused by being intentionally beaten with
          relatively long  narrow  blunt  implements  as  described  by  the
          claimant... these scars cannot be explained by skin infections  or
          other inflammatory skin condition considering the possibility that
          the injuries were caused by stain or skin diseases  I  have  ruled
          this out.  It is extremely unlikely  that  they  were  related  to
          accidental injuries from any known professional or training  (e.g.
          military) activities in view of  being  sited  on  the  back  -  a
          usually clothed area, similar  appearance  to  these  scars  which
          suggests similar implement, with multiple  significant  number  of
          scars on different directions; all these features strongly suggest
          a non-accidental cause.  In my opinion the most likely cause is an
          intentional one; hence the scars are typical of the description of
          events by the claimant and this could  have  been  caused  in  two
          ways:


              -   Self-inflicted injuries - in my opinion  less  likely  in
                   view of the position of  some  of  the  scars,  in  areas
                   difficult to self-reach.


              -   Caused by a third party - this is the most  likely  cause
                   however from inspection of the scars it is scientifically
                   impossible to differentiate self-infliction  of  injuries
                   by  proxy  (SIBP)  from  injuries  caused   by   torture.
                   Although SIBP as a possible cause cannot be discarded has
                   been considered, there is not presenting a fact making it
                   more than a possibility.  Also these are not  scars  that
                   are typical of any religious or cultural rituals and they
                   were not caused by any surgical procedure...

          Determining the age of the scars by just visual inspection is  not
          scientifically possible with exact precision and  often  there  is
          just possible to say that the injuries  are  mature  or  immature,
          enough to give a very approximate range of time when the  injuries
          could have been  caused.   The  scars  appear  with  a  degree  of
          maturity consistent with injuries that were caused more  than  one
          year ago."

249. In his conclusion Mr Martin stated as follows:

          "The scars on the  back  and  limbs  are  typical  of  the  events
          described  by  the  claimant  of   being   intentionally   beaten.
          Following the recommendations in Chapter V, Section  D,  Paragraph
          188 of the Istanbul Protocol where it states that  'ultimately  it
          is the overall evaluation of all lesions and not  the  consistency
          of each lesion with a particular form of torture that is important
          in assessing the torture story', overall my expert opinion is that
          the injuries were typical of intentionally caused.  This is highly
          consistent with the injuries that were caused by being tortured as
          described by the claimant'.


     250. It would appear therefore that in common with the earlier  report
     of Professor Lingam, (that was of  course  following  the  examination
     closer to the events the Appellant had described) that Mr  Martin  had
     also found in terms of paragraph 187  of  the  Protocol,  that  in  an
     ascending scale, the examination of the Appellant's scars fell  within
     (c) namely highly consistent in that the lesion could have been caused
     by the trauma described but there were few other possible causes.

251. I have found the professional credentials of both Professor Lingam  and
     Mr Martin to be impressive.  Indeed,  Mr  Avery,  other  than  briefly
     inviting me to find that the Appellant's  scars  were  self-inflicted,
     said nothing to the contrary in his closing submissions.

252. Whilst I take the point made by  Mr  Melvin  in  his  earlier  skeleton
     argument,  that  Professor  Lingam  had  "overstepped   his   scarring
     expertise in opining  that  the  Appellant's  vagueness  in  answering
     questions may be down to stress", I do not accept his submission  that
     Professor Lingam's report failed to undermine the Secretary of State's
     view that the Appellant was without credibility in his claim  and  had
     arranged for scarring to enhance an otherwise weak asylum  claim.   Mr
     Melvin had also submitted that the fact that no attempt had been  made
     to obtain  a  medical  report  from  an  expert,  as  he  put  it  was
     "indicative of the causation claimed for the  scarring  being  false".
     Such an assertion either overlooks Professor Lingam's report or  would
     imply that I should attach little if any weight to it. If  the  latter
     then it is a contention that I most certainly do  not  share.  However
     and through no fault of Mr Melvin, subsequent to the submission of his
     skeleton argument, there was produced at  the  hearing  before  me  in
     August 2014, the further report of Mr Martin (above referred).

253. It is indeed apparent  from  both  Professor  Lingam  and  Mr  Martin's
     reports that in their assessment, full cognisance  was  taken  of  the
     requirements of  the  Istanbul  Protocol.   In  particular  both  made
     mention in their reports to the five  degrees  of  consistency  in  an
     ascending scale in relation to the assessment  of  physical  scars  or
     lesions as set out at paragraph 187 of the Protocol to  which  I  have
     above referred.

254. Upon a careful consideration of their reports as a whole, I  find  that
     I can attach significant weight to them.  I find that they are  indeed
     detailed and give a careful and balanced consideration to the scarring
     on the Appellant's body and its likely causes.

255. Both experts concluded that the Appellant's  scarring  was  diagnostic,
     typically highly consistent and consistent with the claimed causes  in
     accordance with the Protocol and they also each gave consideration  to
     alterative causation.  As required  by  the  Istanbul  Protocol,  both
     experts gave an overall evaluation and  concluded  that  there  was  a
     substantial  likelihood  that  the  Appellant  was  subjected  to  the
     violence claimed.  I am satisfied that the approach that they  adopted
     was in accordance with the Istanbul Protocol.

256.  I  am  further  satisfied  that  their  respective   reports   provide
     independent evidence of the Appellant's scarring.

257. It is also apparent to me, that in accord  with  the  guidance  in  KV,
     both  experts  considered  all  possible  causes  of  the  Appellant's
     scarring.  I am thus wholly satisfied that the manner of their reports
     was entirely consistent with that set out in the guidance in KV  where
     both experts were clear that it was, in effect, highly  unlikely  that
     any of the Appellant's scars examined could have  been  self-inflicted
     and so I find.

The Appellant's Credibility

258. Within my assessment of the credibility of the Appellant's  account,  I
     am mindful that in the case of R (On the application  of  AM)  v  SSHD
     [2012] EWCA Civ, at paragraph 29, where it is found that the  scarring
     report(s) provides independent evidence of an Appellant's scarring and
     in particular some of the  scars  were  consistent  with  deliberately
     inflicted injury, then a judge has  to  ask  himself,  "If  they  were
     deliberately inflicted, who had inflicted them".

259. Mindful of the significant weight that I have attached for the  reasons
     above stated to the reports of Professor Lingam  and  Mr  Martin,  and
     mindful of aspects of the guidance of their Lordships in AM, see  also
     paragraph 30 of their judgment, I have had no difficulty not least  to
     the lower standard of proof, in concluding that I find to be  credible
     the Appellant's account of his detention in  Kalumnai  and  subsequent
     torture at Maradana Police Station, that he described. The  extent  to
     which it impacts on the Appellant's vulnerability on  arrival  at  the
     airport, is a matter that I will later consider in this determination.

260. My findings as to  credibility  of  the  Appellant's  account  in  this
     regard are reinforced by the following:

261. In the course of  his  lengthy  cross-examination,  the  Appellant  was
     asked to give specific details as to the circumstances of where he was
     detained, where he was taken to be  tortured  etc.   This  was  not  a
     question about which he had been put on notice.  It was not  a  matter
     to  which  he  had  referred  in  his  previous  written   statements.
     Nonetheless, the Appellant proceeded  (as  I  have  set  out  verbatim
     earlier  in  this  determination)  to  provide  a   closely   detailed
     description of such matters.  He did so  without  hesitation  and  his
     animated recollection of those events, was such  as  could  only  have
     been given by a witness of truth.

262. I am reminded that in HK [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 it was held that  instead
     of asking whether an account was inherently  implausible,  one  should
     look at the evidence and ask oneself, has the Appellant's account been
     consistent e.g. through the interview  and  subsequent  statements  in
     oral evidence?  Is it consistent with the background material and  any
     expert or medical evidence in support?  And is that evidence  of  good
     quality?  That is the approach that I have taken in  my  consideration
     of the credibility of the Appellant's accounts  and  claims.   I  have
     also reminded myself that  in  RR  (Challenging  evidence)  Sri  Lanka
     [2010] UKUT 274 (IAC) it was held that  in  a  case  where  there  are
     obvious  but  not  necessarily  determinative   difficulties   in   an
     Appellant's oral evidence,  the  Tribunal  was  likely  to  be  helped
     considerably  by  independent  expert  evidence  that  supported   the
     Appellant's story.  In that regard and for the reasons above stated  I
     have been significantly assisted not only by  the  independent  expert
     evidence of Professor Lingam and  Mr  Martin  but  also  that  of  the
     Appellant's brother-in-law, in support of the Appellant's account.

263. I have also ensured, that full and careful  account  be  taken  of  the
     guidance of the Tribunal in GJ and  Others,  a  decision  subsequently
     approved by the Court of Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka) and I  have  applied
     the guidance in GJ against the backdrop of the facts as I  have  found
     them.

264. I have already found that the Appellant's account of his detention  and
     torture is  not  least  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  entirely
     credible.

265. I have already referred to the fact that I have reminded myself of  the
     guidance in Ghesari (above).

266.  I  appreciate  not  least  in  terms  of  the  discrepancies  in   the
     Appellant's  evidence  identified  by  Mr   Avery   in   his   closing
     submissions,  that  in  a  number  of  ways,  the  Appellant  was   an
     unsatisfactory witness, but he has marks on his body and  the  medical
     evidence concludes that it is wholly consistent with  his  account  of
     how they were sustained.  I find that the  Respondent  has  failed  to
     undermine the  Appellant's  account  as  to  how  he  sustained  those
     injuries  in  the  way  that  he  described,  and  the  basis  of  the
     Respondent's challenge is in effect,  that  he  could  not  have  been
     detained and ill-treated in 2011 in Sri Lanka, because at the relevant
     time he was not MS as he claims but KM who  came  here  as  a  visitor
     sometime in 2008 and has remained in the United Kingdom ever since.

267. It has been a key plank, as rightly submitted  by  Mr  Turner,  of  the
     Respondent's case, that the medical evidence cannot be relied upon and
     that the Appellant's scars were self-inflicted.  The fact  is  however
     that Mr Avery a highly experienced officer and  in  a  lengthy  cross-
     examination of the Appellant,  he  never  specifically  questioned  or
     challenged the Appellant on this issue and did not put to him that the
     Appellant had in fact commissioned the scars.  With great  respect  to
     Mr Avery, it is not sufficient in such circumstances, simply to put to
     the  Appellant  in  a  generalised  way,  that  his  account   was   a
     fabrication.  The fact is,  that  the  failure  on  the  part  of  the
     Presenting Officer to specifically address this issue within his cross-
     examination of the Appellant, denied the Appellant the opportunity  to
     address these concerns.

268. As to  the  Appellant's  true  identity,  the  Appellant  submitted  an
     abundance of documents both in support of his claim for asylum and  to
     rebut the Respondent's allegation that he was not whom he  claimed  to
     be.  Indeed those documents included that of a lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka,
     whose credentials were never challenged by the Respondent, who confirm
     their genuineness.

269. In my view there needed to be a reason of real substance  in  order  to
     doubt the veracity of the documents produced.

270. Whilst it is undoubtedly the  case  that  false  documents  are  widely
     available in Sri Lanka, here apart from the documentation itself,  was
     a letter from an attorney in  Sri  Lanka  confirming  that  they  were
     genuine and that he had seen the originals.

271. These  were  documents  that  lay  very  much  at  the  centre  of  the
     Appellant's application for protection because it  was  maintained  by
     the Respondent that he must have fabricated his  account,  because  he
     was never in Sri Lanka in 2011 and was KM who arrived here in 2008.

272. The  Respondent  has  not  stated  in  terms  whether  the  documentary
     evidence provided both in respect of the Appellant's identity and from
     the police was false.

273. As Mr Turner rightly submitted, this was of  particular  importance  in
     this case, given that Mr Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State at
     the hearing before me in August 2014 told me that steps would be taken
     to have the veracity of the documents checked and indeed this was  one
     of the highly persuasive reasons, that led me to grant his request  to
     adjourn the hearing.  That adjournment was despite the fact  that  the
     Appellant's brother-in-law had taken the trouble and at personal  risk
     and expense, to come to the United Kingdom in order to  give  evidence
     in support of and in corroboration of the Appellant's account  of  his
     past experience in Sri Lanka and as to his  true  identity.   I  would
     agree with Mr Turner in such circumstances, that the  failure  of  the
     Respondent to show  that  the  documents  were  not  genuine  in  this
     particular case supports the  Appellant's  account.  Indeed  it  would
     appear from what Mr Avery understood to be the  position,  that  there
     had only been a failed attempt in  the  interim,  to  check  upon  the
     validity of the Appellant's driving licence. I find it concerning  and
     unacceptable,  that  despite  the  fact  that  some  12  weeks  having
     transpired between  the  adjourned  and  restored  hearing  ,that  the
     explanation offered for this failure, was due to "a lack of time".

274. The documentation produced by the Appellant in August  2014,  comprised
     his original driving licence, a certified copy of  his  passport,  the
     letter from the Sri Lankan attorney, the Deed of Gift and  the  Police
     Message Reports.  That evidence was supplemented by the production  of
     the Appellant's original passport brought by his  brother-in-law  from
     Sri Lanka for the purpose of the hearing and his Birth Certificate.

275. Other than in generalised  submissions,  I  did  not  detect  any  real
     challenge to the veracity of these documents.

276. Further whilst the Secretary of State  maintained  that  the  Appellant
     was in fact KM who entered the United Kingdom in 2008, no evidence has
     been provided to me such as entry records or indeed  exit  records  to
     demonstrate that such a person entered the United Kingdom in 2008.  Mr
     Avery to his great credit, had taken the trouble prior to the hearing,
     to make enquiries in that regard  that  proved  to  be  negative.   He
     explained it was only  if  something  aroused  the  suspicions  of  an
     Immigration Officer that a record would be kept.

277. Mindful of the observations (in emphasis) of Rix LJ (see  paragraph  34
     above) and in the absence of any evidence from the Respondent that  KM
     entered the United Kingdom in 2008 including  landing  cards,  and  in
     light of my careful consideration of the oral and documentary evidence
     to the contrary (not least the documentation that  the  Appellant  has
     produced as to his true identity, that I consider to be  reliable  and
     upon which significant weight can be placed) I agree  with  Mr  Turner
     and indeed find, not least to the lower standard  of  proof,  that  in
     consequence the Appellant's  true  identity,  is,  as  he  has  always
     claimed, that of MS. I find it surprising and in the context  of  this
     case regrettable, that the Secretary of State does not keep records of
     people who enter the United Kingdom even though they would  have  been
     expected to have completed appropriate landing cards which provide the
     record of their arrival.  Nevertheless, Mr  Avery  has  explained  the
     circumstances in which  such  records  are  not  kept  and  thus  this
     possible means of testing the Appellant's story is in consequence  not
     open to me.

278.    I am mindful of the position that was taken  by  the  Respondent  in
     her Letter of Refusal as to the existence of the  Independence  Party,
     but I have not had the opportunity of hearing the  appellant's  answer
     to the points raised, save and insofar as he has related  his  account
     in this regard within his recent statement. It would  appear  that  Mr
     Avery did not consider it was an important enough element of the  case
     to raise either in his lengthy cross-examination of the  Appellant  or
     in his closing submissions, save to the extent that he informed me  at
     the outset of his submissions, that he relied on the  reasons  in  the
     refusal letter. I find it not surprising that there is  little  or  no
     evidence about the Party. It is the appellant's case  that  the  party
     was an ephemeral thing, designed to continue the work of the LTTE that
     in the event, did not find favour with the local electorate. The point
     made in the refusal letter is made well,  but  I  have  considered  it
     within my  assessment  of  the  evidence  in  its  totality  and  have
     concluded to the lower standard, that this aspect of  the  appellant's
     account, not least placed in the context of my findings in relation to
     the evidence as a whole, is credible.

279. There was  indeed  confusion  in  terms  of  the  Appellant's  evidence
     concerning his passport but nonetheless he had taken  the  trouble  of
     producing the original.  He finally explained to my satisfaction,  the
     situation with regard to that passport and a subsequent  one  that  he
     lost.

280. Whilst I  appreciate  Mr  Avery's  submission  that  the  date  on  the
     passport predated the election the Appellant claimed to have undergone
     on behalf of the Independence Party, the evidence of the Appellant was
     that it was the agent that obtained the  passport  and  there  was  no
     evidence as to how or in what circumstances it was obtained.

281. I would agree with Mr Turner upon my careful consideration not only  of
     the Appellant's oral evidence but also the documentary evidence before
     me and mindful of the evidence of the Appellant's brother-in-law  that
     I will shortly address, that any confusion in  his  evidence  in  this
     regard was innocent rather than dishonest.  I am also mindful that  in
     the course of that passage of the evidence both before and  after  the
     luncheon adjournment, the Appellant had expressed himself to be unwell
     and dizzy in relation to which I had given him various breaks  to  get
     some fresh air.  As I have recorded  earlier  in  this  determination,
     from my own observations, it did appear to me (although I do not claim
     to have any medical expertise) that he was indeed unwell and this  may
     well have contributed to his confusion.

282. Mr Turner rightly makes the point that if the Appellant had entered  in
     2008 this would beg the question as to why he would not  have  made  a
     claim then rather than wait for three years.  The background  material
     shows that the situation in Sri Lanka was certainly more  volatile  in
     the run-up to the defeat of the LTTE in 2008 than in 2011.

283. My conclusions as to the credibility of the Appellant's account and  as
     to his identity is not only reinforced by  the  matters  that  I  have
     identified above that includes  the  wealth  of  documentary  evidence
     placed before me as well as the medical evidence,  but  to  the  fact,
     that on no less than two occasions, the Appellant's brother-in-law had
     gone to considerable expense and inconvenience to take the trouble  of
     travelling from Sri Lanka to this country in order to give his account
     in support of the Appellant's account and bring with  him  documentary
     evidence by way of further corroboration both of the events  that  the
     Appellant has described, and as to his true identity.

284.    I have concluded that the Appellant is not someone  caught  out  for
     telling  a  lie,  but  somebody  incapable  of   telling   his   story
     consistently.  If the Appellant is a liar, then he is a very bad  one.
     Whilst there are aspects of his evidence that can be considered to  be
     unreliable they are not matters that I find  are  the  consequence  of
     dishonesty and I have decided the  case  more  in  the  light  of  the
     objective and background evidence.

285. In that regard  I  appreciate  that  the  Appellant  described  in  his
     evidence his failed attempt to leave Sri Lanka in 2008.  He  described
     the basis upon which he went to the  British  High  Commission  having
     supplied a photograph to his agent and acted on his instructions.   He
     described how there was a woman there whom he was told was to pose  as
     his wife and then he explained in great detail indeed consistent  with
     his written statement, as to how there was a fallout between the agent
     and  the  Appellant's  brother-in-law  who  had  engaged  the  agent's
     services over the  question  of  the  agent's  fees.   The  agent  had
     initially  stated  that  the  fee  would  amount  to  20   lakhs   but
     subsequently claimed that it should be increased to 35  lakhs.   There
     was a consistency between the evidence of the Appellant  and  that  of
     his brother-in-law before me as to those events.  The clear difference
     between them was that it was the Appellant's evidence that  this  took
     place  in  2008,  whilst  it  was  the  Appellant's   brother-in-law's
     recollection that it took place in early 2011.

286.   A particular difficulty in  the  Appellant's  account,  is  that  the
     Secretary of State insists that he applied for entry clearance to come
     to the United Kingdom as a visitor  with  his  "wife"  in  2008.   The
     Appellant does not have a wife and indeed this  is  confirmed  in  the
     evidence of his brother-in-law.  There is  no  record  of  his  having
     arrived in the United Kingdom in 2008.  The Appellant does admit  that
     following on the instructions of the agent who made all the  necessary
     arrangements in 2008, that he applied under a  false  name  for  entry
     clearance, although the details of his identity,  passport  etc.  were
     not matters in  the  Appellant's  direct  knowledge.   He  simply  had
     provided a photograph of himself on the agent's instructions.  In  the
     event he says he did not enter the United Kingdom in 2008 and did  not
     receive a passport marked with entry clearance, because his brother-in-
     law  who  was  financing  the  arrangement,   would   not   meet   the
     substantially increased fee charged by the  agent  once  the  passport
     with entry clearance was obtained.

287. As I have set out in some detail above, the Appellant's  brother-in-law
     MFA, has provided a written statement in which he describes an attempt
     to obtain a passport with entry clearance with the help of a dishonest
     agent.  The brother-in-law's account and the Appellant's  account  are
     clearly  talking  about  the  same  incident  from   their   different
     perspectives.  There is as I have earlier identified, one  significant
     inconsistency in their respective recollections.  The  Appellant  says
     this happened in 2008 whilst his brother-in-law's recollection is that
     this took place in early 2011.   Clearly,  if  the  brother-in-law  is
     right then the Appellant has offered no  explanation  at  all  of  the
     Secretary of State having a record or certainly an application  having
     been made bearing his photograph in 2008.

288. I find that there clearly was an application made in 2008 and that  the
     Appellant's brother-in-law whose evidence in all  other  respects  has
     been entirely consistent with that of the Appellant, is  simply  wrong
     on this particular matter.  I find that he has made an honest mistake.
      In turn, the Appellant does not appear to have  remembered  the  date
     until prompted upon being presented with the Home  Office  records  of
     the application form.  The brother-in-law has  given  no  satisfactory
     explanation for remembering the date as early 2011.  Clearly  if  they
     were intending to deceive they would have been expected to check their
     stories.

289.    This is an unsatisfactory element in the evidence,  but  I  bear  in
     mind that the brother-in-law has  gone  to  considerable  expense  and
     inconvenience to make himself available to give oral evidence and face
     cross-examination and I have recorded the evidence that he gave before
     me.  I did not find him to  be  an  untruthful  witness.   Indeed  the
     manner in which he gave his evidence I found to  be  most  impressive.
     It is when I look at the evidence in the round and form  a  view  only
     after considering the evidence as a whole that I  conclude  that  this
     incongruous feature of the evidence is more likely to be the result of
     an honest mistake than of a witness and/or the Appellant being  caught
     out in an act of dishonesty.

290. It follows  from  the  above  reasoning,  that  I  find  the  documents
     produced by the Appellant in support of his true identity and  of  his
     account of past events in Sri Lanka to be reliable such as  to  enable
     me to attach significant weight to them.

Risk on Return

291. In this regard I have carefully taken into account the guidance in  GJ.
      At paragraph 356 the Tribunal set out general guidance on the current
     categories of persons at real risk of persecution or serious  harm  on
     return to Sri Lanka.

292. In GJ the Tribunal recorded inter alia the evidence from Dr  Smith  who
     was also an expert witness in prior country guidance cases in  TK  and
     in LP.  They had this to say:

          "125.   Every detention  resulted  in  the  record  being  raised.
               There was a centralised database lodged with the Ministry of
               Rehabilitation, the SIS military intelligence, with  details
               of all LTTE suspects.  The CID do not have unlimited  access
               to this database.  They can access it only on a case by case
               basis.  What is available at the airport is the 'watch'  and
               'stop' electronic databases.  Staff at the SLHC  passed  all
               details of applications for travel documents to Colombo  and
               incoming  flights  were  required  to  fax  their  passenger
               manifest in advance".

293. It follows that on my findings, I am  satisfied  that  the  Sri  Lankan
     authorities on the Appellant's return to Sri Lanka would be  aware  of
     his LTTE involvement.  The evidence that I  accept,  is  that  it  was
     subsequently confirmed by  the  police  officer  who  facilitated  the
     appellant's escape from Maradana Police Station,  that  the  Appellant
     was recorded as an escapee. The  Appellant's  evidence  was  of  being
     fingerprinted both in Kalmunai and in Colombo.   I  am  reinforced  in
     this conclusion by the documentary evidence  relating  to  the  Police
     Message  Forms  that  show  that  the  authorities  have  indeed  been
     searching for the Appellant.

294. It follows that there is a real risk that on return there  would  be  a
     record of the Appellant's detentions and in the circumstances of  them
     that the Appellant would be of current interest  to  the  authorities,
     who have continued to search for the Appellant.

295. Thus on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  the  authorities  would  look  at  the
     Appellant's history that in their eyes would demonstrate that  he  met
     the profile of an individual who was detained  and  escaped  and  with
     that background they are reasonably likely to view the Appellant as an
     individual who is a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka, that  is  an
     individual with an LTTE background, more importantly with a record  of
     arrests and detentions.  They will look at that record within  current
     day Sri Lanka in the North and  with  that  history,  the  authorities
     would view the Appellant indeed as such a threat to the  integrity  of
     Sri Lanka as a single state.

296. It  is  reasonably  likely  therefore,  that  on  return  it  would  be
     ascertained that the Appellant was on a stop list.  Those  on  a  stop
     list are those in respect of whom  arrest  warrants  had  been  issued
     and/or court orders.  I am  persuaded  in  light  of  the  Appellant's
     history and his escape that it is likely that an arrest warrant  would
     have been issued and records would reveal that he was  wanted.   There
     is therefore a risk of detention and ill-treatment  at  the  point  of
     return.  If, as I have accepted, the  Appellant  escaped  as  claimed,
     then I am satisfied that the evidence points to his  detention  having
     been recorded not least because he was fingerprinted.  This would  all
     point to this being in a formal and recorded detention.

297.  The  Tribunal  in  GJ  at  paragraphs  342  to  348   considered   the
     circumstances at Sri Lanka Airport and thereafter.   At  the  airport,
     questions would be asked as to whether the Appellant was involved with
     the LTTE or his family's past LTTE connections.

298. At paragraph 346 of GJ, it was found that the  authorities  in  Colombo
     had the opportunity to establish whether such a person was of interest
     and knew everything they needed to know  about  that  individual  even
     before their removal from the United Kingdom.

299. At paragraph 347,  it  was  confirmed  that  there  were  no  detention
     facilities at the  airport  but  that  on  return  there  would  be  a
     requirement to provide an address etc. and that checks would  be  made
     within a week by the Sri Lankan authorities at the stated address.  If
     the authorities were interested in a person they would be picked up at
     home unless they were on a "stop" list held at the airport.  If  on  a
     "stop list" they would be interviewed by the CID and that  was  likely
     to involve physical abuse engaging international protection.

300. At paragraph 348 of  GJ  it  was  found  that  internal  relocation  to
     Colombo or elsewhere would not in most cases  avail  an  Appellant  in
     whom there was adverse interest.

301. Quite apart from the risk to the Appellant  in  terms  of  being  on  a
     "stop list", I am satisfied that in his particular  circumstances  and
     if not apprehended at the airport, it is reasonably likely he would be
     on a "watch" list and indeed  in  GJ  the  Tribunal  were  clear  that
     following return to the airport and questioning at  the  airport,  the
     individual's details  would  be  passed  to  the  authorities  in  the
     returnee's home area and that the individual would be monitored and if
     of interest picked up there.

302. In GJ it was found that those at risk were those perceived or who  were
     a threat to the security/integrity of Sri Lanka  and  that  the  focus
     today by the Sri Lankan authorities is to  ensure  that  the  LTTE  or
     something similar is not resurrected.




Conclusions

303. For the above reasons, the Appellant's appeal is therefore  allowed  on
     asylum grounds and under Article 3 of the ECHR.  No separate Article 8
     ECHR argument was advanced.  He  is  not  entitled  to  the  grant  of
     humanitarian protection.

304. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it on asylum and  human
      rights (Article 3 ECHR) grounds.

305. No application having been made to  vary  or  discharge  the  anonymity
      order made by the First-tier Tribunal it continues in force.


Signed                                  Date 31 October 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

