



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06672/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd February 2014                           |On 25th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                                   Between

                              baraktullah sahag
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Spence, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant Baraktullah Sahag was born on 25th March 1993  and  is  a
    citizen of Afghanistan. By a decision dated 5th December 2013, we found
    that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  and  we  set  aside  its
    determination. Our determination of 5th December 2013 is set out below:
    -

     1. "The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born 25th March 1993.  On
        30th July 2013 a decision was made to refuse him  asylum  and  issue
        directions for his removal as an illegal entrant from  the  UK.  The
        Appellant appealed against that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal
        (Judge V McDade), which in a determination dated 5th September 2013,
        dismissed the appeal on  asylum/Humanitarian  Protection  and  under
        Article 8 ECHR. The Appellant now appeals, with permission,  to  the
        Upper Tribunal.

        Background

     2. There is a history to this application  which  it  is  necessary  to
        recite. The Appellant entered the UK in February  2009  and  claimed
        asylum, based upon a fear of the Taliban. He claimed that his father
        was a farmer but was also someone who worked for about five years as
        a prosecutor in a Court in Jalalabad, dealing with  people  who  had
        problems or land disputes or accusations of theft made against them.



     3. In 2008 the Appellant's father received a letter  from  the  Taliban
        demanding that he ensure the release of two of their members who had
        been  arrested.  The  letter  was  accompanied   by   threats.   The
        Appellant's father took the letter to the authorities but they  took
        no action on it.

     4. His father received two more letters and, in August 2008, was killed
        by the Taliban. Following that, the Appellant, apparently because he
        was the eldest son, received a similar letter; informing him that he
        should go to the authorities and "beg" for the release  of  the  two
        Taliban members. Three months after his father's death,  his  mother
        died in childbirth and the Appellant and his  sisters  moved  to  an
        uncle's house in the Kama district of Jalalabad.

     5. His uncle informed him that his life was in danger. His  uncle  made
        the  necessary  arrangements  and  the  Appellant  left  Afghanistan
        arriving in the UK. He claimed asylum and  his  appeal  came  before
        Judge Irvine. At the hearing before Judge Irvine in addition to  the
        asylum claim, an age assessment dispute was raised.

     6. The Appellant claimed to be 16 years of age  and  not  18  years  as
        assessed by the Secretary  of  State.  Judge  Irvine  after  hearing
        evidence and made a factual finding that the Appellant had  attained
        the age of 18 years and therefore fell to be treated as an adult. He
        went on to dismiss the appeal on all grounds and made findings  that
        he comprehensively disbelieved the core of the Appellant's claim.

     7. The next significant factor in the history is  that,  despite  Judge
        Irvine's findings, the  Respondent  granted  the  Appellant  limited
        leave to remain in the United Kingdom until his 18th  birthday.  His
        birth date was now recorded as 25th March 1993.

     8. Following from that, the Appellant made a  further  application  for
        asylum based on the same grounds as those put before  Judge  Irvine.
        The claim was refused once again  and  his  subsequent  appeal  came
        before Judge Batiste. Following the principles of Devaseelan  [2002]
        UKIAT  00702  (Starred),   Judge   Batiste   used   Judge   Irvine's
        determination as his starting point; but even so he commented, "I do
        however make it clear that for the reasons set out in the  remainder
        of this determination, I would not have found the appellant to be  a
        credible witness even if I was hearing the evidence afresh."   Judge
        Batiste went on to dismiss the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

     9. The Appellant sought to appeal that  decision,  but,  significantly,
        only on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  Permission  was  refused  by  Upper
        Tribunal  Judge  Latter  on  8th  April  2011.  At  that  point  the
        Appellant's appeal rights became exhausted.

    10. The appellant then made a  fresh  application  for  asylum  on  17th
        October 2011.  Whilst  that  application  remained  outstanding  the
        Appellant was detained. In detention, he made further submissions to
        the Respondent. Those submissions are  dated  19th  July  2013.  The
        Respondent issued with a notice of  immigration  decision,  refusing
        the submissions but gave the Appellant a further  right  of  appeal.
        That appeal came before Judge McDade who, in a decision  promulgated
        on 5th September 2013, dismissed the appeal  on  asylum/Humanitarian
        Protection and Article 8 ECHR grounds. It is against  that  decision
        that the Appellant sought and was granted permission  to  appeal  to
        us.

        The Upper Tribunal Hearing

    11. It is appropriate that we mention at this  point  that  two  grounds
        only were put forward in the application seeking  permission.  Those
        grounds are,

                 i.  A legally  flawed  approach  to  the  Article  8  ECHR
                    consideration.

                ii.  Failure to engage with SM & Anor v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC
                    1144 (Admin).

        The grant of permission to appeal specifically  outlines  that  "the
        grounds do not challenge  the  asylum,  Humanitarian  Protection  or
        Articles 2 and 3 determination". It continues, "Despite the merry-go-
        round of appeals, it is arguable that inadequate reasons were  given
        for the rejection of the Article 8 claim for the  reasons  given  in
        the application. All grounds may be argued".

    12. In opening his submissions before us Mr Schwenk said he was  seeking
        to amend the grounds. First, he  conceded  that  ground  2  (the  SM
        point) no longer had any force. We accept this concession  and  that
        disposes of that matter.

    13. His application to amend the grounds is on this basis. The Appellant
        at the hearing before Judge Irvine was incorrectly found  to  be  an
        adult. Judge Irvine therefore HAD treated the Appellant as an  adult
        and did not approach the Appellant's evidence with  the  appropriate
        caution which is due to a minor. Both Judge Batiste and Judge McDade
        when dealing with the Appellant's claim, had applied Devaseelan  and
        relied upon  the  adverse  credibility  findings  of  Judge  Irvine.
        Relying on the Devaseelan  principle,  those  two  Judges  had  made
        findings  that  the  Appellant's  account   comprehensively   lacked
        credibility. The Appellant, therefore had never had the  benefit  of
        his case being  judged  as  it  ought  to  have  been,  as  a  minor
        applicant.  The evidence of his interview, for  example,  had  never
        been evaluated appropriately. This had led all three Judges to  make
        adverse credibility findings to the prejudice of the  Appellant.  He
        sought leave to amend the grounds to include  a  reconsideration  of
        the Appellant's asylum claim/Humanitarian Protection on this basis.

    14. So far as the remaining Article 8 ground is  concerned,  Mr  Schwenk
        relied in the main on the grounds seeking permission. He expanded on
        those grounds saying that Judge McDade's reasoning is defective. The
        Judge had appeared to find  evidence  of  family  life  between  the
        Appellant and his partner, but having found that  appeared  to  omit
        steps 2, 3 and 4 of the familiar  Razgar  test.  Further  there  was
        inadequate reasoning as regards proportionality coupled with a  lack
        of any finding why it would not be unreasonable to expect a  British
        citizen to relocate to Afghanistan with the Appellant.

    15. He submitted that if we allowed his application to amend the grounds
        and we found that the Article 8 issue should be set aside, then  the
        whole matter should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
        fresh re-hearing.

    16. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the Respondent opposed both applications. He
        referred us to paragraph 24 of Judge Batiste's determination in that
        Judge Batiste said,

           Preliminary Matters

           Two issues arose as preliminary matters. Firstly Mr Fuller  gave
           an undertaking that the  Appellant  would  not  be  returned  to
           Afghanistan as an unaccompanied minor until he reaches his  18th
           birthday next month.  Throughout  the  hearing  I  gave  careful
           consideration to the fact that he remained a  child.  Equally  I
           made due allowance for that fact in assessing his evidence.

    17. Mr Diwnycz submitted that, so far as the Article 8 issue  which  was
        before Judge McDade is concerned, there was adequate analysis of the
        evidence. There is only one  finding  of  fact  which  is  that  the
        Appellant has now entered into a relationship of not long  duration.
        He submitted that the  Judge  could  hardly  have  gone  into  great
        detail, because there simply was not detailed evidence  before  him.
        The analysis of what evidence there was and the  reasons  given  for
        dismissing the appeal were adequate. The decision should stand.

        Discussion and Consideration

    18. We deal firstly with the application to amend the grounds of appeal.
        We refuse that application for the  following  reasons.  When  Judge
        Irvine made his finding that the Appellant was 18 years  of  age  he
        nevertheless conducted a full  oral  hearing  and  importantly  took
        evidence from the Appellant.

    19. Whatever the age  of  the  Appellant  (and  we  bear  in  mind  that
        relatively there cannot be said to be such a deal of  difference  in
        age between a 16 year old and an 18 year old) Judge  Irvine  was  in
        the best position to determine the relative weight to  be  given  to
        the Appellant's story and interview record. It is clear to  us  that
        he took great care in evaluating the  evidence  before  him.  Having
        taken that care we are  satisfied  that  the  Judge's  findings  are
        reflective of  a  proper  weight  being  given  to  the  Appellant's
        evidence. We are satisfied therefore that the  Judge's  findings  on
        the credibility of the Appellant would have been the same whether or
        not the Appellant had been found at that point to be 16 years of age
        or 18 years of age.

    20. We are reinforced in our view on this by the fact  that  this  point
        was never raised when permission to appeal was sought against  Judge
        Irvine's determination.

    21. We are further reinforced in our decision not to allow Mr  Schwenk's
        application, because the appellant had a further appeal before Judge
        Batiste.  That determination shows, as Mr  Diwnycz  rightly  pointed
        out, that Judge Batiste kept in mind this point when  assessing  the
        Appellant's evidence when he said ''throughout the  hearing  I  gave
        careful consideration to the fact that he remained a child.  Equally
        I made due allowance for that that fact in assessing his evidence.''

    22.  Having  succinctly  set  out  matters  in  paragraph  26   of   his
        determination, Judge Batiste kept this point at the forefront of his
        mind when he states in paragraph 26,

           As such at no stage  was  there  any  attempt  to  overturn  the
           findings  on  the  substantive  asylum  claim  to  be  found  at
           paragraphs 29 to 38 (of Judge Ervine's determination).

        Following on from that Judge Batiste states,

           I would not have found the Appellant to be  a  credible  witness
           even if I was hearing the evidence afresh.

    23. We re-emphasise, that in the unsuccessful application for permission
        to appeal Judge Batiste's determination, the only ground put forward
        was an Article 8 ECHR one. We conclude therefore there is  no  basis
        for permitting an amendment to the grounds of appeal. This  disposes
        of that aspect of the matter.

    24. Even if we had granted the proposed amendment, we are not  persuaded
        that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law.  Whilst  Mr  Schwenk  is
        entitled to submit that the Secretary of State only granted leave to
        remain to the appellant because she accepted the age assessment of a
        local authority social worker (see [7] above), there is no  evidence
        at all that  the  Secretary  of  State  expressly  agreed  with  the
        proposition that the appellant was, as he had claimed, a minor. What
        is clear is that the appellant has never  sought  to  challenge  the
        determination of Judge Irvine. We simply do not accept that a  local
        authority age assessment, even taken together with the grant to  the
        appellant of leave to remain, should completely and  retrospectively
        undermine Judge Irvine's fact finding for the reasons advanced by Mr
        Schwenk.

    25. What remains is Ground 1. We consider there is merit in the argument
        advanced by Mr Schwenk on this ground. Whilst Judge McDade  properly
        sets out the five stage test in Razgar, we find that the  Judge  has
        fallen into error in his inadequate assessment of  the  evidence  of
        the relationship between the  Appellant  and  his  partner.  We  are
        mindful that the Appellant's partner submitted a  witness  statement
        and we understand attended the hearing. We are hard pressed to  find
        any clear reasoning to  show  that  this  evidence  has  been  fully
        considered. The Judge took note of the witness  statement  but  does
        not appear to factor it  into  his  reasoning  when  dismissing  the
        Article 8 claim. For example, the Appellant's partner is  a  British
        citizen.  The Judge reaches the conclusion  that  it  would  not  be
        unreasonable for her to relocate to Afghanistan. We cannot  see  the
        route by which the Judge reached this conclusion.  This leads us  to
        the view that the Appellant's case has not been properly  tested  on
        the Article 8 issue.

    26. We set aside the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
        findings in respect of asylum/Article 3 ECHR/Humanitarian Protection
        are preserved. The Upper  Tribunal  shall  remake  the  decision  in
        respect of Article 8 ECHR only at a resumed hearing at Bradford on a
        date to be fixed."

The Resumed Hearing

 2. At the resumed hearing on 24th February  2014,  we  reminded  ourselves
    that what we are deciding is the 5th question in Razgar namely  whether
    removal  of  the  Appellant  to   Afghanistan   would   amount   to   a
    disproportionate interference with his Article  8  ECHR  family/private
    life. The Appellant's claim to his Article 8  rights  is  based  solely
    on his relationship with Tayyaba Sajar.   The  Appellant  attended  the
    hearing and gave evidence  before  us  in  the  presence  of  a  Pushtu
    interpreter. We also heard from Tayyaba Sajar.

 3. The Appellant's evidence is contained in a witness statement signed and
    dated 20th February 2014. In that statement he makes reference  to  two
    further statements which were submitted as part of his previous  asylum
    application. Those statements are dated 13th October 2011 (K34 to  K37)
    and 29th August 2013.

 4. The Appellant claims that since his last appearance before us  on  18th
    November 2013, his  relationship  with  Tayyaba  has  become  stronger.
    Tayyaba's family have now found  out  about  the  relationship  and  as
    expected do not approve. He told us that as a result of  this,  Tayyaba
    has been beaten up by her brother and has effectively  left  home.  She
    stays with various friends in  the  Manchester  area,  on  a  temporary
    basis.

 5. He said that added to all this, Tayyaba's younger  brother  Kamram  was
    fatally stabbed and died on 18th December 2013.  Despite  all  she  has
    been through, Tayyaba has not walked away from him and this shows  that
    she truly loves him.

 6. In  cross-examination  however,  a  different  aspect  to  the  claimed
    strength of the relationship emerged. When questioned by Mr Spence  the
    Appellant told us that Tayyaba does not  work,  but  that  she  attends
    college on Tuesdays and Fridays. He reconfirmed that Tayyaba is  living
    at friends' homes, but did not know the name of the  friend  with  whom
    she was presently living, nor the address, other than  to  say  it  was
    somewhere in Manchester.

 7. He said that he did not visit Tayyaba at her friend's house, because he
    did not want to create problems. He then said (and we  make  particular
    note of this) that he and  Tayyaba  saw  each  other  "only  on  Monday
    nights".

 8. The Appellant was then asked by Mr Spence to look at his patient record
    notes which had been exhibited at an earlier hearing. In those notes at
    page 13 of 51 date of 22nd June 2011,  the  Appellant  is  reported  as
    saying to the Community Nurse that he had "moved in with his girlfriend
    who is providing for him whilst he waits for asylum" He was  asked,  is
    this correct?  He responded that it was not true he had  not  moved  in
    with his girlfriend. He was then referred to page 61 of the notes where
    he is reported as saying, "he tells me that he was  going  out  with  a
    girl - wanted to marry her so he  could  get  permanent  stay  in  this
    country (as been advised by his friends)- have recently found out  that
    she has gone back home to get married" was this correct?  He  responded
    by saying that his girlfriend had not got married and  that  he  didn't
    remember any friends advising him in those terms.  That  concluded  his
    evidence.

 9. We next heard from Tayyaba Sajar. Tayyaba told us that she now lives in
    Manchester but could not remember the address of the property where she
    is staying. She exhibited a witness statement  which  she  relied  upon
    save for the fact that she lists her family home in Huddersfield as her
    address. That is no longer correct.

10. She told us that she  would  describe  the  Appellant  as  "her  future
    husband". She said that she felt that he had been there for her against
    her family. So far as her plans for the future are concerned  she  said
    that she needed to find a  job,  sort  everything  out  and  marry  the
    Appellant. She recounted that her family  had  cut  her  out  of  their
    lives, because of her relationship with the  Appellant.  She  confirmed
    that her brother Ejaz had beaten her but that  she  had  not  made  any
    complaint to the police because it would end up  being  the  worse  for
    her.

11. She was tearful when she told us  that  her  brother  Kamran  had  been
    fatally stabbed. She said that if the Appellant had  not  been  around,
    she would have killed herself.

12. Mr Spence asked Tayyaba how  often  she  and  the  Appellant  met.  Her
    response, which we duly noted, amounted to this. She saw the  Appellant
    once a month, although she had seen him on Monday of "last  week".  She
    was further pressed on this and was asked to say how often she and  the
    Appellant had met since the last hearing which had taken place on  18th
    November 2013. Her unequivocal response was "once only".

13. She did say that before the last hearing she and the Appellant used  to
    see one another every Monday evening. They would 'risk' staying at  his
    hostel. This was no longer the case. That completed her evidence.

14. The Appellant's  claim  is  that  to  require  him  to  remove  him  to
    Afghanistan would amount to a breach of his Article 8 ECHR  family  and
    private life rights. The central core of his  claim  is  based  on  his
    relationship with Tayyaba Sajar.

15. In our assessment, this is a claim where the evidence of  the  strength
    of the relationship between the Appellant and Tayyaba, is inconsistent.
    Firstly the Appellant would have us believe that he  and  Tayyaba  meet
    regularly on a Monday evening. She would stay with him  at  the  hostel
    where he lives. When asked by Mr Spence, on  this  point  he  gave  the
    clear impression that he and Tayyaba were still meeting one another  on
    Monday nights. Tayyaba on the other hand told us that since the date of
    the last hearing in November 2013, she  had  seen  the  Appellant  only
    once. We accept that according to her evidence she  and  the  Appellant
    did meet on Monday evenings regularly,  before  her  family  interfered
    with this arrangement. However, this arrangement has  now  stopped.  We
    accept Tayyaba's evidence that she wishes to continue her  relationship
    with the Appellant; what  we  are  not  satisfied  about  is  that  the
    strength of the Appellant's feelings equals those of Tayyaba.

16. Tayyaba is living in Manchester  and  the  Appellant  in  Huddersfield.
    Those two places are not a  world  apart.  The  train  journey  between
    Huddersfield and Manchester takes about 30 to 40 minutes. Yet they have
    met only once, in the last three months. We heard of no good reason why
    they should not meet up, even if Tayyaba could not stay the night.

17. The Appellant portrays himself as a man who is much in love and  wishes
    to marry Tayyaba. His actions (or rather lack of them)  do  nothing  to
    satisfy us of the strength of his claimed feelings. He  does  not  even
    know of the address where Tayyaba is staying. There was little evidence
    of contact between them.

18. We take into account the evidence contained  in  his  personal  medical
    notes and whilst we accept that Tayyaba genuinely believes that she and
    the Appellant have a future together, we are  not  drawn  to  the  same
    conclusion  about  the  Appellant's  feelings  or  commitment  to   the
    relationship. It strikes us as a one sided one.

19. We conclude therefore that the strength  of  the  claimed  relationship
    does not assist the Appellant in  the  proportionality  assessment.  No
    other evidence was put forward to show an interference with his private
    /family life other than the fact that he  has  been  in  the  UK  since
    February 2009. That we discount as there was  nothing  exceptional  put
    forward about that period of time.

20. For the foregoing reasons we are not satisfied that the  appellant  has
    shown  that  his   removal   to   Afghanistan   would   amount   to   a
    disproportionate interference with his Article 8 ECHR rights.

21.  The  findings   in   respect   of   the   Appellant's   asylum/Article
    3/humanitarian protection claims were preserved at an  earlier  hearing
    before  us.  We  confirm  that  his  claims  on  those  grounds  remain
    dismissed.

    Decision

22. We set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  We  remake  the
    decision,  dismissing  the   Appellant's   appeal   on   asylum/Article
    3/humanitarian protection and Article 8 ECHR.

    Appeal dismissed



No anonymity direction is made.


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



