
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06160/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th August 2016                   |On 6th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              Mr ramazan Morina
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Trevelyan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 17th  January  1997.   He
    appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  sitting
    at Sheldon Court on 7th March 2016 who dismissed the Appellant's appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent  dated  11th  August  2014.   That
    decision was to refuse the Appellant's application for asylum.

2.   The hearing before Judge Parkes was itself a rehearing  as  a  previous
    First-tier Tribunal decision in this case had been set  aside  and  the
    matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing on all matters
    with no findings preserved.  When the matter came before  Judge  Parkes
    on 7th March the Appellant did not give evidence and the case proceeded
    by way of submissions only.  The Judge summarised the Appellant's claim
    as follows:

         "Having travelled overland for three months [the Appellant] arrived
         in the United Kingdom in November 2013  and  claimed  asylum...  In
         summary the Appellant was told  by  his  mother  that  two  of  his
         cousins had stabbed a taxi driver in a dispute over the  fare.   He
         did not know if the police had been involved and had  himself  been
         threatened by the driver's family.  The Appellant's cousins and all
         other male relatives over the age of 16 including his  father  left
         Albania.  The Appellant did not remain indoors when in Albania  and
         in June 2013 sustained injuries in a grenade attack whilst  tending
         animals about twenty minutes from his home, he was kept in hospital
         for two weeks.  The Appellant also said in interview  that  he  had
         remained in hiding until he left."

3.   The Judge also summarised the  contents  of  the  refusal  letter.  The
    Respondent did not consider the Appellant's account  indicated  a  high
    level of notoriety about the initial killing of the taxi driver.  As no
    members of the Appellant's family were killed and he  knew  no  details
    about the other family there was no reason to believe that the Albanian
    police would be unwilling to assist  the  Appellant.   There  was  some
    doubt about the grenade attack as the Appellant  had  said  he  was  in
    hiding and there was no evidence that the  other  family  had  in  fact
    carried it out.  The Appellant had been 16 at the  time  of  the  first
    killing and his explanation for not leaving Albania (that  he  did  not
    look his age and was waiting for his mother to make  arrangements)  was
    not accepted.  In any event there was no evidence to suggest  that  the
    other family had any reach or influence, the Appellant  could  relocate
    within Albania and protection would be available.

The Decision at First Instance

4.   At paragraphs 24 to 41 the Judge discussed the  evidence  and  set  out
    his  findings.   He  noted  that  although  there  were  said   to   be
    discrepancies in the Appellant's account these were not  taken  by  the
    Respondent to indicate that the fundamental  core  of  the  Appellant's
    account was rejected. The Appellant had said that he had  been  15  and
    therefore not in danger but also said he was over 16 but did  not  look
    that age.  There  was  confusion  in  the  account  about  whether  the
    Appellant was in hiding after his father had left Albania or only after
    the grenade attack.  There were  some  inconsistencies  in  the  report
    relating to the Appellant's injuries.  There were inconsistencies about
    the contact the Appellant had had with his mother and it was not  clear
    why there had been no further contact with her or why  the  Appellant's
    representatives had not been in contact with her.

5.   The Appellant did not see who threw the grenade  but  assumed  that  it
    was the other family, the [C].  He was alone tending  sheep  when  this
    happened and  lost  consciousness.   If  that  were  the  case  it  was
    difficult to see why if the aim of the attack was  to  avenge  a  blood
    feud the Appellant was  not  killed  when  powerless  to  resist.   The
    failure by the attackers to do so could suggest  in  the  Judge's  view
    that there was significantly less enthusiasm to prosecute this vendetta
    than might have been expected.   The  police  report  obtained  by  the
    Appellant's mother did not name the [C] family but their willingness to
    provide a report suggested that they  took  the  Appellant's  situation
    seriously.  The absence of the opposing family's name suggested a doubt
    on the part of the Appellant's mother about the event.  I  assume  from
    that that the Judge means that the police report which would  be  based
    on the information given by the mother did not contain the name of  the
    [C] family. Therefore the Appellant's mother did not suspect  that  the
    [C] family were behind the grenade attack.

6.   The Respondent had not seriously contested the Appellant's  claim  that
    his cousins killed a taxi driver which led to a blood feud and that all
    the other male members of the family had left Albania and a grenade had
    been thrown at the Appellant.  Thus the  real  issue  was  whether  the
    Appellant could return to live safely in Albania.  There was an  almost
    complete absence of any information about the [C] family.  Nothing else
    was known about them apart from the fact that one of the [C] members of
    the family was a taxi driver now deceased.  There was nothing  to  show
    they were a family of any size or suggest they had any  connections  or
    were able to exercise influence in any other part of Albania.  The lack
    of intention to pursue the blood feud might be indicated by  their  not
    finishing off the attack on the Appellant when he lay unconscious.

7.   The Judge had  before  him  a  report  from  Dr  Young  most  of  which
    consisted of background information about Albania rather than  material
    directly germane to the Appellant's  case.   Dr  Young  had  said  that
    "everyone knows everyone" based on the networks of kin and  neighbours.
    As the Judge pointed out in paragraph 32 of his determination, if  this
    was correct then anyone the subject of a blood  feud  would  simply  be
    entitled to refugee status as of right.  Similarly  the  leading  Upper
    Tribunal authority on blood feuds EH [2012] UKUT 00348 would be  rather
    different in its guidance which was that there  were  circumstances  in
    which a person could return to Albania and  be  expected  to  relocate.
    The Judge noted at paragraph 33 that the inability of Dr Young to  give
    any information about the [C] family demonstrated that information  was
    not necessarily that easy to come by.  With effectively no  information
    at all about the [C] family it was wholly speculative to  suggest  that
    the family of a taxi driver when nothing  else  was  known  about  them
    would have the reach,  power  or  influence  to  pursue  the  Appellant
    elsewhere in Albania.

8.   If returned to Albania the Appellant would  have  no  need  to  live  a
    closed existence and would  be  in  a  position  to  access  the  usual
    services and facilities of the state.  There was no  evidence  to  show
    that the killing of the taxi driver  generated  publicity  outside  the
    Appellant's area as at the time or that it continued to do so.  Certain
    documents relied upon by the  Appellant  did  not  take  the  case  any
    further forward even if they were reliable.   The  police  report  only
    confirmed an explosion, the hospital report  confirmed  injuries  which
    were not entirely consistent with other evidence but neither  had  been
    contested by the Respondent.

9.   At paragraph 40 the Judge dealt with the Appellant's claim in  relation
    to mental health.  He wrote:

         "I accept that this is a  cause  for  concern  and  this  is  amply
         supported by the report of Dr Thomas.  The suggestion is that  [the
         Appellant] fears return to Albania and that alone could  exacerbate
         his  condition.   However  there  is  no  evidence  to  show   that
         facilities are not available to the Appellant in Albania and I have
         found that he would not be living a closed existence and  would  be
         able to access them.  It may be  that  the  Appellant's  return  to
         Albania would have to be carefully managed but there is no evidence
         to show that that could not  be  achieved.   His  mother  lives  in
         Albania and there has been contact with her in the past  and  there
         is no reason to believe that she cannot be contacted again or would
         be unable herself to  relocate  and  support  the  Appellant.   The
         Appellant has been in the UK for a relatively short time.  He still
         has his mother in Albania who can be contacted and who can  provide
         support.   The  Appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules and it has not  been  shown  that  he  could  not
         reintegrate into society there or that he would be required to live
         a closed existence or be unable to access the usual services.   His
         mental health is not such that he could  succeed  under  Article  8
         when he does not qualify under Article 3 on that basis.   There  is
         nothing in the Appellant's case that would justify  granting  leave
         under Article 8 outside the Rules".

The Onward Appeal

10.  The Appellant appealed this decision  in  lengthy  grounds  settled  by
    Counsel who appeared at first instance and before me.  In  relation  to
    the grenade attack the grounds reiterated the Appellant's evidence that
    he had been injured and pretended to be  dead  so  that  his  attackers
    would leave him alone.  The Judge had given no reason for finding  that
    the Appellant's assailants would not have concluded that  he  was  dead
    finding instead that the Appellant's survival damaged  his  claim.  The
    Judge had inadequately assessed the expert evidence.  He  had  departed
    from Dr Young's conclusions as to the Appellant's risk on return  which
    constituted an error of  law  unless  cogent  reasons  were  given  for
    rejecting that evidence.

11.  The Judge was also criticised for the way  he  dealt  with  Dr  Thomas'
    report which had concluded that even if  suitable  psychiatric  support
    services were available in Albania the Appellant was likely to  be  far
    too psychiatrically unwell and much too frightened and  traumatised  to
    access them.  Dr Thomas  had  recommended  that  the  most  urgent  and
    initial treatment need for the Appellant  was  to  be  able  to  remain
    securely in the United Kingdom without fear of return to Albania.   The
    Judge had materially erred in failing to properly consider  the  actual
    impact of removal upon the Appellant particularly given that facilities
    on return would not be accessible.

12.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig  on  22nd  April  2016.   In  refusing
    permission to appeal he found it was not the case that Judge Parkes had
    only made passing reference to the grenade attack. Rather the Judge had
    considered that in the context of blood feuds.  Secondly in relation to
    the experts it was clear that Dr Young had made a generalised statement
    albeit referring to the Appellant.  The Judge did not  so  much  depart
    from Dr Young's evidence as  alleged  but  clearly  viewed  it  in  the
    context of EH as he was bound to do.  The Judge's consideration  of  Dr
    Thomas' report was not cursory.  The Judge did not dispute  Dr  Thomas'
    opinion but on the evidence and regarding contact with the  Appellant's
    mother and the lack of  evidence  to  show  that  facilities  were  not
    available the Judge reached an entirely sustainable conclusion.

13.  Following the refusal of  permission  by  Judge  Pullig  the  Appellant
    renewed his application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    largely  repeating  the  earlier  grounds  of  appeal.    The   renewed
    application came before Upper Tribunal Judge Frances on 13th June 2016.
     In a very brief decision she stated: "It is arguable  that  the  Judge
    erred in law in his conclusion  that  the  Appellant  could  internally
    relocate in light of the expert evidence.  The grounds are arguable".

14.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission  by  a  letter  dated
    19th July 2016  submitting  that  Judge  Parkes  had  directed  himself
    appropriately.  He had adequately considered the  medical  reports  and
    gave reasons for the findings made.  He was entitled to find  that  the
    Appellant could internally relocate in Albania  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence.

15.  On 1st August 2016 the Appellant's solicitors wrote in to the  Tribunal
    with a skeleton argument settled by Counsel dated  13th  July  2016  in
    support of the argument that te  First  Tier  decision  should  be  set
    aside.  It followed the grounds of onward  appeal  submitting  that  in
    dealing with the grenade attack incident the Judge had applied too high
    a standard of proof and did  not  make  a  rounded  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's case.  The Judge had treated Dr Young's evidence with undue
    scepticism.  It was an unfairly simplistic analysis of the position  to
    say as the Judge had that if Dr Young was correct when  she  said  that
    "literally everyone knows everyone" then anyone the subject of a  blood
    feud would simply be entitled to refugee status as of right.  In  EH  a
    range of factors were identified beyond simply  whether  an  individual
    was in fact the subject of a blood feud.  The Judge had conflated those
    factors into a single consideration which had then led him to find that
    Dr Young's evidence was undermined.  This error led the Judge to attach
    little weight to key elements of  Dr  Young's  evidence.   The  Judge's
    finding that  the  Appellant  could  relocate  to  Albania  and  access
    facilities there was directly opposed to Dr  Thomas'  report  that  the
    Judge had not considered whether internal relocation  would  be  unduly
    harsh.  The Judge had not engaged with Dr Thomas' report.

16.  A discrete element of the case was  the  Appellant's  risk  of  suicide
    upon  receiving  removal  directions.   If  the  Judge   had   properly
    considered the Thomas report in the context of the Appellant's  suicide
    risk it would have been driven to the  conclusion  that  removal  would
    breach the Appellant's Article 3 rights.

The Hearing Before Me

 17. In oral submissions Counsel began by taking matters out  of  order  and
    started with the risk of  suicide.   The  First-tier  had  accepted  Dr
    Thomas' report as reliable.  Dr Thomas had said  that  return  was  not
    possible because the Appellant had been  re-traumatised  and  would  be
    unable to access healthcare.  The Judge had dealt with the  risk  under
    Article 3 tangentially saying that  because  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed under Article 8 he could  not  succeed  under  Article  3.   At
    paragraph 74 Dr Thomas had said that the Appellant was  too  unwell  to
    access services.

18.  I queried with Counsel at this point the basis on which Dr  Thomas  had
    come to his view that the Appellant would be unable to access services.
     The Judge's view was that the Appellant would be able to be in contact
    with his mother.  Had Dr Thomas based his view that  accessing  medical
    facilities would be impossible on whether there would or would  not  be
    contact  with  the  Appellant's  mother?   Counsel  replied  that   the
    Appellant believed that harm would come to him therefore any support he
    might  receive  from  his  mother  would  not   override   Dr   Thomas'
    conclusions.  The  Judge  had  reached  conclusions  on  the  issue  of
    relocation in the mental health context which were not open to  him  on
    the evidence and he had not considered the question of undue harshness.
     The Judge's conclusion that the Appellant would access facilities  was
    contrary to the evidence.

19.  The next head of appeal was the treatment of the evidence of  Dr  Young
    and the Appellant's own statement which described the  grenade  attack.
    The scarring report of Dr Arnold  and  the  psychiatric  report  of  Dr
    Thomas corroborated the Appellant's account in relation to the  grenade
    attack.  The Judge had applied too high a standard of proof.

20.  In reply the  Presenting  Officer  referred  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in MF  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  902  which  dealt  with  Dr  Young's
    evidence.  In MF an issue arose as to whether an Appellant's mother who
    was still living on the family farm with an adult daughter  could  move
    to the capital Tirana to give the Appellant in that case  support.   In
    her report Dr Young had said that it would be  extremely  hard  if  not
    impossible for the mother to do so but as the Court of Appeal noted  Dr
    Young's opinion "does not appear to have been based on any knowledge of
    the mother's specific circumstances".  At paragraphs 16  the  Court  of
    Appeal said it was perhaps unfortunate that in MF Dr Young had  allowed
    herself

         "to be drawn into expressing views on the  very  issues  which  the
         Tribunal had to determine and to do so on the basis of her  general
         knowledge and understanding  of  conditions  in  Albania  generally
         rather than on specific information about the circumstances of  the
         Appellant's case."

    In one section of her report where she appeared to  have  commented  on
    individual paragraphs of  the  Respondent's  refusal  letter  Dr  Young
    "allowed herself to be  put  in  the  position  of  an  advocate  which
    inevitably undermined her objectivity".

21.  At paragraph 18 the Court of Appeal said that they did not

         "find it surprising that the Tribunal should have declined to place
         much weight on that part of Dr Young's report.  Its  criticism  may
         have been couched in rather harsh terms but in substance they  were
         well-founded.  In the absence of any specific information about the
         reach of the M family or  the  Appellant's  mother's  circumstances
         (which she would have had to give as a witness of fact rather  than
         an expert) those parts of the report were of little or no value".

22.  On the issue  of  relocation  the  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that
    expert evidence was one element for the Judge to take into account  but
    the Judge's findings were not to be a dialogue between the  expert  and
    the Judge.

23.  As to the risk of suicide, there was no need to consider  the  risk  of
    suicide in country, the question was what was the risk of suicide  upon
    return.  The burden was on the Appellant to make the  claim  out.   The
    Judge had rejected the evidence that the Appellant's mother  could  not
    help the Appellant.  Dr Thomas did not have the benefit of that finding
    (which lay in the future) but that was because Dr Thomas  accepted  the
    basis of the  Appellant's  case.   In  fact  as  the  Judge  found  the
    Appellant will have the benefit of his  mother  upon  return  and  that
    disposed of that point.

24.  Dr Young had been criticised for acting as an advocate (see above),  in
    fact Dr Young did not say that the [C] family have influence in Albania
    which could lead them to influence the police such that there would  be
    no level of protection available for  the  Appellant.   The  Judge  was
    bound to have concerns about Dr Young's assertion that anyone could  be
    found in Albania.  As the Judge pointed out it would not matter whether
    a feud was or was not notorious if as Dr Young said you could be  found
    by anyone.  That was not the ratio in EH.  Dr Young was  slipping  back
    into the role of an advocate.  The Respondent  did  not  say  that  one
    could never place weight on any report from Dr Young but the  Appellant
    would return to  the  lack  of  a  blood  feud  and  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and the Appellant's mother would assist him.   The  decision
    was legally sound.

25.  In conclusion counsel accepted that the Judge was not required  to  set
    out each question in  EH  and  answer  them  individually  but  it  was
    incumbent on the Judge to address the tests in EH in some way which the
    determination in this case did not do.   That  was  an  error  of  law.
    There was a discrete claim in this case regarding the risk of  suicide.
    If the Judge was going to find that the Appellant could return  it  was
    incumbent upon him to deal with Dr Thomas' evidence that the  Appellant
    could not.  That was an error of law.  The decision in MF  Albania  did
    not mean that Dr Young's reports were no longer to be relied upon.

Findings

26.  The Appellant makes a number of  criticisms  of  the  decision  of  the
    Judge at first instance in this case as follows:

    (i)  that the Judge erred in his assessment of the grenade attack which
         the Appellant seeks to link to a feud with the [C] family;

    (ii) that the Judge does  not  analyse  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
         involved in a blood feud in accordance  with  the  conditions  laid
         down in the case of EH;

    (iii)    the Judge does not give sufficient weight to Dr Young's report
         that the Appellant could be found if he relocated to Albania;

    (iv) the Judge does not give sufficient weight  to  Dr  Thomas'  report
         that the Appellant would be unable to access services  upon  return
         and there would be a risk of suicide.

27.  The first objection taken to the Judge's  determination  is  largely  a
    disagreement with the Judge's conclusions.   The  Appellant  sought  to
    suggest that there had been a serious attempt to kill him in a  grenade
    attack by the [C] family.  The Judge was concerned about two aspects of
    the alleged attack.  Firstly whether it really was an attempt  to  kill
    the Appellant and secondly the attribution of the attack to the alleged
    rival family the [C].  The Judge  had  severe  reservations  about  the
    seriousness of the attack  finding  that  if  the  Appellant  had  been
    rendered unconscious by an attack  it  would  have  been  a  relatively
    simple matter for the [C] to finish the Appellant off or  at  any  rate
    for the assailants to finish the Appellant off.  That they did  not  do
    so when they had the Appellant at  their  mercy  tended  to  call  into
    question how serious they were in  pursuing  this  blood  feud  to  the
    bitter end of killing the Appellant.  The Appellant's response was that
    he was only feigning dead but that does not answer the  point  made  by
    the Judge.  Whether the Appellant was genuinely unconscious  or  merely
    pretending to be so the  fact  remained  that  the  attackers  had  the
    Appellant at their mercy and if they were seriously concerned  to  kill
    the Appellant it was reasonable in those circumstances to have expected
    them to have finished off the job in some way or other.  That they  did
    not do so led the Judge to a conclusion that whoever the attackers were
    they were not so determined to kill  the  Appellant  as  the  Appellant
    claimed.  That was a matter for the Judge and this ground of appeal  is
    merely a disagreement with the Judge's decision.

28.  The next point of concern about the grenade attack was the  attribution
    to the [C] family when a police report on the  incident  did  not  name
    them.  Given the source of  information  for  the  police  report  (the
    Appellant's own mother) it was in the Judge's view a  significant  fact
    that they were not named.  The criticism of the Judge's  conclusion  in
    the grounds of onward appeal is a mere disagreement.

29.  The next challenge  to  the  determination  was  the  treatment  of  Dr
    Young's evidence.  Whilst the Court of Appeal in MF had some kind words
    to say about Dr  Young  they  also  expressed  reservations  about  her
    evidence in  the  case  which  they  were  considering.   Although  the
    criticisms expressed of Dr Young in MF were said to be harsh, they were
    not expressly disapproved of.  Each case must of course turn on its own
    facts and as the Respondent fairly conceded before me it  was  not  the
    Home Office case that anything written by Dr Young was unreliable.  The
    problem for the Judge was that  Dr  Young  had  made  a  very  sweeping
    statement ("literally anyone can be found by anyone") which appeared to
    demonstrate that Dr Young's objectivity as an expert writing  a  report
    was subject to question.  For the Appellant still to be  at  risk  upon
    return to Albania he would have  to  be  able  to  show  to  the  lower
    standard that he was still at risk from the [C]  family  who  would  be
    able to find him.  If the Appellant wished  to  rely  on  Dr  Young  to
    support that assertion her report needed to be  able  to  stand  up  to
    examination.  The kind of general assertion that Dr  Young  made  which
    the Judge criticised did not mean that the report  could  stand  up  to
    criticism.

30.  There were a number of other inconsistencies  described  by  the  Judge
    (see above paragraph 4) although the Judge also where relevant made  it
    clear these  were  not  points  taken  against  the  Appellant  by  the
    Respondent. It is clear from a fair reading of the  determination  that
    he was giving the most anxious scrutiny to the point of  was  what  was
    known about the [C] family which could lead to an inference  that  they
    would be both able and willing to find the Appellant and cause him some
    harm upon return.  The Judge was heavily influenced by the fact that no
    such evidence was available.  Further Dr Young had been quite unable to
    assist the Tribunal on this particular point.  She  had  evidently  not
    been able to find out about the [C] family despite her knowledge of and
    no doubt contacts in Albania.  This did not of itself  prove  the  case
    but the burden was on the Appellant to show that the [C] family if they
    were indeed in a blood feud with the Appellant could locate  him.   The
    evidence was simply not there.

31.  Dr Thomas' report on the Appellant's mental health  condition  and  the
    impact on the Appellant of a return to Albania was  heavily  influenced
    by the Appellant's own account.  Dr Thomas had not been given the  full
    picture of the Appellant's family in Albania and had thus not been able
    to investigate  what  if  any  assistance  they  could  render  to  the
    Appellant upon  return.   The  Judge  evidently  felt  it  was  a  very
    important point that the Appellant's mother who had been supplying  the
    Appellant with documents to assist his case could be  found.   Although
    the Judge does not say in express terms he was  evidently  disappointed
    by the failure of the Appellant's representatives to make any effort to
    contact the Appellant's mother.  This was a fundamental issue which  Dr
    Thomas did not have the benefit of  knowing.   Dr  Thomas  was  clearly
    anxious for his patient who he thought might  be  returned  to  Albania
    alone with no-one to help him upon return when the Appellant was  in  a
    vulnerable condition.  That however was not the case.  The facts of the
    matter were different to Dr Thomas' understanding. I do not find  there
    was any error by the Judge in his treatment of Dr Thomas' evidence.

32.  Finally much was made in the application for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal of the risk of suicide (as opposed to  what  appears
    to be the relatively little importance that was  given  to  it  in  the
    appeal to the First-tier).  Whether the Appellant's  fear  which  might
    lead to suicide was objectively justified or merely a  subjective  view
    on his part is not relevant in itself.  The important point is  whether
    there would be adequate facilities upon reception and  thereafter.   Dr
    Thomas was of the view that there were not but as I have  indicated  Dr
    Thomas' view was based on an incorrect assessment of what the  position
    would be upon the Appellant's return.  In those circumstances it was  a
    matter for the Judge to decide whether any claim under Article 3  would
    succeed and he found that it would not.  As the Judge  pointed  out  at
    paragraph 41 the Appellant still had his mother in Albania who could be
    contacted and who could provide support.  The Appellant  would  not  be
    required to live a  closed  existence  in  Albania  given  the  Judge's
    finding of no blood feud. This was not based on a conflation of the  EH
    factors into one that of notoriety but rather based on an  analysis  of
    what the Appellant's circumstances were.

33.  There were no relevant and/or significant  factors  overlooked  by  the
    Judge. As was conceded it was not necessary for the Judge  to  set  out
    each and every issue in THE. The  appeal  against  the  first  instance
    decision was largely a disagreement with the  result.  The  Appellant's
    account given to support the existence of a blood feud was found not to
    indicate such a feud. Factors such as whether the feud continued,  when
    the Judge found it was not in existence (and the Appellant could return
    without the need to self isolate)  were  not  relevant.  Similarly  the
    document  emanating  from  the  Albanian  police  did  not  assist  the
    Appellant for the reasons given by the Judge (see above  paragraph  8).
    The Judge considered in some detail the claimed ability of  members  of
    the "aggressor clan" to locate the Appellant and rejected that part  of
    the claim too. The Appellant would be able to access services and  this
    would include any medical assistance he might require should his mental
    health condition be such that he threatened suicide.  There is no basis
    for this complaint against the Judge's determination either.

34.  In short the grounds of onward  appeal  as  amended  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal amount to  no  more  than  a  lengthy  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the Judge who was well aware of  the  EH  criteria.   Those
    findings were based on the evidence  the  Judge  received  and  do  not
    disclose any  error  of  law.   The  Appellant's  appeal  is  therefore
    dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and the Appellant's appeal against that decision is dismissed.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 5th day of   September   2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable and the appeal has been dismissed there can be no  fee
award.


Signed this 5th day of September   2016


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

