
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06314/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 4 January 2016                    |13 January 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                      mohamed rimshard thuwan aggireen
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr B Aboosalih, legal representative with Marsh &
                    Partners solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's refusal to
    grant him asylum, humanitarian protection or leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds.  He is a Sri Lankan citizen and a Muslim.



Immigration history

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom in  June  2009  as  a  Tier  4
    (General)   Student   Migrant.    He   returned   to   Sri   Lanka   in
    October/November 2009, June 2009, and February 2013.  He re-entered the
    United Kingdom on a Tier 4 Student visa  on  20  September  2013,  with
    leave to remain until 20 August  2014  on  that  basis.  The  appellant
    claimed asylum on 31 October 2013.

Asylum claim

 3. The core of the appellant's asylum claim is  that  in  September  2013,
    during the Sri Lankan Provincial Council  elections,  he  worked  as  a
    media officer for a National Unity Alliance (NUA) candidate,  Mr  Azath
    Salley, and that he suffered persecutory ill-treatment at the hands  of
    Mr Lohan Ratwatte, then the member of the Sri Lankan Parliament for the
    Kandy area.

 4. The appellant claimed to fear persecution both from  Mr  Ratwatte,  and
    from the Sri Lankan authorities, based on a Court summons said to  have
    been issued against him on 4 September 2013 in the Magistrate Court  of
    Kandy, which, in a translation prepared by I.G. Gimhani Tilakaratne,  a
    sworn translator whose address is 43/1/2,  Colombo  Street  Kandy,  Sri
    Lanka, said as follows:

         "30 September 2013.   Allowing  for  communal  riots  in  terms  of
         Section 2(9) of Prevention of Terrorism Act No.48 of 1979.  You are
         hereby ordered in the name of the Republic of Sri Lanka  to  appear
         before Kandy Magistrate Court on 30.09.2013 along with witnesses if
         any. As a complaint had  been  made  today  before  the  Magistrate
         undersigned to the  effect  that  you  have  committed  an  offence
         punishable under Criminal Procedure Code  (Chapter  15),  requiring
         him to appear before that Court on 30 September 2013."

    The document is recorded as  signed  on  behalf  of  the  Registrar  of
    Magistrate Court Kandy.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the appellant had indeed acted as
    Mr Salley's media officer during the September 2013 Provincial  Council
    election  campaign.   On  the  basis  of  the  background   information
    submitted by the appellant, the Judge also accepted that Mr Salley  was
    a prominent Muslim politician who was  arrested  and  detained  by  the
    previous regime in Sri Lanka for 8 days in May 2013, on  Prevention  of
    Terrorism Act charges which were subsequently withdrawn.   He  accepted
    to the lower standard the appellant's account of being attacked  on  18
    August 2013 and of subsequent threats, which neither the appellant  nor
    Mr Salley regarded as serious.  He considered there to be  no  reliable
    evidence  of  Mr  Ratwatte  being  responsible  for  attacks   on   the
    appellant's home or the NUA party offices and that this was surmise  on
    the appellant's part.

 6. In the light of the appellant's general  credibility,  the  Judge  also
    accepted that the summons was genuine but noted that the appellant  had
    left the country after it was issued, but  before  the  date  when  the
    appellant was required to  answer  the  summons.   The  Judge  did  not
    consider that the appellant was likely to have been on any  alert  list
    and found that he had probably left Sri  Lanka  on  his  own  passport.
    There was no evidence of any warrant for his arrest issued since  2013.
    The Judge found, applying the country guidance of the Upper Tribunal in
    GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC), that
    the appellant did not fall into any of the continuing risk  groups  and
    could return safely.  He noted evidence from Mr Salley that he was  now
    a high profile  member  of  the  Central  Provincial  Council  who  had
    promised to support the appellant in any way he could  on  return.   If
    there were any outstanding politically  motivated  proceedings  against
    him, the appellant would  be  able  to  use  Sri  Lanka's  functioning,
    independent and  impartial  judiciary,  including  the  services  of  a
    lawyer, to help him clear his name.

 7. The asylum, humanitarian protection and Article 2  and  3  ECHR  claims
    were dismissed. The appellant had made no Article 8 ECHR  claim  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  His grounds of appeal  were
    settled by Mr Paul Turner of Mansfield Chambers, and relied principally
    on the risk accruing to the appellant under the Sri  Lankan  government
    in January 2015 by reason of what he described as an outstanding arrest
    warrant.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes on  the
    basis that there was no finding as to whether the  appellant  would  be
    detained on return and if so, whether such detention would  breach  his
    Article 3 ECHR rights. In granting  permission,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Holmes noted the political seniority of Mr Salley now, and his promised
    help for the appellant if he returned.

Procedural history before the Upper Tribunal

10. The appeal was listed to be heard on 5 March 2015.  At that hearing, Mr
    Turner appeared for the appellant.  He  was  by  then  acting  for  the
    appellant on a  direct  access  basis,  rather  than  as  a  member  of
    Mansfield Chambers.  Mr Turner relied on the risk to the appellant from
    failure to answer a summons  for  a  serious  matter.   The  appellant,
    although not a Tamil, was a Sri Lankan Moor and  they  were  an  ethnic
    group which was treated in the same manner as Tamils,  in  Mr  Turner's
    submission.

11. For the respondent, Ms C Johnstone, a Home Office  Presenting  Officer,
    observed that the document in question appeared to be a summons, not  a
    warrant, such that the appellant was unlikely  to  be  on  the  airport
    alert lists.  Elections were a tense time and nothing had come  of  the
    allegations against Mr Salley, the appellant's  principal.   The  Judge
    was entitled to find that the  summons  would  not  create  a  risk  of
    detention.

12. There was discussion of the  document  relied  upon  by  Mr  Turner,  a
    summons from the  Kandy  Magistrate  Court.   The  English  translation
    prepared in  Sri  Lanka  was  unclear  as  to  the  offence  committed,
    referring to Chapter 15 of the Criminal Procedure  Code:  according  to
    documents publicly available, the Sri Lankan  Criminal  Procedure  Code
    has Sections, not Chapters, of which Section 15 specifies the length of
    imprisonment which a Sri Lankan Court can impose, a minimum of 7  days.
    It was possible that the reference was to Sri Lanka's  Penal  Code  (as
    amended), which did have a Chapter  15,  headed  'Offences  Related  to
    Religion'.  It  became  clear  that  a  professional  translation   was
    required,  and  Mr  Turner  agreed  to  obtain  one.  The  hearing  was
    adjourned, with Counsel's dates to be taken into account  in  re-fixing
    it.

13. The appeal was next listed for 27  October  2015.   The  appellant  was
    represented again by Mr Turner, on  a  direct  access  basis,  and  the
    respondent by Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

14. There was new evidence on both sides: the appellant had served a  small
    supplementary bundle,  consisting  of  a  witness  statement  from  the
    appellant, and three letters purporting to be from his lawyer, Mr  I  M
    Mawjood, Justice of  the  Peace  and  Unofficial  Magistrate,  dated  2
    January 2014, 28 December 2014, and 13 April  2015,  dealing  with  the
    charges and the risk relied upon. The bundle also  contained  a  letter
    from Mr Salley  on  NUA  headed  notepaper,  dated  26  December  2014,
    supporting the appellant's appeal. The respondent sought to rely upon a
    letter dated 3 July 2015, from the British  High  Commission  (BHC)  in
    Colombo, dealing with the reliability of letters of this type, but  not
    specifically with the appellant's  case  before  the  Kandy  Magistrate
    Court.

15. By agreement, the hearing was adjourned, to enable the parties to  seek
    to establish whether the appellant was indeed a wanted man in  relation
    to the September 2013 summons.  Directions were  given:  the  appellant
    was to submit a further translation of the  alleged  summons,  together
    with any relevant further evidence, copies of  the  statutes  mentioned
    therein, and a skeleton argument, within 28 days.  The  respondent  was
    to have 42 days to file relevant further evidence (if so advised) and a
    skeleton argument.  The appeal was then to be listed for half a day  on
    the first available day after 6 weeks.

16. Neither party complied with the Upper Tribunal's directions in a timely
    manner although both had  been  represented  at  the  27  October  2015
    hearing.  There are no skeleton arguments to assist the Upper  Tribunal
    today.

17. The respondent on 24 December 2015 served on the appellant  a  document
    verification report obtained on 10 December 2015, indicating  that  the
    signature on the purported summons was  not  one  which  their  records
    showed had ever been used by a Registrar  at  Kandy  Magistrate  Court.
    The document verification  report  stated  that  the  summons  was  not
    genuine.

18. I have heard evidence today from Mr Jay Gajjar,  who  assists  Mr  Paul
    Turner in his direct access practice, to the effect that Mr Turner  had
    misunderstood the directions agreed at the 27 October 2015 hearing  and
    that thought his client was going to obtain the  translation  required.
    According to Mr Gajjar, who gave his evidence with his laptop  open  to
    enable him to check Mr Turner's records,  two  attempts  were  made  to
    obtain a translation in late  December  2015.   On  28  December  2015,
    having seen the document verification report,  the  appellant  withdrew
    his instructions from Mr Turner.  Mr Turner does  not  appear  to  have
    written to the Upper Tribunal to say that he was no longer representing
    the appellant.

19. On 30 December 2015, the appellant instructed  Marsh  &  Partners,  who
    wrote to the Upper Tribunal the same day to say that they were awaiting
    the full file of papers from Mr Turner, but  that  Mr  Turner  "...  is
    waiting to get translated the Summon, which now been  alleged  to  have
    been challenged by the respondent ... We understand from our client and
    the limited documents provided by him that we do require to instruct an
    independent  Lawyer  or  representative  in  Sri  Lanka  to  check  the
    authenticity of the Summon that was issued against our  client  by  Sri
    Lankan Court in order to represent our client at the  Upper  Tribunal".
    The firm sought a  further  adjournment  which  was  refused  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor on the basis that:

         "The applicant has had ample  opportunity  to  gather  and  produce
         evidence relevant to his appeal and has  known  about  the  hearing
         date since at least the 3 December. There have  been  a  series  of
         adjournments in this matter and at the hearing of 27  October  2015
         directions were given for the production of evidence  and  skeleton
         arguments. Those directions have,  without  explanation,  not  been
         complied with and an explanation is also  lacking  as  to  why  (i)
         solicitors have been instructed so late in the  day  and  (ii)  the
         evidence the appellant states he wishes to obtain has  not  already
         been obtained."

20. That was the basis on which the appeal came before me today.

Upper Tribunal hearing

21. At the hearing, Mr Aboosalih,  a  legal  representative  with  Marsh  &
    Partners, appeared for the  appellant.   Mr  Jay  Gajjar,  Mr  Turner's
    assistant, attended the hearing as a courtesy to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Mr Aboosalih made a further application for  an  adjournment,  which  I
    refused, having regard to the overriding  objective.  This  appeal  has
    been adjourned too often already and the evidential issues are not new.



22. There was at the hearing no witness statement from Mr Turner to explain
    why the agreed directions from the 27 October 2015 hearing had not been
    complied with by him.  I heard oral evidence from Mr Gajjar in which he
    said that he had conduct of this matter only  as  an  assistant  to  Mr
    Turner.  His understanding was that Mr Turner thought the appellant had
    agreed to provide the translation and that at some later date  when  Mr
    Turner realised that was not the case, Mr Gajjar had  been  instructed,
    on 28 December 2015, to order an urgent translation.  Mr Turner had not
    been instructed since, he  thought,  approximately  30  December  2015.
    Following receipt by Mr Turner of the document verification  report  on
    24 December 2015, the appellant  had  given  explicit  instructions  to
    withdraw the translation instruction, and Mr  Gajjar  had  carried  out
    that instruction on 30 December 2015.

23. Mr Gajjar's evidence does not assist me in discovering why no  skeleton
    argument was prepared for this appeal, which was among  the  directions
    given.

24. In addition, without objection from Mr Melvin, I  gave  Mr  Turner  the
    opportunity to produce a witness statement from  by  2  p.m.  today  in
    order to assist me as to the procedural aspects of this appeal. At 2.27
    p.m. a draft witness statement was faxed through to the Upper Tribunal,
    unsigned and undated. It is not clear whether Mr Turner  has  seen  and
    approved the document. The material parts of the draft statement are as
    follows:

         "3.  Following the hearing on  27  October  2015,  there  was  some
         confusion in which I was under the impression  that  the  appellant
         would be obtaining his own translation from  a  translator  in  the
         United Kingdom as my instructions under the  direct  access  scheme
         did not cover obtaining a translation in compliance with the  order
         and nor was I put in funds for the same.

         4.   I advised the appellant on 30  November  2015  of  a  fee  for
         having the documents translated.  Following some discussion  as  to
         the terms of payment and instalments, I was placed in funds.

         5.   On 22 December 2015, a  request  was  made  to  an  individual
         translator in order to have the summons translated for the  hearing
         on 4 January 2016.  Sadly, it became apparent on 24  December  2015
         the translator was not going to be in a  position  to  provide  the
         documents in a timely manner.

         6.   On 24 December 2015, I also received a request from Mr  Melvin
         on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  enclosing   a   document
         verification report in which the documents were considered as  'not
         genuine'. I immediately forwarded a copy of this  document  to  the
         appellant and advised him ...   The  appellant  requested  time  in
         order to consider his position.

         7.   ... On 30 December 2015, the appellant  explicitly  instructed
         that I withdraw the translation and seek a refund in light  of  the
         document verification report and I did the same."

25. I have excluded from my excerpts from this statement matters concerning
    the advice given by Mr Turner to the appellant, which are not a  matter
    for the Upper Tribunal and to which  I  have  had  no  regard.  As  the
    document is unsigned, I can give it only limited weight,  but  even  on
    that  basis,  I  am  concerned  that  the  question  of  financing  the
    translation of a few lines of summons held up  any  attempt  to  comply
    with the directions until after  the  agreed  period  of  28  days  had
    elapsed.  I do not consider that a reasonable excuse has been  provided
    for the failure of  the  appellant  and  his  representatives  to  seek
    promptly to obtain the translation, nor that the very  late  change  of
    representation is a proper reason for the prior non-compliance  by  the
    appellant.

26. I have examined with anxious  scrutiny  the  evidence  now  before  the
    Tribunal regarding the political career  of  Mr  Salley,  the  attorney
    letters, the evidence about the summons  or  arrest  warrant,  and  the
    evidence from the BHC in Colombo.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
    that document as genuine, but for the reasons  which  I  will  give,  I
    consider that the First-tier Tribunal erred in so doing.

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

27. The appellant's evidence consists of three letters from his  lawyer  in
    Colombo. No original of any of these letters has  been  produced.   The
    first, on 2 January 2014, is addressed 'Dear Mr Turner' and the date is
    typed at the top.  It ends with a signature and an ink stamp giving the
    writer's name and address: M. I. M. Mawjood, Attorney-at-Law, JPUM  and
    Notary Public, No. 88 1/1, Main Street, Mawanella. In that  letter,  Mr
    Mawjood seeks to clarify the charges, as follows:

         "Although the translation states 'Allowing for  communal  riots  in
         terms of section 2(9) of Prevention of  Terrorism  Act  No.  48  of
         1979, the actual charges refer to section 2(1)(h) of the Act  which
         states:

             "By words either spoken or intended to be read or by signs  or
             by visible representations or otherwise causes or  intends  to
             cause commission of acts of violence or religious,  racial  or
             communal disharmony  or  feelings  of  ill-will  or  hostility
             between different communities or racial or religious groups."

    As I observed  to  Mr  Turner  at  the  hearing  in  March  2015,  that
    clarification  further  confuses  the  question  of  what  offence  the
    appellant is said to have committed.  It does not increase  the  weight
    which can be placed on  the  Sri  Lankan  translation  of  the  alleged
    summons, and made a proper translation of the original essential if the
    appellant's case were to succeed.

28. The second  letter,  dated  23  December  2014,  is  strikingly  poorly
    written, with 'i' and 'sri lanka' in lower case in some places,  random
    capitals in the middle of sentences, and a handwritten date on the top.
    It is addressed 'Dear Sir/Madam' and headed 'To Whom it  May  Concern'.
    The letter suggests that after  the  appellant  failed  to  answer  his
    summons, the  Kandy  Court  issued  an  arrest  warrant  of  which  the
    appellant and his family, and Mr Mawjood, have no copy. In this  second
    letter, it looks as though the ink stamp from the previous  letter  has
    been cut and pasted to the bottom of the letter.  The  signature  seems
    to be different too, as is the typeface used.  I  am  not  inclined  to
    place any weight at all on this document.

29. The third letter, with a handwritten date, is again addressed to  'Dear
    Sir/Madam' on a To Whom it May Concern basis.  It asserts that:

         "There is an open warrant against my client which is  still  active
         and he will be  arrest  upon  arrival  in  Sri  Lanka.  My  Clients
         passport will be checked when he  arrives  and  since  h  has  been
         absconding, his details  will  be  registered  at  the  airport  to
         prevent him leaving or arrest upon arrival.

         The charges sighted [sic]  in  the  said  case  amounts  to  racial
         distraught which can arise communal  feelings  among  the  subjects
         which is punishable under the prevention of  terrorism  act  48  of
         1979 and will culminate  in  indefinite  remand  custody  and  jail
         term."

30. Again the grammar and structure of the letter is poor, the typeface  is
    different again, and the writer's signature differs from that  on  both
    of the previous letters, as does the name stamp.  I consider the second
    and third letters to be fabricated to support the appellant's case  and
    that very little assistance for him in these proceedings can be  gained
    from the first letter, even if it is genuine.

31. The other document on which the appellant relies is a letter  dated  26
    December 2014 from Mr M  Azath  S  Salley,  who  describes  himself  as
    'Leader/General Secretary of the National Unity  Alliance  (NUA)'.   In
    it, Mr Salley confirmed the appellant's involvement in his campaign for
    the upcoming local provincial council  election  in  2013.   Mr  Salley
    describes himself as 'former deputy mayor of the city of  Colombo,  Sri
    Lanka  and  the  present  Provincial  Council  Member  of  the  Central
    Province'.

32. Mr Salley says in his letter that the  appellant  is  fluent  in  three
    different  languages,  a  vibrant  youth  with  a   sound   educational
    background.  He  states  that  the  current  government  (the  previous
    Rajapaksa government) keeps Mr Salley under constant  surveillance  and
    that he has to frequently change his  personal  mobile  telephone.   He
    says, nonetheless, that  he  is  'more  than  willing  to  assist  [the
    appellant] whatever I can do within my  power'  and  urges  the  United
    Kingdom government to provide the appellant with safety  and  security.
    There is no evidence regarding Mr Salley after 26  December  2014,  and
    certainly none to show  that  he  came  to  harm  under  the  Rajapaksa
    government after September 2013.

33. The appellant's supplementary bundle includes a  brief  unsigned  draft
    statement from him which  adds  nothing  to  his  evidence.   A  signed
    statement from the appellant dated 4 January 2016 handed up at  today's
    hearing deals with the question of the missing  translation  and  notes
    that the appellant has changed his address.   He  asserts  that  he  is
    'very much frightened to suspect whether that Sri Lankan  authority  is
    now targeting me to return back to Sri  Lanka  to  arrest  me,  if  the
    verification check carried by the respondent is genuine'.

34. The respondent's new evidence consists of two sets of  documents,  both
    originating from the BHC in Colombo.  The first is  a  letter  dated  3
    July  2015  dealing  with  verification  of  letters  from  Sri  Lankan
    attorneys.  Of 80 cases investigated, 11  of  the  attorneys  were  not
    contactable; 2 attorneys denied issuing the letters of  support;  6  of
    the attorneys had false  qualifications;  1  attorney  (involved  in  4
    cases) confirmed writing  the  letters  but  there  were  discrepancies
    between his file copy of the letter and the copy produced in the United
    Kingdom proceedings; and in 7  cases,  the  attorney  confirmed  having
    written the letters, but the supporting  documents  turned  out  to  be
    false when verified with the issuing police station or Court.  Overall,
    86.7% of the attorney  letters,  attorney  credentials  and  supporting
    documents were verified as not genuine.

35. The second set of documents, under cover of a 24 December  2015  letter
    from Mr Melvin confirming that the summons had been  verified  as  'not
    genuine' comprises two  copies  of  the  document  verification  report
    produced by the BHC on 10 December 2015, the first  with  an  incorrect
    Sri Lankan Court  file  number  compared  with  that  on  the  disputed
    document, and the second, with the correct number, both with  the  same
    conclusions.  The document verification report  is  accompanied  by  an
    email chain explaining the numeric discrepancy. The error is  a  matter
    of  one  digit  and  I  accept  that  it  is  likely  to  have  been  a
    typographical error by the document verification clerk.

36. The corrected document verification report records that at  0945  on  8
    December 2015, a name and address redacted copy of the disputed summons
    was sent to Kandy Magistrate Court and at 1430 the Court replied.   The
    Registrar (telephone number supplied) in his reply observed  that  'the
    Court reference [given] is  not  relevant  to  the  Magistrate's  Court
    Kandy' and 'the signature of the Registrar does not correspond  to  the
    samples held of any past/present Registrars at the  Kandy  Courts...the
    Registrar was certain that [case number given] did not relate to a case
    heard at the Magistrate's Court Kandy'.

Submissions

37. For the appellant, Mr Aboosalih stated that Marsh &  Partners  had  not
    yet received the full file of papers from  Mr  Turner.   However,  this
    appeal had been listed (for a third time)  in  line  with  Mr  Turner's
    availability and the appellant, whose appeal it is, cannot  rely  on  a
    last minute change of solicitor as  a  reason  for  being  unready  for
    hearing (see Secretary of State for the Home Department v SS (Congo)  &
    Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and JA (Ghana) v The Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1031).

38. Mr Aboosalih accepted that there is a new government in Sri Lanka  with
    a reconciliation agenda, but observed that  Mr  Rajapaksa,  the  former
    President of Sri Lanka, remains a member of the Sri  Lankan  opposition
    party in Parliament.  He stated that he did not know  whether  the  NAU
    was defunct or not.  He was not in a position to make  any  submissions
    on Mr Salley's evidence, save to  say  that  both  Muslims  and  Tamils
    accept his leadership.  He was unable to  say  whether  Mr  Salley  had
    experienced any further difficulty after his May  2013  detention.   Mr
    Aboosalih asked the Upper Tribunal to note that in an unrelated matter,
    permission to appeal had been granted under Article 9 ECHR, but it does
    not appear that Article 9 has ever been in issue in these proceedings.

39. For the respondent, Mr Melvin asked me to take judicial notice  of  the
    political changes in Sri Lanka following the January  and  August  2015
    Sri  Lankan  elections.   Mr  Melvin  produced  a  list  of  recognised
    political  parties  in  Sri  Lanka,  prepared  by  Mahinda  Deshapriya,
    Commissioner of Elections, on Monday July 6  2015,  before  the  recent
    elections. The NAU is not there listed. He also  produced  a  Wikipedia
    entry, downloaded on 2  November  2015,  indicating  that  the  NAU  is
    defunct or dormant and that Mr Salley is now the leader of  the  Muslim
    Tamil National Alliance (MTNA), an unregistered party  which  does  not
    appear in the list of recognised parties prepared by  the  Commissioner
    of Elections.



Discussion

40. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had made no finding as to whether the appellant would be
    detained on return while his alleged criminality was investigated,  and
    if so, whether such detention would breach his Article 3  ECHR  rights.
    The Sri Lankan documents and  what  they  mean  are  key  to  assessing
    whether in so doing the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  and  if  so,
    whether such error was material.

41. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted the appellant's evidence of  his
    history during the 2013 provincial election  campaign.   He  considered
    that the appellant would be able to contest any  politically  motivated
    proceedings which had been fabricated against him.

42. The absence of a finding on whether the appellant would be detained  on
    return is material only if weight can be placed on the documents before
    the First-tier Tribunal or those before the Upper  Tribunal  concerning
    the alleged summons and any arrest warrant which may have been  issued.
    The question of the weight to be given to  documents  from  Sri  Lankan
    attorneys and courts was considered by the Court  of  Appeal  in  PJ  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1011, in the
    judgment of Lord Justice Fulford, at  paragraphs  29-42  thereof.   The
    most relevant passages in that judgment are as follows:

         "30. ... simply because a relevant document is potentially  capable
         of being verified does not mean that the national authorities  have
         an obligation to take this step. Instead, it may  be  necessary  to
         make an enquiry in order to verify the authenticity and reliability
         of a document - depending always on the  particular  facts  of  the
         case - when it is at the centre of the request for protection,  and
         when a simple process of  enquiry  will  conclusively  resolve  its
         authenticity and reliability (see Singh v Belgium [101] - [105]). I
         do not consider that there is any material difference  in  approach
         between the decisions in Tanveer Ahmed and Singh v Belgium, in that
         in the latter case the Strasbourg court simply addressed one of the
         exceptional situations when national authorities should undertake a
         process of verification.

         31.  In my view, the consequence of a decision  that  the  national
         authorities are in breach  of  their  obligations  to  undertake  a
         proper process of verification is that the Secretary  of  State  is
         unable thereafter to mount an argument challenging the authenticity
         of the relevant documents unless and until the breach is  rectified
         by a proper enquiry. It follows that if a decision of the Secretary
         of State is overturned on appeal on this basis, absent  a  suitable
         investigation it will not open to her to suggest that the  document
         or documents are forged or otherwise are not authentic.

         32.  Finally, in this context it  is  to  be  emphasised  that  the
         courts are  not  required  to  order  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         investigate particular areas of evidence or otherwise to direct her
         enquiries. Instead, on an appeal from a decision of  the  Secretary
         of State it is for  the  court  to  decide  whether  there  was  an
         obligation on her to undertake particular  enquiries,  and  if  the
         court concludes this requirement existed, it will  resolve  whether
         the Secretary of State sustainably discharged her  obligation  (see
         NA (UT rule 45: Singh V Belgium) [2014] UKUT 00205 IAC).  If  court
         finds there was such an obligation and that it was not  discharged,
         it must assess the consequences for the case. ...

         41.  ... Whilst it is undoubtedly the case that false documents are
         widely available in Sri Lanka, once it  was  established  that  the
         documents in  question  originated  from  a  Sri  Lankan  court,  a
         sufficient justification was required for the conclusion  that  the
         appellant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution. ... But
         perhaps of greatest  significance,  there  is  a  letter  from  the
         Magistrate of the relevant court to the Controller  of  Immigration
         and Emigration stating that the appellant is in the United  Kingdom
         and that he is to be arrested on  his  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  ...
         However  in  my  view,  without  an  adequate  explanation,  it  is
         difficult to understand how the appellant could  have  falsified  a
         letter from the Magistrate of the relevant court to the  Controller
         of Immigration and Emigration ordering the appellant's arrest which
         he then placed in the court records  so  that  it  could  later  be
         retrieved by two separate lawyers. At the very least, this  feature
         of the evidence required detailed analysis and explanation.

         42.  These documents lie at  the  centre  of  the  application  for
         protection, and I consider that  Judge  Kekic  misdirected  herself
         when she concluded that they had  been  falsely  prepared,  without
         providing  any  reasoning  as  to  how  the  appellant  could  have
         infiltrated forged material into the  court  records,  particularly
         since there is no suggestion that the lawyers had been involved  in
         any discreditable conduct."

43. The decision in PJ  (Sri  Lanka)  arose  from  a  situation  where  the
    respondent had not sought  to  verify  the  documents  and  there  were
    letters from two apparently reputable lawyers in Sri Lanka directly  to
    the appellant's representatives in London,  indicating  that  they  had
    seen the Court documents for themselves and held copies.   The  charges
    were specific and serious. That is not the case here.   The  respondent
    has sought verification of the summons relied upon in this  appeal  and
    it was found to be "not genuine".  Only one of the attorney letters  is
    addressed directly to the  appellant's  representative  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and that one letter casts a doubt on the offence  in  question
    which has not been resolved, despite a delay of  almost  10  months  in
    which to do so and a direction to produce a better translation.

44. The burden is always on an appellant to  prove  elements  of  his  case
    which are in doubt and in this appeal, the appellant has failed  to  do
    so. On the basis of the evidence before me, I do not accept that  there
    is credible evidence even of a summons  against  the  appellant,  still
    less an arrest warrant or any continuing interest in  him  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities of a type which would result  in  his  detention  on
    return for any period of time at all.

45. Even if these documents were genuine,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    rightly concluded that any risk which existed  for  this  appellant  in
    September 2013 had now ceased, and therefore, any error  which  he  may
    have made in analysis of the documents and/or of the risk of  detention
    under the previous government is not now material.  There  has  been  a
    change  in  circumstances  in  Sri  Lanka:  the  government  which  the
    appellant claimed to  fear  is  now  out  of  power.   In  Presidential
    elections on 8 January 2015, President Maithripala Sirisena beat former
    President  Mahinda  Rajapaksa.   In  August  2018,   in   parliamentary
    elections, Mr Rajapaksa's party was defeated and Prime  Minister  Ranil
    Wickramesinghe was appointed by President Sirisena in a  government  of
    national unity and reconciliation.

46. The appellant's principal during the 2013 elections, Mr  Ajath  Salley,
    was elected member of the Central Provincial Council and is a prominent
    Sri Lankan politician. There is no evidence of Mr Salley having come to
    harm since September 2013. It is not remotely credible  that  any  risk
    which existed for  his  media  advisor  in  2013  under  the  Rajapaksa
    government survives in the present circumstances.

DECISION

47. There is no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

48. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Date:    4 January 2016    Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                        Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
