
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06097/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2016                  |On 02 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                  h.a.m.a.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L. Kullar, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan, born on 1 January 1983. On 14 June
    2013 a decision was made by the respondent to remove the  appellant  to
    Sudan, pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999,
    following the rejection of his asylum claim.

 2. His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Osborne ("the FtJ") on 30 July 2013  following  which  he  allowed  the
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds (Article 3 of the ECHR).  The
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and under Articles  2  and  8
    were dismissed. The respondent appealed against the FtJ's  decision  to
    allow the appeal and the appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Robertson ("the DUTJ") at a hearing on 14 October 2013.  She  concluded
    that the FtJ had erred in law and she set aside his decision,  for  the
    decision to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal. It was thought for a time
    that the appeal was potentially suitable  for  the  giving  of  country
    guidance on returns to Sudan, but that did  not  come  to  pass.  There
    having been a transfer order (from the DUTJ), the appeal came before me
    for the re-making of the decision.

 3. The DUTJ's decision is included as an annex to this  decision,  and  to
    which reference should be made for the  full  reasons  for  her  having
    found that the FtJ made an error of law. To  summarise,  she  concluded
    that the FtJ had erred in failing to follow applicable country guidance
    and in his reliance on country background  information  which  was  not
    adequate to displace the conclusions in the existing  country  guidance
    as to risk on return for a failed asylum seeker.

 4. The further background to the appeal can be deduced from the  preserved
    findings made by the FtJ. The DUTJ indicated at [22]  of  her  decision
    that the findings of fact "as to the details of the  Appellant's  case"
    are preserved. She went on to say that the findings made by the FtJ  at
    [44]-[65] and [69] are to be preserved. With one exception  I  set  out
    those findings as follows:

       .  The  appellant  assisted  members  of  the  village  committee  in
         preparing for a visit to the village in May 2008 by  one  Professor
         Hassan Al-Turabi in May 2008, a prominent politician who was  well-
         known in the area and  who  came  from  the  same  village  as  the
         appellant.

       . At the time, the appellant had been living in the village where the
         meeting took place and he had been an  active  participant  in  the
         social affairs of the village.

       . The meeting that Professor Al-Turabi addressed was  interrupted  by
         security forces. The appellant was detained for a period of 10 days
         (and ill-treated). Professor Al-Turabi  was  not  detained  at  the
         meeting but had been arrested on other occasions.

       . Government forces would have  had  an  interest  in  attempting  to
         eradicate interest in Professor  Al-Turabi's  party  which  was  in
         opposition to the government.

       . The appellant was released with  a  requirement  that  he  "report"
         after a period of 15 days.  The  appellant  appears  to  have  been
         released from detention "with ease".

       . The fact that the appellant was released conditionally demonstrates
         that  he  was  unlikely  to  be  of  significant  interest  to  the
         government forces. There is no evidence that he was ever  contacted
         (by the authorities) after he was released to inform him as to when
         he was required to sign on.

       . After he was released the authorities had demonstrated  no  further
         interest in him. That conclusion is supported by the fact that  the
         appellant had maintained contact with his family  "throughout"  and
         knows nothing of any attempt by the  authorities  to  contact  him,
         either because he had failed to report or because  they  sought  to
         call him back into the armed forces.

       . The appellant had given a truthful  account  of  his  journey  from
         Libya to the UK.

       . The appellant had told the truth about  his  experiences  in  Sudan
         prior to leaving to go to Libya.

       . Recall to serve in the armed forces would not amount to persecutory
         treatment.

       . It is likely that there is no record of his previous detention.

       . The appellant never involved himself with any party as an activist.
         When he attended political meetings at university he always ensured
         that he "kept out of trouble" by avoiding being caught  up  in  any
         interference by the State in any such meetings.

 5. I said in the previous paragraph that there was one  exception  to  the
    findings of fact made by the FtJ to be set out. That is  a  finding  at
    [65] where the FtJ said that he could not be  satisfied  to  the  lower
    standard that the treatment meted  out  to  the  appellant  during  his
    detention amounted  to  more  than  harassment,  stating  that  he  was
    detained only for a relatively short period of time, was released "with
    ease", and there having been no contact with  him  by  the  authorities
    after his release to inform him when he was to sign on.

 6. It is the conclusion to the effect that the treatment of the  appellant
    during his  detention  amounted  only  to  harassment  that  causes  me
    concern. At [15] the  FtJ  set  out  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    detention. He was blindfolded and taken to the place of detention.  The
    FtJ records that during the 10 days' detention he was  "badly  treated"
    by being beaten, having water thrown over him and forced to stay out in
    the very hot sun. He was interrogated about his political views.

 7. That description of how he was treated seems to me to  amount  to  more
    than mere harassment given the account of being beaten  and  forced  to
    stay out in the hot sun. I drew the parties' attention to my concern in
    that respect, without demur from either side.

    Submissions

 8. Mr Mills relied on the recent country guidance decision of  IM  and  AI
    (Risks-membership of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress and JEM) Sudan CG [2016]
    UKUT 00188 in terms of risk on return. Given the preserved findings  of
    the FtJ, to the effect that  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  ongoing
    interest in the appellant by the authorities at the time of  the  FtJ's
    decision in 2013, there is no reason to think that the situation  would
    be any different now. IM and AI makes a distinction between  those  who
    are detained for a short period and are not at risk of serious harm and
    those whose contact with the authorities would mean that there would be
    an ongoing risk of serious harm. The  authorities  distinguish  between
    those regarded as a real threat and those not.

 9. Although the country guidance set out in the headnote to IM and AI does
    not refer specifically to the risk on return for failed asylum seekers,
    the body of the decision at [216]-[226] indicates that there would  not
    be a risk on that basis. In particular, it is  to  be  noted  that  the
    expert evidence did not suggest such a risk.

10. Ms Kullar submitted that although there  are  preserved  findings,  the
    guidance at [8] of  the  headnote  supports  the  contention  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return. The appellant could be  perceived
    as a person in opposition to the government. He would be returned on an
    emergency travel document, although it is true that he  would  have  to
    demonstrate more than that.

11. His account of his treatment was accepted by the FtJ. He  had  provided
    some limited support for Professor Al-Turabi who it is also accepted is
    from the same village as the appellant. Professor Al-Turabi is known to
    the authorities as an opposition leader. On his  return  to  Sudan  the
    appellant would be questioned about where he  has  been  and  would  be
    required to provide details of his address in Sudan which would  reveal
    that he is from the same village as Professor Al-Turabi. The  appellant
    would also be questioned about his  political  opinions.  He  would  be
    connected with a person in opposition to the government. In that regard
    [227] of IM and AI is relevant.

12. Although there is a distinction between  those  detained  for  a  short
    period, what is a 'short period' is  not  defined.  The  appellant  was
    detained for a period of 10 days and was ill-treated. At  [234]  of  IM
    and AI it is said that the overall picture needs to be  considered  and
    there are cumulative factors that need to be taken into account.

    Conclusions

13. Although at [65] the FtJ characterised the treatment that the appellant
    was subjected to by the authorities in Sudan as "harassment",  and  the
    DUTJ said that the findings in [65] amongst other paragraphs are to  be
    preserved, the  DUTJ  did  not  advert  directly  to  the  'harassment'
    finding. That is a finding of mixed fact and law and it is  clear  that
    the DUTJ had intended to confine the preserved findings to the  factual
    findings made by the FtJ. In any event, the nature and  extent  of  the
    ill-treatment suffered by the appellant on the accepted facts does,  it
    seems to me, amount to persecution rather than mere  harassment.  As  I
    have indicated, neither party before me suggested to the contrary  when
    I raised the matter at the hearing.

14. Paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules is relevant in this respect. It
    provides that:

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated."

15. The country guidance in IM and AI at [277]-[238] is as follows:

         227. There must be evidence known or likely  to  be  known  to  the
                Sudanese  authorities  which  implicates  the  claimant   in
                activity which they are likely to perceive  as  a  potential
                threat to the regime  to  the  extent  that,  on  return  to
                Khartoum, there is a risk to the claimant that  he  will  be
                targeted by the authorities. The task of the decision  maker
                is  to  identify  such  a  person  and  this   requires   as
                comprehensive an assessment as possible about the individual
                concerned.

         228. The evidence draws a clear distinction between those  who  are
                arrested, detained for a short period, questioned,  probably
                intimidated, possibly rough handled without having  suffered
                (or being at risk of suffering) serious harm and  those  who
                face the much graver risk of serious harm.  The  distinction
                does not depend upon the individual  being  classified,  for
                example, as a teacher or a  journalist  (relevant  as  these
                matters are) but is the result of a  finely  balanced  fact-
                finding exercise encompassing all the information  that  can
                be gleaned about him. The  decision  maker  is  required  to
                place the individual in the airport on return or  back  home
                in his community and assess how the authorities  are  likely
                to react on the strength of the information  known  to  them
                about him.

         229. Distinctions must  be  drawn  between  those  whose  political
                activity or perceived political activity is not  significant
                or who do not have much influence. Whilst it does  not  take
                much for the NISS to open a file, the very fact that so many
                are identified as potential targets inevitably requires NISS
                to distinguish between those whom they view as a real threat
                and those whom they do not.

         230. It will not be enough to make out a risk that the authorities'
                interest will be limited to the extremely common  phenomenon
                of arrest  and  detention  which  though  intimidating  (and
                designed to be intimidating) does not  cross  the  threshold
                into persecution.

         231. The purpose  of  the  targeting  is  likely  to  be  obtaining
                information about  the  claimant's  own  activities  or  the
                activities of his friends and associates.

         232. The evidence establishes the targeting is not random  but  the
                result  of  suspicion  based   upon   information   in   the
                authorities' possession, although it may be limited.

         233. Caution should be exercised when  the  claim  is  based  on  a
                single  incident.  Statistically,  a  single  incident  must
                reduce the likelihood of the Sudanese  authorities  becoming
                aware of it or  treating  the  claimant  as  of  significant
                interest.

         234. Where the claim is based on  events  in  Sudan  in  which  the
                claimant has come to the attention of the  authorities,  the
                nature of the claimant's involvement, the likelihood of this
                being perceived as in  opposition  to  the  government,  his
                treatment in detention, the  length  of  detention  and  any
                relevant surrounding circumstances and the likelihood of the
                event or the detention being made the subject  of  a  record
                are all likely to be material factors.

         235. Where the claim is based on events outside Sudan, the evidence
                of the claimant having come to  the  attention  of  Sudanese
                intelligence is bound to be  more  difficult  to  establish.
                However, it is clear that  the  Sudanese  authorities  place
                reliance upon information-gathering about the activities  of
                members of the diaspora which includes covert  surveillance.
                The nature and extent of the claimant's activities, when and
                where, will inform the  decision  maker  when  he  comes  to
                decide whether it is likely those  activities  will  attract
                the attention  of  the  authorities,  bearing  in  mind  the
                likelihood that the authorities  will  have  to  distinguish
                amongst a potentially large  group  of  individuals  between
                those who merit being targeted and those that do not.

         236. The decision maker must seek to build up  as  comprehensive  a
                picture as possible of the claimant taking into account  all
                relevant material including that which  may  not  have  been
                established even to the lower standard of proof.

         237. Once a composite assessment of the evidence has been made,  it
                will be for the decision maker to determine whether there is
                a real risk that the claimant will come to the attention  of
                the authorities on return in such a way as amounts  to  more
                than  the  routine  commonplace  detention  but  meets   the
                threshold of a real risk of serious harm.

         238. Where a claimant has not been believed in all or part  of  his
                evidence, the decision maker will have to  assess  how  this
                impacts on the requirement to establish  that  a  Convention
                claim has been made out. He will not have the comprehensive,
                composite picture he would otherwise  have  had.  There  are
                likely to be shortfalls in the evidence  that  the  decision
                maker is unable to speculate upon. The final  analysis  will
                remain the same: has the claimant  established  there  is  a
                real risk that he, the claimant, will come to the  attention
                of the authorities on return in such a  way  as  amounts  to
                more than the routine commonplace detention and release  but
                meets the threshold of serious harm."

16.  Strictly speaking, the country guidance is that to  be  found  in  the
    body of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision,  rather  than  that  in  the
    headnote. The reason I mention that fact is  because  I  note  that  at
    [227] it states that "There must be evidence  known  or  likely  to  be
    known" to the Sudanese authorities which  implicates  the  claimant  in
    activity etc. (my emphasis), whereas in the  headnote  it  states  that
    "there must be evidence known to the  Sudanese  authorities  etc.,  (my
    emphasis again). The difference is the phrase "or likely to be  known".
    The distinction is probably immaterial, and is so on the facts of  this
    appeal, but it is necessary to consider the actual guidance as set  out
    in the decision. In addition, for "likely to be  known"  I  would  read
    'reasonably likely to be known', but again nothing  turns  on  that  in
    this appeal.

17. Although the country  guidance  in  that  decision  does  not  strictly
    consider the issue of returned failed asylum seekers per se,  it  is  a
    matter that is considered in the decision. Between [216] and [226]  the
    position was considered with reference to the earlier country  guidance
    decision of HGMO (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT  00062.
    In IM and AI the Tribunal said at [218] that as long ago  as  2005,  Dr
    Alizadeh of the UNCHR commented that failed asylum  seekers  would  not
    face severe problems upon return, as long as they are not recognised as
    a threat to the state, and that that was the conclusion of the Tribunal
    in HGMO. At [220] it was noted that in HGMO the Tribunal concluded that
    neither involuntary returnees nor failed asylum seekers, nor persons of
    military age (including draft evaders and deserters) "were as  such  at
    real risk on return to Khartoum".

18. At [222] it  was  stated  that  it  was  not  argued  that  involuntary
    returnees would be at risk on return for that  reason  alone,  and  the
    expert evidence of Peter Verney did not suggest as much. After  further
    consideration of the evidence before it  the  Tribunal  said  at  [225]
    that:

         "It is our firm  view  conclusion  that  a  failed  asylum  seeker,
         including an individual who has been subject  to  investigation  by
         the immigration authorities on return, would  not  be  at  risk  of
         further investigation by NISS [National Intelligence  and  Security
         Services] on that basis alone."

    At [226] it was also said that:

         "The response made by Waging Peace to the Landinfo  report  repeats
         its stance that Sudanese from all parts of society...who have spent
         time outside Sudan may be  at  risk  on  return...but  we  are  not
         satisfied that this supports a claim that all those who  return  as
         failed asylum seekers are at risk. We accept that our assessment is
         hampered by a lack of monitoring from UNHCR or from countries  that
         return failed asylum seekers to Sudan. However,  we  are  satisfied
         that the approach adopted by the Tribunal in  HGMO  (Relocation  to
         Khartoum) to the effect that even without  monitoring,  news  leaks
         out if there  had  been  widespread  ill-treatment  of  involuntary
         returnees. Indeed, the persons interviewed by Waging  Peace  afford
         good examples  of  how  individuals  are  able  to  describe  their
         experiences and how those  experiences  find  their  way  into  the
         public domain."

19. Although before the FtJ the appellant  had  relied  on  a  report  from
    Waging Peace dated 4 August 2011,  which  led  the  FtJ  to  allow  the
    appeal, that report was expressly not relied on before me. Furthermore,
    as I  pointed  out  to  the  parties,  that  report  itself  relied  on
    information from a UNHCR report of 2008, and there were  other  reasons
    to conclude that the report was not a reliable indicator of the risk to
    the appellant on return.

20. I have considered the guidance in IM and AI in detail. It  is  apparent
    that the appellant would not be at risk on return purely on  the  basis
    that he is a failed asylum seeker.

21. The FtJ  concluded  that  he  had  given  a  credible  account  of  his
    activities in Sudan, the circumstances of his detention  and  the  ill-
    treatment that he received. The appellant was not a political  activist
    and his political activities were such that  he  kept  himself  out  of
    trouble. He was detained for 10 days and  ill-treated.  More  important
    than deciding what the Tribunal in IM and AI meant when it referred  at
    [228] to a "short period" of detention, is the fact that the  appellant
    was released without further consequence. The period  of  detention  is
    not determinative, although in relative terms the  10  days'  detention
    was a short period. Although the FtJ found  that  he  was  required  to
    report, there was no follow-up, as it were. The FtJ concluded  that  he
    was not of significant interest to the authorities on his release,  and
    of no further interest after his release.  It was also  found  that  it
    was not likely that there would be a record of his detention.

22. Ms Kullar contended that there would be a risk to the appellant because
    of his coming from the same village as  Professor  Al-Turabi,  a  known
    opposition activist. However, in answer to the question as  to  whether
    it could be said that anyone coming from the same village would  be  at
    risk, reliance was placed on the fact of the appellant's detention.  It
    was also said that he would be questioned about his activities  in  the
    UK but it was conceded that there was  no  evidence  of  any  political
    activities in the UK.

23. The plain fact is that the appellant was not regarded as of any adverse
    interest to the authorities when he  was  released  from  detention  or
    subsequently. There is no basis therefore, from which to conclude  that
    he would be seen as a threat or potential threat  to  the  regime.  The
    appellant would not be targeted as a result of his activities or  those
    of  his  friends  or  associates.  There  are  no  such  activities  or
    associates that would be of interest.

24. Although the appellant comes from the same  village  as  Professor  Al-
    Turabi, that cannot be said to create a real  risk  of  persecution  or
    Article 3 harm because that was a matter that was known about  when  he
    was in Sudan; at the time of his release and  afterwards.  It  did  not
    create a risk to him then, and there is no basis from which to conclude
    that it would create a risk to him on return now, there having been  no
    evidence of adverse interest  in  him  by  the  authorities  since  his
    release.

25. There is not even likely to be a record of his having been detained, so
    the FtJ found. Even if there is, and even if that is discovered on  his
    return,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  that  alone,  or  in
    combination with the other circumstances of the appellant's background,
    would create a risk to him now.

26. Although the appellant was subject to treatment which I would  conclude
    amounted to persecution, the evidence indicates  that  there  are  good
    reasons to consider that such treatment will not be repeated.

27. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the appellant has  established  to
    the required lower standard that there is a real risk of persecution or
    Article 3 ill-treatment on return to Sudan.

    Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision having been set aside,  I  re-make  the
    decision, dismissing the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  2/12/16

                         ANNEX-ERROR OF LAW DECISION

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06097/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham   |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 October 2013                   |                                     |
|Prepared on 15 October 2013          |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                                   H A M A
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Authi, solicitor from Aman, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Procedural History

 1. For ease of  reference  the  Appellant  and  Respondent  are  hereafter
    referred to as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Therefore
    HAMA is referred to as the Appellant and  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    referred to as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Sudan, whose date of birth  is  1  January
    1983, appealed against the decision of the Respondent  to  set  removal
    directions  to  Sudan  after  refusing  refugee  status,   humanitarian
    protection and leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds. First-
    tier Tribunal Judge V S Osborne allowed his appeal on all  grounds  and
    the Respondent appeals against  this  determination.  Unless  otherwise
    stated, all paragraph references in  my  determination  relate  to  the
    determination of Judge Osborne.

 3. Permission to appeal was requested by the Respondent on the basis that:

        a.  The  Judge   materially   misdirected   herself   in   law   by
           misinterpreting the evidence before her; she concluded that  the
           Country of Origin Information Report on  Sudan  dated  September
           2012 (the COIS report) raised sufficient concerns to  find  that
           the Appellant may be apprehended as someone who  claimed  asylum
           in the UK  and  therefore  should  be  granted  refugee  status.
           However, the evidence in the COIS report that is referred to  by
           the Judge was sourced between  2006  -  2010  and  was  no  more
           current than the evidence considered  in  the  Country  Guidance
           cases. The Judge found that the Appellant is not someone who has
           a political profile and the authorities had shown no interest in
           him since his release from detention or  departure  to  the  UK.
           There was no evidence before the Judge to demonstrate  that  all
           failed asylum  seekers  were  at  risk  on  return  and  it  was
           unreasonable for her to so conclude; and

        b. In HMGO (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00062,
           the Tribunal found that  involuntary  returnees,  failed  asylum
           seekers and persons of military age were not  at  real  risk  on
           return to Khartoum. The Judge acknowledged but failed to  adhere
           to the guidance in HMGO and did not give  adequate  reasons  for
           not so doing.

 4. Permission was granted on the basis that the  Judge  had  arguably  not
    followed the guidance in the case law because she  allowed  the  appeal
    even after  she  found  that,  although  the  Appellant's  account  was
    credible, the authorities in Sudan had no interest in  him  after  they
    released him and that he was not at risk at the time he left Sudan.

 5. A Rule 24 response was not filed by the Appellant.

The Hearing

 6. Mr Smart handed up AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - location)  Sudan  CG  [2009]
    00056, extracts from HGMO (Relocation  to  Khartoum)  Sudan  CG  [2006]
    UKAIT 00062, SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940, DSG & Others (Afghan
    Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC); extracts
    from the COIS report (paragraphs 29.02 - 30.17 and 31.23  -  32.17  and
    the Chronology of Major  Events),  a  document  dated  27  August  2013
    subheaded "Treatment of returnees to  Sudan  (from  European  countries
    including the UK)" to which  is  annexed  a  letter  from  the  British
    Embassy in Khartoum dated 8 April 2013 (the  British  Embassy  letter),
    the latter document for the purposes  of  remaking  the  decision  only
    rather than establishing the error of law.

 7. In his submissions, Mr Smart relied  on  the  grounds  of  application,
    stating that although AA made changes to the risk  categories  so  that
    much of HMGO was no longer applicable, some of the guidance in HMGO was
    retained. HMGO related to four black Africans from  Darfur;  they  were
    non-Arab Darfuris. AA left in place paragraphs 2 and 6 of the head note
    to HMGO  and  paragraph  2  of  the  head  note  was  relevant  to  the
    Appellant's case. At paragraph 172 of HMGO, the  Tribunal  stated  that
    they were  forced  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  whether  involuntary
    returnees to Sudan would be at risk, not just non-Arab Darfuris,  which
    they considered at paragraphs 173 to 186. They concluded, at  paragraph
    309 (2) that "A Sudanese national will not be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Khartoum either at the airport or subsequently merely because he or she
    is a failed asylum seeker. Although the fact of having  claimed  asylum
    (and having spent time in the UK) is likely to be known to the Sudanese
    authorities there, the evidence does not  suffice  to  show  that  this
    would make him or her the subject of adverse attention."

 8. In SG, at paragraphs 45 -  47,  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  the
    benefits of the system of Country Guidance  determinations  to  provide
    reliable information  about  country  conditions,  and  confirmed  that
    judges were required to follow them  "...unless  very  strong  grounds,
    supported by cogent evidence, are adduced justifying  their  not  doing
    so" (paragraph 47). In DSG, the Tribunal, at paragraph 20, set out  the
    basis for the Country Guidance system, to be found within the  Practice
    Directions at  12.2  -  12.4,  which  provides  that  "Because  of  the
    principle that like cases should be treated in like manner, any failure
    to follow a clear, apparently applicable country guidance case or  show
    why it does not apply to the case in question is likely to be  regarded
    as grounds for appeal on a point of law" (paragraph 12.4) At  paragraph
    26 of DSG, it is stated that  "...a  judge  may  depart  from  existing
    country  guidance  in  the  circumstances  described  in  the  Practice
    Direction and the Chamber Guidance note. That does not amount to  carte
    blanche for judges to depart from country guidance as it is  necessary,
    in the wording of the Practice Direction to show why it does not  apply
    to the case in question..." Mr Smart submitted that in DSG, the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was found to be right  in  departing  from  country
    guidance on the evidence before him but this did not detract  from  the
    need for strong grounds supported by cogent evidence.

 9. As to the application of the country guidance to the Appellant's  case,
    Mr Smart submitted that at paragraph 32 of the determination the  Judge
    quoted an extract from the COIS report which was set out  at  paragraph
    28 of the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.  She  gave  her  reasons  for
    rejecting it at paragraph 69 but she did not engage with the  Secretary
    of State's position in relation to it; she did not engage with HMGO  or
    consider the provenance  of  the  Waging  Peace  report.  That  failure
    amounted to an error in law.   Mr  Smart  submitted  that  the  British
    Embassy letter confirmed that there were no reports of mistreatment  of
    returnees, which would assist in the remaking of the  decision  in  the
    event that a material error of law was established.

10. Mr Authi submitted that looking at the  documentary  evidence,  it  was
    clear that the  Judge  conducted  a  good  balancing  exercise  on  the
    evidence before her. At paragraph 65 she stated that the Appellant  was
    credible. At paragraph 68, she had in the back of  her  mind  that  the
    Appellant would  be  someone  who  was  of  interest  to  the  Sudanese
    authorities. She referred to  the  risk  factors  that  would  put  the
    Appellant at risk  on  return  at  paragraph  69;  she  carried  out  a
    balancing exercise on the basis that he was known to the authorities.

11. Mr Authi submitted that although it was  stated  within  the  grant  of
    permission that the Judge did not appear to  have  considered  existing
    case law, she stated that she had considered it and found that it was a
    number of years old and she balanced the country guidance case  against
    the Waging Peace report. She dealt with the risk to Sudanese  nationals
    who are returned. She stated that there was no report of failed  asylum
    seekers from the UK being  reintegrated  into  Sudanese  society  as  a
    result of the re-integration programmes that are in place  between  the
    Sudanese government  and  the  governments  of  neighbouring  countries
    because there was no such agreement between  the  Sudanese  authorities
    and the UK.

12. With reference to paragraph 203 of HMGO, Mr Authi  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's background would be known to the  authorities  because  the
    Judge accepted that his account is credible and that he  was  detained.
    The  COIS  report  confirmed,  at  para  32.02,   that   the   security
    organisations are powerful and that they have  records  of  those  they
    deem to be of interest. The Judge  made  a  thorough  examination  with
    regard to the issue of risk on return on the evidence as a whole.

13. As to DGS, Mr Authi submitted that the Judge in that  case  did  depart
    from country guidance in the particular circumstances of the  case.  In
    the Appellant's case, the Judge considered the Appellant's  background,
    and at paragraphs 68 - 69 she stated why she departed from the  country
    guidance cases - she stated that they were out of date. He asked that I
    find that there was no error of law.

14. I referred Mr Smart to paragraph 7 of the  grounds,  in  which  it  was
    stated that the evidence within the COIS report that was referred to by
    the Judge was sourced between 2006 and 2010 and  was  no  more  current
    than the country guidance cases and I asked him if there  was  evidence
    to confirm that the evidence on which the Waging Peace report was based
    was before the Tribunal in HMGO. He stated that he was not  relying  on
    paragraphs 6 and 7 of the grounds of application.

15. Both representatives agreed that if I were to find  that  there  was  a
    material error  of  law  in  the  findings  of  the  Judge,  there  was
    sufficient material before me on which to make a decision  without  the
    need for a resumed hearing.

Decision and reasons

16. I do not accept Mr Authi's submission that the Judge had in the back of
    her mind that the Appellant was known to the  authorities  because  she
    found his  account  of  having  been  detained  credible.  This  is  an
    Appellant who claimed that he had left Sudan in May 2008 and spent five
    years in Libya before arriving in the UK on  17  May  2013.  The  Judge
    stated:

         "(the Appellant) was detained for  a  relatively  short  period  of
         time, he appears to have been released with ease and  there  is  no
         evidence before me that the Appellant was ever contacted  after  he
         had been released to inform him as to when he was required to  sign
         on with the authorities.  This  indicates  to  me  that  after  the
         Appellant had been released the  authorities  had  demonstrated  no
         further interest in him. I am supported in this finding by the fact
         that I am satisfied that the Appellant has maintained contact  with
         his family throughout and knows  nothing  of  any  attempt  by  the
         authorities to contact him either because he failed  to  report  as
         ordered or because they sought to call  him  back  into  the  armed
         forces. In any event I am not satisfied that calling him back  into
         the armed forces would amount to persecutory treatment - all  young
         men like the Appellant are required to undertake military  training
         which the Appellant did and  the  Appellant's  fear  was  that  the
         authorities in Sudan would use this as "punishment" against him for
         having left the country. Even if that were to be the case I am  not
         satisfied that it would amount to persecutory treatment" (para 65).



17. At paragraph 69 the Judge finds that there would be no  record  of  his
    previous detention. There was no evidence before  the  Judge  that  the
    Appellant was ever politically active, either in Sudan or abroad.

18. She then identifies the real cause for concern as  being  the  risk  on
    return. She cites the extract from the Waging Peace  report,  which  is
    dated 4 August 2011,  at  paragraph  32  of  the  determination,  which
    provides:

         "Returning Sudanese asylum seekers from the UK to Sudan in  and  of
         itself constitutes a significant risk to their safety at the  hands
         of the National Intelligence  Service  (NISS),  and  in  the  worst
         instances can result in death. Claiming asylum abroad is considered
         an act of regime defiance and as such the process of  applying  for
         documentation brings an individual to the attention  of  the  NISS.
         Furthermore, the NISS uses information gathered through an advanced
         security service network to incriminate detainees, making the  risk
         of imprisonment for failed UK asylum seekers  high.  Detainees  are
         then held without warrant, record, trial or  representation,  often
         severely tortured and their lives threatened, in prison  conditions
         that are unacceptable. They are  sometimes  released  only  on  the
         basis that they gather information on rebel activity and return  to
         the NISS to be detained  should  they  not  provide  "satisfactory"
         answers. With this in mind, returning a Sudanese asylum seeker from
         the UK can, in the worst cases, amount to  sending  them  to  their
         death and even in more favourable cases, constitute a  considerable
         threat to their safety and wellbeing."

19. The Respondent,  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  states  that:
    "...while it is noted that there have been individual reports of failed
    asylum seekers being mistreated  in  Sudan,  it  is  noted  that  these
    reports lack breadth and depth. It is also  noted  that  various  other
    organisations are continuing to run voluntary returns to Sudan and have
    not reported any findings similar to those outlined above."

20. The Judge refers  to  the  Waging  Peace  report  in  her  reasons  for
    departing from HMGO which are set out in  paragraphs  68  and  68.  She
    states:

         "The fact that the country of origin information service report has
         included that description in its report is something that I  cannot
         ignore. Equally I must take into account the  fact  that  a  return
         programme has been implemented with the Sudanese government working
         in cooperation with governments of selected neighbouring  countries
         however I note that there is no report  of  failed  asylum  seekers
         from the United Kingdom being reintegrated into Sudanese society as
         a result of these programmes. Specific reference is made to returns
         from Uganda.  I  am  satisfied  that  it  would  be  known  to  the
         authorities in Sudan that the  Appellant  was  returning  from  the
         United Kingdom.

         "According to the Waging Peace report the risk to the Appellant  is
         therefore a high one. My attention was not drawn  to  any  relevant
         country guidance case which has considered the issue  of  returnees
         from the United Kingdom to Sudan. I have personally considered  the
         existing country guidance cases - they do not support the  view  of
         Waging Peace but I take into account  the  fact  that  the  country
         guidance cases which remain are now quite old and may  not  reflect
         current  country  guidance  conditions.   My   overall   conclusion
         therefore is that to return the Appellant to Sudan from the  United
         Kingdom would be dangerous. He would  be  at  risk  of  persecutory
         treatment even if there was no record of  this  previous  detention
         which I find is likely to be the case."

21. However, there is no reference within the Waging Peace  report  to  the
    methodology used or the sources of  the  evidence  used  to  reach  the
    conclusions set out in the extract cited by  the  Judge.  There  is  no
    reference to the number of cases, how these were documented or  whether
    there was a breakdown in relation to  the  ethnicity  of  the  Sudanese
    nationals referred to, a factor that would have been relevant if it was
    to lead to a departure from the conclusions of the Tribunal in HGMO  in
    relation to return from  the  UK  of  failed  asylum  seekers  of  Arab
    ethnicity. In the circumstances, I find  that  the  reasons  given  for
    departure from HMGO, which are really no more  than  that  the  country
    guidance  cases  are  old,  were  insufficient  to  depart   from   the
    conclusions of that country guidance case. This is a material error  of
    law, and I set aside the decision in relation to application of country
    guidance to the facts.

22. The findings of fact as to the details  of  the  Appellant's  case  are
    preserved; no issue was raised in relation to them by either party  and
    the findings were open to the Judge on the evidence before her.

23. The promulgation of this determination has been delayed for some  time,
    pending a decision as to whether this case is to  be  identified  as  a
    potential country guidance case. The parties will be contacted  when  a
    decision is made with a view to arranging a resumed hearing. If  it  is
    not to be listed as a country guidance case, the parties will still  be
    contacted for a decision as to whether, given the passage  of  time,  a
    resumed hearing is necessary.



Decision

24. The findings of the Judge at paragraphs 44 - 65 are  preserved,  as  is
    the finding at paragraph 69 that there is unlikely to be any record  of
    the Appellant's previous detention.

25. The Judge materially erred  in  law  in  failing  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for departing from the guidance case HMGO. The decision is  set
    aside.



Anonymity

26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I see
    no reason why an order should be  made  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   Date

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

