
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06771/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 January, 9 March, 29 June 2012,          |                             |
|5 March, 17 April and 4 June 2013             |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                     JA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, Counsel instructed by Messrs Kathala
& Co
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    (For hearing on 05/01/12):
     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
     (For hearing on 09/03/12):
     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
     (For hearings on 29/06/12, 05/03/13, 17/04/13 & 04/06/13):
     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of  Afghanistan  born  on
    24 April 1993, against the decision of the Respondent dated 14 December
    2010 to refuse to vary the Appellant's leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to refuse to him the grant of  asylum  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules.

2.   On 15 October 2008 the Appellant was granted limited  leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom until 24 October 2010 on  a  discretionary  basis
    for a reason not covered by the Immigration Rules.

3.   In her Letter of Refusal dated 14 December 2010 the Secretary of  State
    noted that the Appellant was an Afghan citizen  born  in  Zahidabad,  a
    village in Mohammed Agha Province in Logar District of Afghanistan, who
    had attended school at the age of 7 and  then  studied  at  the  Hazrat
    Bilal Mosque until he completed the Quaran at the age of 10.

4.   The Appellant had a brother, whom I shall call SA, who had joined Hizb-
    e-Islami when he was 8 or 9 years old.  SA would travel back and  forth
    between the Appellant's village and Kunar  Province  once  a  month  or
    sometimes every two or three months.

5.   It was the Appellant's account that the Afghan  authorities  discovered
    that his brother was working for  Hizb-e-Islami  two  or  three  months
    after he joined and that in consequence his brother  went  into  hiding
    with Hizb-e-Islami.  The authorities went  to  the  Appellant's  family
    home and questioned his mother regarding his brother's whereabouts.

6.   The Appellant claimed that at age 13 he  joined  Hizb-e-Islami  on  the
    advice of his brother and that over the next two years  he  would  make
    trips to Kunar Province and assist Hizb-e-Islami by filling rifles with
    bullets, cooking meals for the group  and  acting  as  a  lookout.   He
    returned home to his mother after five or six  days  at  a  time.   The
    journey took three to four hours in a vehicle.

7.   When the Appellant was 14 the government approached his mother's  house
    whilst he was out one day and enquired after him.  She told  them  that
    she did not know her son's  whereabouts  and  the  officials  told  the
    Appellant's mother that she was to  report  her  son  to  the  district
    police officer when she saw him.  The Appellant's mother  told  him  of
    this visit on his return and that the government had discovered he  was
    working for Hizb-e-Islami.  She advised the Appellant to live with  his
    brother  in  Kunar  Province.   The  Appellant  believed  that  someone
    informed the authorities that he had been working for Hizb-e-Islami.

8.   The Appellant stayed with his brother within the  mountainous  area  of
    Kunar Province for two months.   He  claimed  to  have  witnessed  dead
    bodies and injured people and he was given weapons training and ordered
    to fight by his commander.

9.   The Appellant's  brother  decided  that  the  Appellant  had  to  leave
    Afghanistan because he was concerned for his safety.

10.  The Appellant thus feared  return  to  Afghanistan  because  he  feared
    persecution from  the  Afghanistan  authorities  because  of  his  past
    membership of Hizb-e-Islami and his brother's membership  of  the  same
    organisation.

11.  Since the Appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom on 7  January  2008
    he had initially been supported by Croydon Social Services and  at  the
    time of the refusal letter he was described as "currently living with a
    foster family in Upper Norwood".

12.  It was noted that during his time in the  UK  the  Appellant  had  been
    studying and had made progress with his education  as  demonstrated  by
    the numerous certificates as evidence of his many achievements enclosed
    in his application for further leave.  In addition it was clear that he
    had participated and been involved in a number of sporting  and  social
    activities within the local community and had made a  number  of  close
    friends.  The Appellant had formed strong bonds with  his  current  and
    previous foster carers.

13.  It was the Appellant's account in support of his claim  that  he  would
    continue to live in fear of his life if he was returned to Afghanistan.
    His father was killed by the Afghan  authorities  because  he  too  was
    working with the Hizb-e-Islami. The Appellant also feared  if  not  the
    Afghan Government, the  Hizb-e-Islami,  who  would  ask  him  to  fight
    against the present government.

14.  The Appellant claimed he was not in touch with his  family  members  in
    Afghanistan and was unaware as to their present whereabouts.

 15. The Appellant claimed that  his  brother  had  contacted  his  maternal
    uncle who arranged for an agent to take him to an  unknown  destination
    in  Pakistan  by  car.   He  had  no  documents  and   encountered   no
    checkpoints, nor did he experience any problems at the Afghan/Pakistani
    border.  He left Pakistan from Islamabad Airport and travelled  by  air
    for eight or nine hours to the UK to an unknown airport arriving on  22
    August 2008.  He travelled with a family of four whom  he  met  at  the
    agent's house in Pakistan.  A false passport was used  that  the  agent
    carried for the Appellant and which bore the  Appellant's  picture  and
    date of birth.

16.  Upon arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  a  friend  of  the  Appellant's
    maternal uncle collected him and the Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  29
    August  2008.   The  Appellant  was  refused  asylum  and  Humanitarian
    Protection on 15 August 2008 but was granted Discretionary Leave  until
    24  October  2010.   The  Appellant's  subsequent  application  for  an
    extension of stay in the United Kingdom was made  on  13  October  2010
    before his leave expired.

17.  In her Letter of  Refusal,  the  Secretary  of  State  noted  that  the
    Appellant relied in essence on the details of his  original  claim  for
    asylum that had been considered in October 2008  and  refused  for  the
    reasons given in a decision letter  supplied  at  that  time.   It  was
    considered the reasons then given were still valid and continue  to  be
    relied  upon.   The  Appellant  had  failed  to  provide  a   credible,
    consistent and accurate account of the events that he  claimed  led  to
    his departure from Afghanistan and it was thus not accepted that he was
    ever a member of Hizb-e-Islami or that he had ever been of interest  to
    the Afghan authorities.  It was therefore not accepted that he had fled
    Afghanistan to evade the Afghan authorities.

18.  The Secretary of State  in  her  letter,  made  reference  to  relevant
    background  material  and  also  considered  the  issue   of   internal
    relocation with reference  to  relevant  case  law  that  included  the
    country guidance decisions in RQ (Afghan National Army -  Hizb-i-Islami
    -  risk)  Afghanistan  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00013  and  PM   and   Others
    (Afghanistan) CG [2007] UKIAT 00089.  In that latter case the  Tribunal
    found that internal relocation  to  Kabul  in  circumstances  where  an
    Appellant established a well-founded fear of persecution  in  his  home
    area, was a reasonable expectation.

19.  It was considered that the Appellant had  demonstrated  an  ability  to
    adapt to life in the United Kingdom and that there was no  evidence  to
    suggest he could not do so in his own country upon return.

20.  In consequence the  Secretary  of  State  further  concluded  that  the
    Appellant in his particular circumstances, failed  to  cross  the  high
    threshold warranted by Article 3 of the ECHR and  failed  to  establish
    that he was in need of Humanitarian Protection.

21.  In terms of Article 8 of the ECHR, more  particularly  as  regards  the
    private life the Appellant had established in the UK, it was noted that
    the Appellant had been  here  since  August  2008  and  had  made  many
    friends. He had submitted impressive  documents  that  demonstrated  in
    particular the educational progress that  he  had  made  but  the  fact
    remained that any private life the Appellant had established during his
    stay was in the full knowledge of his  precarious  immigration  status.
    It was thus concluded that the Appellant's removal to Afghanistan would
    not breach the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8.

22.   Consideration  was  also   given   to   the   Appellant's   particular
    circumstances under paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules and  whilst
    carefully considering all the  Appellant's  circumstances  individually
    and cumulatively it was  concluded  for  the  reasons  given  that  the
    Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would be appropriate.

23.  The Secretary of State issued a Supplementary  Letter  dated  17  March
    2011 that specifically focussed on Article 8 ECHR issues raised by  the
    Appellant.  Consideration was given specifically to Section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship, and Immigration Act 2009 and to the need to  make
    arrangements to safeguard and promote the welfare of children  who  are
    in the United Kingdom.  In that regard the Secretary of State had noted
    the availability of education in Afghanistan and the effect of  removal
    on the Appellant.  Further the Appellant would be able to keep safe and
    healthy in view of the facilities  available  in  Afghanistan  and  the
    support network in place on his return and the age and length  of  time
    the Appellant had resided in the United Kingdom.  All those factors had
    been  balanced  against  the  wider  public  interest  of   controlling
    immigration.

24.  It was noted that the Appellant had no medical conditions and  that  he
    had benefited from education whilst in the UK and would be able to  use
    the skills he had gained to seek employment or further  his  education.
    If the Appellant were to return to Afghanistan  voluntarily  then  help
    was available to him from the International Organisation for  Migration
    (IOM) to arrange the Appellant's education or employment  opportunities
    if he so wished.

25.  It was observed that when in Afghanistan,  the  Appellant   lived  with
    family members and his mother and that other family  members  continued
    to reside there. It was therefore considered that he had recent  family
    relationships in Afghanistan.

26.  The Appellant had only been living in the UK since August 2008 but  had
    lived in Afghanistan for the majority of his life. Further in returning
    to Afghanistan he would be  able  to  continue  to  enjoy  his  ethnic,
    religious, cultural and linguistic background and ensure his  right  to
    preserve his identity, including his nationality. For those reasons the
    Appellant's removal would not be in  breach  of  the  UK's  obligations
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

27.  This is a case with a lengthy  appeal  history.  Indeed  following  the
    decision to refuse to the Appellant the grant of asylum on  15  October
    2008, the Appellant's appeal  was heard before Immigration Judge  Wyman
    at Hatton Cross on 7 January 2009, and  dismissed  in  a  determination
    promulgated on  29  January  2009,  although  it  was  noted  that  the
    Appellant continued to retain  the  grant  of  Discretionary  Leave  to
    remain until October 2010.

28.  Following the further decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  14
    December  2010  to  refuse  the  Appellant  a  grant  of  asylum,   the
    Appellant's appeal against that decision came before Immigration  Judge
    Wellesley-Cole who sitting at Taylor House on 28 January  2011  allowed
    the appeal to the extent that it was sent  back  to  the  Secretary  of
    State in relation to Section 55 of the 2009 Act for consideration. That
    decision of course prompted  the  Secretary  of  State's  Supplementary
    Letter to which I have above referred.

29.  Indeed it was in consequence of the Respondent's Supplementary  Refusal
    Letter dated 17 March 2011 that the Appellant lodged a  further  appeal
    which was heard before Immigration Judge Davda who  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 28 July 2011 and in a determination promulgated on  22  August
    2011,  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on   asylum,   Humanitarian
    Protection and human rights grounds.

30.  The Appellant  successfully  made  an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal that decision that I indeed granted, having been persuaded  that
    the Appellant's application demonstrated that the Immigration Judge had
    arguably made an error of law in failing to give adequate  reasons  for
    her findings on material matters.   Further  that  the  grounds  raised
    arguable issues as to whether the judge was entitled in  law  to  reach
    the conclusions that she did for the reasons given.  The brevity of the
    Judge's determination was noted and I observed in granting  permission,
    that  whilst  brevity  might  have  its  place  in   the   writing   of
    determinations, it should never be at the expense of clear and adequate
    reasoning.

31.  Thus the appeal came before me on 5 January 2012 when Mr Nath  for  the
    Respondent told me at the outset of the hearing, that he accepted  that
    the findings of  the  Immigration  Judge  were  inadequately  reasoned,
    noting for example that there  was  no  cross-reference  to  background
    material or relevant case law or country guidance and no evaluation  of
    the evidence of two of the witnesses who had given evidence before  the
    Judge in support of the Appellant's appeal.  I agreed for  like  reason
    and therefore set aside the Immigration Judge's determination and  with
    the agreement of the parties directing that none of her findings  would
    in the circumstances be preserved.

32.  There were however further concerns, not least in the  absence  of  any
    evidence before me as to whether the Secretary of State  had  acted  on
    the decision of IJ Wellesley-Cole.  The material simply was not  before
    me at the time of that hearing nor within Mr Nath's Home  Office  file.
    It was agreed that in the  circumstances  the  appropriate  course  was
    initially to re-list this matter For Mention Only before  me.   At  the
    For Mention hearing on 9  March  2012  such  matters  of  concern  were
    clarified and I arranged  for  the  appeal  to  proceed  to  a  resumed
    substantive hearing before me.

33.  At the resumed hearing on 5 March 2013, I was told by Ms Heybroek  that
    what she described as two crucial  witnesses,  namely  the  Appellant's
    former foster parents, one of whom was a social worker, were unable  to
    attend that day's hearing.   It  was  considered  that  both  witness's
    evidence were  central  to  the  Appellant's  Article  8  appeal.   The
    Appellant's former foster mother was giving  professional  evidence  in
    proceedings elsewhere that day. It was  agreed  that  as  the  evidence
    solely related to the Appellant's Article 8 appeal, there was no reason
    why I could not proceed to hear evidence in relation to the Appellant's
    asylum appeal where he would be the only witness.  Regrettably  in  the
    course of the Appellant's evidence I was  advised  by  the  interpreter
    present, that he was required elsewhere in  Birmingham  that  afternoon
    and could only stay until 3pm. In consequence there was  common  ground
    between myself and the parties that it would be  foolhardy  to  further
    proceed with the Appellant's cross-examination in that Ms Isherwood had
    reached a particular point in the proceedings where it was  appropriate
    to stop. In the circumstances I arranged for the matter to be re-listed
    before me on 17 April 2013.

34.  At the restored hearing, I agreed to Ms Heybroek's request to hear  the
    Appellant's witnesses first not least because one of them, whom I shall
    call Ms AF had brought her young children with  her.   I  proceeded  to
    hear Ms AF's evidence followed by that of the Appellant's witness, whom
    I shall call MT.  The Appellant then resumed the giving of his evidence
    in relation to his asylum  appeal.   In  the  event  this  resulted  in
    continued and lengthy cross-examination.  It being late in the day,  it
    was agreed the case would now be adjourned to 4 June 2013 and  that  at
    the resumed hearing the Appellant would give his evidence in  terms  of
    his Article 8 appeal.  I reminded Ms Heybroek of my direction  for  her
    to file with the Tribunal and serve upon the Respondent,  a  translated
    copy of the Appellant's ID card and to endeavour to obtain a copy of  a
    BBC on-line article concerning Faryadi Zardad, an  Afghan  warlord  who
    was serving a sentence of imprisonment in the United  Kingdom  but  who
    had provided a signed letter in support of the Appellant's appeal.

35.  At the restored hearing on 4 June  2013  the  Appellant  concluded  his
    evidence.  I then heard the submissions of the parties' following  upon
    which I reserved my determination.

The Appellant's Evidence

36.   In  oral  evidence  before  me  the  Appellant  adopted  his  previous
    statements dated 1 October 2010, 24 January  2011,  18  July  2011,  12
    December 2011, and 13 June 2012.  Although I  have  considered  all  of
    them with care, it will suffice if I summarise the salient features  of
    those statements, the first of which on 17 December 2008  disputed  the
    Secretary of State's conclusion in her initial letter of  refusal  that
    the Appellant was not an Afghan national.  Indeed he proceeded  to  set
    out in detail the way of life of an Afghan.  He described the  area  in
    which he lived in significant detail, the national dress, the  type  of
    clothing worn by Afghan men and women in the  various  seasons  of  the
    year and details of Afghan diet and eating habits.  The Appellant  then
    went into some detail as to the languages used in  Afghanistan  and  in
    particular Kabul,  he referred to the various tribes, even the national
    game for Afghanistan and its purpose.

37.  The Appellant challenged the Secretary of State's  conclusion  that  he
    did not serve with Hizb-e-Islami pointing out  that  most  people  from
    Logar Province were  from  Hizb-e-Islami.  He  described  Hizb-e-Islami
    clothing and the name of his commander. He  attached  photographs,  the
    originals of which he had already handed to the Secretary of State,  in
    which the Appellant claimed to be depicted.  He described his brother's
    role in the Hizb-e-Islami and even the name of his brother's commander.
    He described the clothing he used to wear and how he always had on  his
    person a carry bag that contained bullets and grenades.  He  went  into
    considerable detail about magazines  and  bullets  and  how  they  were
    fitted.  He pointed out that Kalashnikovs were usually carried by Hizb-
    e-Islami members.  The Appellant described his role in the organisation
    and other jobs that he carried out including helping with meals.

38.  The Appellant confirmed that the photographs and Afghan  identification
    card which he had provided were genuine and should be  relied  upon  as
    evidence of his membership of Hizb-e-Islami and the fact that he was an
    Afghan national.

39.  In the Appellant's second statement of  2008,  the  Appellant  repeated
    his account as reflected in the Secretary of State's  refusal  letters.
    He provided full details of his parents' names and that of his  brother
    and nephew.  He claimed his father was a member  of  Hizb-e-Islami  and
    killed by the government in 2002.  His  brother  rejoined  the  Hizb-e-
    Islami group when the Appellant was 8 or 9 years old.  His brother  was
    a group commander.  He was involved in fighting.   He  was  essentially
    based in Kunar.

40.  The Appellant explained how, when he was  13  years  old,  his  brother
    convinced him to join the Hizb-e-Islami and how over the following  two
    years he became an active member of the group and used to go  and  stay
    at Kunar for different periods of time in those  years.   He  explained
    that during that time with the group he learned how to fill rifles with
    bullets and load them onto the barrel.  He would  cook  meals  for  the
    group.  He used to sit at the petrol stations and act as a lookout  and
    when he was not needed by the group he returned home to his mother.

41.  He explained how one day, on the way back from Kunar, he went to  bring
    some groceries before  arriving  home  and  subsequently  learned  that
    "government people came to my home looking for me and asked  my  mother
    where I was".  Upon returning home the Appellant's mother told him that
    he was in danger.  She was concerned that he should leave straight away
    as these were the same people that had killed the  Appellant's  father.
    He was advised by his mother to go to his brother in Kunar where indeed
    he stayed for two months.  Gradually he was also ordered to fight.   It
    was at that time that the Appellant's brother decided  that  he  should
    leave, that he was at risk of being killed and  he  did  not  want  the
    Appellant to face the same danger that he was facing.  A maternal uncle
    was contacted who made the arrangements  with  an  agent  to  take  the
    Appellant to Pakistan by car.  The details of the Appellant's travel to
    the UK are set out in the Letter of Refusal.

42.  The Appellant's  subsequent  statements  relate,  inter  alia,  to  his
    educational achievements whilst in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  started
    school in September 2008 and completed his GCSEs in Maths, Food Studies
    and Graphic Design.  He had obtained  many  certificates.   He  was  in
    particular awarded a certificate from the Mayor  of  Croydon.   He  was
    presently at  Coulsdon  College  and  studying  a  BTEC  in  Vocational
    Studies.  He had already passed the first level with  distinction.   He
    had also completed the second year and was now in his third year.  Once
    completed, he intended to seek to undergo  a  course  with  a  view  to
    achieving a National  Diploma  in  IT.   The  Appellant  described  his
    activities with friends and his interests  and  how  he  was  currently
    living with a foster family in Upper Norwood, that being with Ms AF and
    her husband and her children.  The Appellant explained how he was  also
    taking A-level in Urdu.  He  repeated  that  he  could  not  return  to
    Afghanistan because he continued to have a fear for his  life  for  the
    reasons already given.  He insisted that he was not in touch  with  his
    family  members  in  Afghanistan  and  was  unaware  of  their  present
    whereabouts. Finally he confirmed that during the Pakistani  floods  he
    had raised money in his local mosque in Croydon.

43.  In his subsequent statements, the Appellant  took  further  issue  with
    aspects of the Secretary of State's most recent letter of refusal.   He
    pointed out that he had been in the United Kingdom  since  August  2008
    and had adapted to the lifestyle with the help of Social  Services  and
    his foster family, pointing out that without their support he would not
    have been able to start a new life in the UK or adapt  to  the  culture
    here.  He was scared to return to Afghanistan because  he  believed  he
    would end up on the streets and be an easy target "for anyone  to  take
    advantage of me".  The Appellant strongly believed that if returned  to
    his country he would "definitely be harmed and  my  life  would  be  at
    risk.  I would be targeted on my return to Afghanistan".

44.  Attached to  the  Appellant's  statement  of  12  December  2011,  were
    letters from Faryadi Zardad and from a Mr MNB who was  described  as  a
    senior  Hizb-e-Islami  operative  but  now  a  recognised  Home  Office
    interpreter.  Both gave evidence in their letters that the  Appellant's
    father was "a very senior commander" in the Hizb-e-Islami.

45.  It is right to say  that  over  a  period  of  two  hearing  days,  the
    Appellant was subjected to lengthy and close cross-examination.

46.  The Appellant explained that the age  difference  between  himself  and
    his brother was about ten years.  He was now aged 19  and  his  brother
    aged 30.  There was a  nephew  now  aged  12.   At  the  time  he  left
    Afghanistan his mother and nephew were living in Logar  Province  which
    was about 30 to 45 minutes from Kabul by car and  his  brother  was  in
    Kunar Province which was three to four hours from  Kabul  by  car.  The
    Appellant had seen none of them since he left the country and there had
    been no further contact.   He  had  made  attempts  to  establish  such
    contact through the Afghan Society and also through the Red Cross,  the
    latter about four to five months earlier.  He had contacted the  Afghan
    Society in early 2009.

47.  The Appellant explained that he was scared to make contact through  the
    Red Cross sooner because if they had visited his  area  and  found  his
    family members or spoken to them, the other people in the  village  who
    were uneducated, would have thought that his family were  working  with
    foreigners and it might have created  problems  for  them.  The  Afghan
    Society did not prove too helpful due  to  a  lack  of  facilities  but
    assured him that if they became aware of any information they would let
    him know.

48.  The Appellant produced a letter from the British  Red  Cross  dated  29
    January 2013 that confirmed that their UK offices had accepted his  Red
    Cross message and tracing enquiry for his mother,  brother  and  nephew
    which had been forwarded to the  International  Committee  of  the  Red
    Cross (ICRC).  It was pointed out that it might  be  some  time  before
    they had something to report but the  Red  Cross  would  write  to  the
    Appellant every six months about the status of his  case  and  that  as
    soon as their enquiries were completed he would be contacted.

49.  It was put to the Appellant that he could have  sought  help  from  his
    cousin in the United Kingdom to whom the Appellant had  made  reference
    in his statement of 18 July 2011 where  he  had  described  him  as  "a
    father figure". The Appellant had explained how they had met by  chance
    at a reception in December 2010 and had maintained contact ever  since.
    The Appellant had a good relationship with his cousin's  children  with
    whom he often played.

50.  The Appellant explained that although he respected him like a father:

         "... there is a difference between a real mother and a person  born
         to a real mother but as a cousin he is not my real brother so there
         cannot be the same love and affection".

51.  When asked why the Appellant had not asked his  cousin  to  help  trace
    his family, the Appellant  explained  that  his  cousin  could  not  do
    anything about his own safety and could not visit Afghanistan.  He  was
    referred to a passage from the determination of IJ Davda.   I  reminded
    the parties that I had directed that none of  her  findings  should  be
    preserved but with their co-operation and  agreement,  I  was  able  to
    isolate that part  of  the  relevant  paragraph  that  simply  recorded
    evidence as opposed to a finding.  It  was  agreed  that  this  extract
    could be referred to and it is right that I should set it out below:

         "The Appellant's  second  paternal  cousin  (Mr  BA)  in  his  oral
         evidence said he met the Appellant by  chance  at  a  Duncan  Lewis
         reception in December 2010.  He and the Appellant are both from the
         same area.  He has family in Afghanistan.  They live half an hour's
         walk from the  Appellant's  family.   His  last  contact  with  the
         Appellant's family was in 2002.  He came to the United  Kingdom  in
         2002 and has not returned to Afghanistan.   He  is  now  a  British
         citizen.  When asked to produce his passport, which  had  Pakistani
         entry stamps, only then he said he went to Pakistan this year where
         he stayed at his maternal uncle's house.  His  father,  mother  and
         sister came over from Afghanistan to meet him".

52.  It was put to the Appellant that clearly his  cousin  had  visited  his
    own family in Afghanistan whom he met  in  Pakistan,  further  that  it
    appeared that his cousin's family live only half an hour away from  the
    Appellant's home in Afghanistan.  The Appellant was asked  why  he  had
    not requested his cousin  to  make  appropriate  enquiries  as  to  his
    family's whereabouts.  The Appellant responded  that  he  had  not  so,
    because he understood that his cousin had "threats to his own  life  in
    Afghanistan but in fact I tried through the Afghan Society and the  Red
    Cross". The Appellant continued that he did not know  that  his  cousin
    was visiting Pakistan.  He had not been told of  his  cousin's  planned
    visit.

53.  The Appellant insisted that he had not  had  contact  with  his  family
    since he left Afghanistan.  His nephew would now be 12 and  his  mother
    54.  He repeated that his father had been killed.  His father had  been
    with Hizb-e-Islami:

         "... for a long time.  I do not know how  many  years  but  he  was
         promoted from a low level to a commander position".

54.  The Appellant did not know at what age his father had joined the  group
    but he had been told by  his  mother  that  his  father  was  a  senior
    commander in Hizb-e-Islami and had eventually been  killed.   He  could
    not remember the exact date because he was a young child  at  the  time
    but he remembered his father not least from photographs.   He  recalled
    his father would come to the family home from Kunar where  his  command
    was based.

55.  The Appellant disputed that the only evidence that he had a father  who
    was a commander in Hizb-e-Islami was that of his own and pointed to the
    letters from Mr Zardad and Mr MNB.  The latter had told him that whilst
    happy to provide the letter he was a busy man and could not "physically
    come himself" and Mr Zardad was in  prison  having  been  convicted  of
    serious terrorist offences for which he  had  received  a  sentence  of
    twenty years.  The Appellant had  contacted  both  of  these  gentlemen
    asking if they knew his father and his position with Hizb-e-Islami  and
    they were willing to provide the letters now produced.

56.  The Appellant continued that:

         "Mr Zardad is popular with  the  entire  Afghan  community  and  Mr
         Bashart I found  through  solicitors  because  he  writes  expert's
         reports and is a prominent figure.


         I asked them do you know this person as I have my own ID card  that
         shows the name of my father and Mr Zardad said he knows  my  father
         and my family at home."


57.  The Appellant pointed out that  his  ID  card  bore  the  name  of  his
    father.  He insisted that he retained his ID card before he joined  the
    Hizb-e-Islami.  He in fact sought to refer to his own interview  record
    to further make the point.  The Appellant had not known the exact  date
    when he approached the authorities to get his ID card  because  at  the
    time he "was illiterate and young", but he had joined the Hizb-e-Islami
    when he was 13 and had retained his ID card beforehand.

58.  When asked if the Appellant knew how his father had died, he  responded
    that his father had been abducted by the current  government  from  his
    home and killed but he did know how his father was killed.  He had  not
    previously mentioned  his  father  was  abducted  because  he  had  not
    specifically been asked that question.  He had simply been  asked  what
    had happened to his father and he had replied at interview that "he was
    taken by the current government and killed".  The  Appellant  continued
    that his father was abducted from his home when he was in the house but
    asleep.  He was taken at night.  The Appellant would have been 8  or  9
    years old at the time.

59.  In the house at the time was himself,  his  parents,  his  brother  and
    nephew (his brother's son). The house had a yard and  a  compound.   It
    was medium sized with  four  rooms  comprising,  one  bedroom  for  his
    parents and one for his brother and his wife. There was  a  guest  room
    and an all-purpose room for cooking and then the  Appellant's  bedroom.
    He described there being a shower and  toilet  in  the  corner  of  the
    compound but they were separate and basic.   It  was  a  single  storey
    house.  All the houses were attached to each  other.   The  Appellant's
    room was next to his parents' bedroom.  He had not been disturbed  when
    his father was abducted because:

         "As a child when you are sleeping you can't wake  up  or  anything.
         It is different now.  Now if I hear a small noise I wake up but  it
         was different when I was a small child".

60.  The Appellant was told of this event the  following  morning  after  he
    awoke.  His mother was crying.

61.  The Appellant explained that the Hizb-e-Islami could not  come  to  the
    area as they had no power of influence there.  They were only  powerful
    in Kunar.  The Appellant continued:

         "Two parties are enemies to each other and it is normal for them to
         abduct and kill each other's people".

62.  The Appellant described how following his father's death the  villagers
    carried out his funeral.  Generally the villagers were  scared  of  the
    government.  The funeral had  taken  place  in  Logar.   The  Appellant
    explained:

         "The tradition is in our village when someone dies,  they  announce
         it on the loudspeaker from the mosque  and  then  people  hear  the
         announcement and they come to the funeral".

63.  It  was  noted  that  Mr  MNB  in  his  letter,  had  stated  that  the
    Appellant's father was a prominent active commander  and  that  Mr  MNB
    worked as a high-ranking media operator.  It was put to  the  Appellant
    that given that his father held such high office as to why  there  were
    no announcements about his death  in  the  newspapers.   The  Appellant
    responded if it had been published he would not have known about it  as
    he was illiterate and young at the time.  He had  however  searched  on
    the internet and found nothing.

64.  MNB had given him the letter now produced and told  him  "I  am  giving
    you this letter to prove what you asked me and if they have any further
    questions they can write me a letter".  The  Appellant  explained  that
    when he was first refused by the Home Office he did not know  MNB,  but
    that at that particular appeal hearing it was accepted that  he  was  a
    member of Hizb-e-Islami although no finding was made about his  father.
    Subsequently he made these enquiries and was able to contact Mr  Zardad
    and Mr MNB.

65.  The Appellant continued:

         "My father was a big commander of Hizb-e-Islami but everyone  knows
         the biggest commander  is  Gulbodin  Heykmatyar  -  but  the  lower
         commanders were under my father's hand and he  was  getting  orders
         from the top commanders.


         I am telling you that for the last four years my father was  a  big
         commander in Hizb-e-Islami and I provided you with proof from these
         two people.  Please accept what I am saying to you.  What  else  do
         you want?"

66.  At the resumed hearing on 4 June  2013,  the  Appellant  continued  his
    lengthy cross-examination, more particularly following  the  production
    of a further copy of his ID card  with  a  certified  translation.   In
    summary, the Appellant was challenged on his claim that he had obtained
    the card before joining Hizb-e-Islami, Ms Isherwood relied on the  date
    shown on the card, that she maintained  did  not  correspond  with  the
    Appellant's account.

67.  The Appellant was subject to further detailed  questioning  as  to  the
    circumstances under which he joined Hizb-e-Islami in which he  repeated
    that following his brother joining the organisation, his brother  would
    return to the family home every so many  months.   When  the  Appellant
    finally joined Hizb-e-Islami he would  see  his  brother  on  occasions
    because he was also based in Kunar. The Appellant's mother  had  looked
    after him whilst his brother was  with  Hizb-e-Islami.   His  brother's
    son, the Appellant's nephew, was 6 years old at the time.

68.  The Appellant insisted his brother  was  a  commander  but  essentially
    carried out the orders of his senior  officers.   It  was  put  to  the
    Appellant that if his brother could hide in Kunar  why  could  not  the
    Appellant rather than flee the country.  The Appellant responded:

         "At that time there was a lot of killing and we had seen a  lot  of
         dead bodies and so my brother advised me to leave the country as it
         wasn't safe for me.  He said 'don't worry about me but I just  want
         you to be safe'".

69.  In re-examination and with the agreement of the parties, the  Appellant
    was asked to draw a sketch design of his house and where members of the
    family slept. He was given a pen and paper for this purpose and I noted
    that without the slightest hesitation and with considerable  animation,
    the Appellant began to confidently sketch the house  providing  details
    of and identifying the whereabouts of all the various rooms and to whom
    they belonged including even where the windows  were  located.   Having
    presented the sketch he was subject to a series of searching  questions
    to which he responded in some detail, that included  the  thickness  of
    the walls, their composition, why they were made with a mixture of  mud
    and straw and so on.  He explained that because the walls were some two
    foot thick "to protect the house from the winds in the winter" he would
    not be able to hear his parents talking in  their  bedroom  next  door.
    The Appellant explained that he was a very heavy sleeper.  Even at  the
    present time, once asleep, only his alarm would wake him up  to  ensure
    he got to college on time.

70.  The Appellant proceeded to give detailed evidence  in  support  of  his
    Article 8 claim, again the subject of lengthy cross-examination. In the
    course of this evidence, he explained that AF, with whom he lived,  was
    like a mother to him and her husband like a father. He  regarded  their
    children as if they were his real siblings.   He  was  treated  like  a
    normal member of the immediate family.  He continued:

         "I call (AF) auntie.  I have been living in the  same  house  since
         2009.  I was 16 at the time and I am now 20.   I  call  her  auntie
         because we are very sweet with each other.  That I talk in  English
         shows how much she has helped me with English and  English  customs
         and culture and she helps me with my course work.   I  call  (AF's)
         husband (RF).


         They have all treated me as if I was never fostered.  They treat me
         like I am their own son.  I look upon the children as if they  were
         my brothers and sisters.


         I can see a bright  future  for  myself.   Four  universities  have
         already offered me places subject to passing  my  final  exams  and
         regularising my immigration status.  They are Brighton,  Middlesex,
         Greenwich  and  Metropolitan.   I  wish  to  undergo  a  course  of
         computing/networking which is a three  year  course  leading  to  a
         BSc(Hons) degree.


         Even if I am hopefully granted immigration status and attend one of
         these universities I shall continue to  live  with  auntie  and  my
         family and will commute to college.  Auntie helps me with  English.
         They are all my family and I am very happy with them."


71.  The Appellant repeated that he had had no contact with his  mother  and
    brother.  When he left Afghanistan his mother  was  in  Logar  Province
    still in their village and his brother was in Kunar  with  the  Hizb-e-
    Islami which was some three to four hours away by car.

72.  In conclusion when asked the effect upon him if  he  was  removed  from
    this country and from AF and her family, he responded:

         "It would be horrendous and in Pakistan  Afghanistan  people  would
         take advantage of me.  I would be no one.  I would be living on the
         streets and if I got back they are not going to leave me  alone  as
         they know I work for Hizb-e-Islami.


         I have already been separated from my own mum and if I am now to be
         separated from AF and family it will break my heart.  God has given
         me someone who looks after me and given me the love that I used  to
         have from my own parents so please I beg you  do  not  separate  me
         from them".

73.  The Appellant continued that his removal would have  a  bad  effect  on
    AF's children, not least their eldest daughter. AF's  father  regularly
    came to the home and he called him "Grandad".  He kept him company  and
    made him tea and made his dinner and did whatever "Grandad"  needed  to
    make him happy.

74.  When cross-examined, the Appellant clarified that  he  initially  lived
    with another foster parent for six to seven months.  He was then  moved
    into the care of AF and her family.  There came a point when the  local
    authority stated they could no longer pay for AF's  fostering  services
    and he was temporarily moved from the home to a shared house with other
    boys.  The Appellant explained:

         "I was only there for two weeks but missed (AF) and the family  and
         I could not study or do anything because these  boys  were  smoking
         and drinking and shouting.  I did not sleep and then (AF)  told  me
         she wanted me back.  There would be no charge.  She would not  take
         any money from the council.  That was in the middle of 2011."



Evidence of AF

75.  Mrs AF began by adopting her statements of 21 August 2011 and  13  July
    2012, in which she stressed that the Appellant had been "an honest  and
    reliable person and he has always been very respectful to my  immediate
    and extended family members.   (JA's)  personality  is  very  calm  and
    pleasant.  I have never known him to raise his voice or have  an  angry
    tendency".  Ms AF fully supported JA's application for asylum as he was
    "a good citizen who will be hardworking, law abiding, a  positive  role
    model and a pillar of the community".  The Appellant had come to her as
    a minor and she had been looking after him ever since.  He had a  close
    relationship with the family and had many  friends  amongst  the  local
    boys.  He was well settled in the United Kingdom  and  in  her  opinion
    would not survive in Afghanistan.  She was no longer a paid carer:

         "... but I love him and hence I have kept him in my house.  I  have
         three young children and he looks after them for me when I go  out.
         He teaches them to read and write  and  often  collects  them  from
         school and takes them to the  park.   He  is  providing  invaluable
         support for me and my family".

76.  In her oral evidence, Ms AF explained that  when  the  Appellant  first
    moved into her home in 2009 she only had one child, a daughter, but had
    since had twins in 2010.  She also  had  an  elderly  father  whom  the
    Appellant was very caring towards.  Ms AF stressed that  the  Appellant
    was regarded as a member of the family.  She  explained  that  she  had
    three children and "one more child is not much more to feed and it is a
    pleasure".

77.  Ms AF was a full-time social worker but often  worked  from  home.  Her
    husband was a delivery driver who worked evenings  and  therefore  they
    alternated with child care. The Appellant was not responsible for  this
    child care and so those arrangements would  not  be  disrupted  by  his
    going back to Afghanistan but she stressed that  he  was  part  of  her
    family.  Her eldest daughter had always seen him as a big brother.   Ms
    AF had a large extended family of nine  brothers  and  sisters  and  an
    elderly father, "I have got a large family and we feel that (JA)  is  a
    part of this".  She continued:

         "If he has  to  go  back  and  live  in  Kabul  there  is  so  much
         uncertainty within the country; media would state that the  country
         is fine to go back to.  However, I feel that if he was to  go  back
         his life would be at risk".

78.  When asked what it would  mean  to  her  and  for  her  family  if  the
    Appellant was removed Ms AF replied:

         "It would be as though I have lost a son.  It would be like a death
         in the family because he is part  of  us.   We  have  accepted  him
         forever.


         It would be devastating and I think he could have a breakdown and I
         do think (though I have got no proof) that he could take his  life,
         it would be that much of a worry to him.


         Last year we lost our mum and she suffered greatly at the  loss  of
         her grandmother and in the event of (JA) no longer being with us it
         would be seen as another death in the family.


         If he was granted asylum, I would categorically state that he would
         be a law abiding citizen and would continue his education to become
         a professional and to work hard and to earn an honest living and he
         has integrated well into British society.  There would be no issues
         with  offending  behaviour.   He  would  remain  positive  and  the
         stability of his religion would maintain his dignity and values."

79.  Ms AF explained that she had been a qualified full-time  social  worker
    for fifteen years.  She had been employed  by  the  National  Fostering
    Agency for the last  ten  years  and  prior  to  that  had  worked  for
    Barnado's for seven and a half years and before that she  was  a  Youth
    and Community Worker for five years.

80.  When cross-examined she explained that when she first came  across  the
    Appellant he could  not  speak  any  English  and  the  family  had  to
    communicate with him as best they could.  "No way could he be described
    then as a well-educated person fluent in English".

81.  She recalled that the Appellant had one cousin that she  had  met  whom
    the Appellant saw on a  regular  basis.   That  cousin  was  not  in  a
    position to have the Appellant live with him.

82.  When asked if she had spoken to the Appellant  about  family  relatives
    in Afghanistan, she responded:

         "It is painful when he speaks about family members  and  I  do  not
         encourage it and I know a lot of his family are deceased".

83.  Ms AF was not aware that the Appellant's cousin had  visited  Pakistan.
    It was not her role to discuss with the Appellant the  tracing  of  his
    family members in Pakistan.  She added however:

         "During meetings with his  social  worker  at  which  I  have  been
         present, that question has come up and there is a lot of fear  with
         young boys from Afghanistan using organisations like the Red Cross.
          All of my three boys in placement did not want to use that service
         due to fear of their lives.  They see it as  something  that  would
         come back on themselves.  (JA) has said to me that he does not know
         the whereabouts of his family members".

84.  It was put to the witness that it followed that from 2009 to  2013  her
    evidence was that the Appellant had done nothing to  trace  his  family
    members to which Ms AF replied that his family were  dead  or  missing,
    that is what she had been told by the Appellant and "I do not  want  to
    go there with him and I do not want to stress him".

85.  Ms AF explained that when the subject matter of  his  immediate  family
    was brought up that the Appellant started to  cry  and  get  upset  and
    emotional.  She continued:
         "It is a very distressing period for him and I say  to  him  'let's
         see what happens in the future'.  I have left  it  because  I  just
         want to work toward his future and give him hope."

86.  Ms AF explained that she sought no rent or payment from the  Appellant.
     He was treated just like any other family  member  in  the  household.
    She stressed that she regarded the Appellant "as my own son and I  hope
    my son grows  up  just  like  him".   Ms  AF  had  not  considered  the
    alternative for the Appellant but if he was allowed to  stay  then  she
    intended to continue to support him. If he subsequently decided to  get
    a place of his own such as an offer of  accommodation  with  the  local
    authority, she would help him with furniture and cost but otherwise she
    was more than happy that he should continue to stay with  her  and  her
    family.  She repeated that the Appellant would "always be regarded  and
    treated as an extended member of my family".

Evidence of MT

87.  Ms MT adopted her statements of 5 January and 8 June 2011 and  18  June
    2012 but she stressed that the Appellant had moved on in the last  nine
    months and there was more to report on him.  She referred to her letter
    of 5 January 2011  confirming  that  she  had  taught  English  to  the
    Appellant at Coulsdon Sixth  Form  College.   His  first  language  was
    Pashtun.  She had been teaching him since September  2009  and  meeting
    him once a week for between an hour and an hour and a half.  He  was  a
    very good  student,  extremely  polite  and  respectful,  diligent  and
    cheerful.  He had a 100% attendance record and engaged fully  in  every
    session and was very serious about his studies.  His study  skills  had
    developed well over the last few years.   He  listened  and  read  very
    carefully and this resulted in him having good powers of comprehension.
    He worked hard in developing his writing skills in order to improve his
    course work and assignments.

88.  Ms MT stressed that  speaking  English  was  the  Appellant's  greatest
    strength since he was a "natural communicator".  He had  focussed  well
    on improving his pronunciation and conversational flow in  English  and
    had focussed on expanding his regular vocabulary.  Ms MT  regarded  him
    as "a great asset in a group of students and brings value  to  teaching
    sessions.  He is  extremely  friendly  and  supportive  of  his  fellow
    students and I believe that he has acted as  a  peer  group  member  of
    college.  He is popular and engaging and is highly principled".

89.  Ms MT  was  sure  that  the  Appellant  would  make  the  best  of  any
    educational opportunities that were offered to  him.   He  had  already
    successfully combined the responsibilities of a part-time job with  his
    studies and had shown a very mature attitude towards his future.

90.  Apart from the Appellant's educational achievements, Ms MT  wished  him
    well in the future and hoped he would  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom which was now his home.  She pointed out that:

         "The stress he has experienced over  the  last  six  months  during
         which his residency status had been in question has been  extremely
         hard for him to  bear  and  he  has  shown  exemplary  strength  of
         character in enduring the strain and not allowing it  to  undermine
         his spirit or his efforts to work and study".

91.  Ms MT said that in the last three years the Appellant had been  a  very
    active member of the British Afghan Association in Croydon where he had
    been a mentor of other Afghan men towards their  integration.   He  had
    been happy to absorb himself in his Afghan traditions and he was a very
    good Afghani dancer.

92.  Ms MT was aware the Appellant received  an  award  from  the  Mayor  of
    Croydon for his service - a combination of being a good student, a good
    citizen and a good representative of the Afghan community.  However she
    had not seen the Appellant since September  2012  on  a  regular  basis
    because of his timetable and hers which did not make  it  possible  but
    the Appellant came to see her every week at  the  college  just  for  a
    chat.  He was having two or three lessons in Functional Skills  English
    so that he could attain Level 2 AQA which  was  necessary  for  him  to
    apply for a university place.  She was aware that he had  already  been
    provided with offers of places in a number of universities.

Documentary Evidence

93.  There are spread between the  Tribunal  bundle  and  the  bundles  most
    helpfully prepared by the Appellant's  solicitors  in  support  of  his
    appeal, a large volume  of  documents  that  include  certificates  and
    character references which, apart from anything else,  demonstrate  the
    educational progress that the Appellant has made and  his  contribution
    to the local community.  None  of  those  documents  were  called  into
    question by the Respondent.

94.  In terms of additional evidence that the Appellant has put  forward  in
    support of his claims as to his father and  brother's  activities  with
    Hizb-e-Islami, there are the following:

Statement of BA


95.  This is an unsigned, undated statement but one that was  clearly  given
    in support of the Appellant's appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  I
    am aware that Mr BA, who  is  the  Appellant's  cousin  and  a  British
    citizen, also gave oral evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    witness statement confirms that he and the Appellant are second cousins
    and confirms the Appellant's account that they met by coincidence at  a
    Duncan Lewis reception  in  December  2010.   BA  explains  he  had  an
    appointment on the same day as the Appellant as he had to  collect  his
    son's  passport.   The  Appellant  recognised  him  and  they   quickly
    established as to how they were related.


96.  Mr BA confirmed that he left Afghanistan in 2002 and  came  to  the  UK
    because his brother used to work for  Hizb-e-Islami.   He  pointed  out
    that his brother was working very closely with the  Appellant's  father
    as they both worked for the Hizb-e-Islami.


97.  Mr BA's statement proceeds to name JA's father whom he describes as  "a
    well-known commander in Logar Province, Mohammed Agha  District".   The
    statement continues:


         "(JA's) father always had eight to ten bodyguards with him  and  he
         had many men under his command.  I confirm that I am aware of  this
         because we are relatives in the same area  and  (JA's)  father  was
         known in surrounding villages by everyone as he had  been  involved
         in many fighting against Jamiat-e-Islami who is the  leading  party
         in the present Government.


         I can confirm the above as a result of his father's activities many
         members of Jamiat-e-Islami had suffered and the family  members  of
         those who had suffered or the people who are still alive must be in
         power with the  Government.   As  a  result  (JA)  would  encounter
         problems if returned back to Afghanistan as they would want to seek
         revenge from the family members.


         I can confirm that (JA's) life would be in danger if returned  back
         to Afghanistan.


         I can confirm that anyone who is  against  the  Government  whether
         they are low level or not they will always remain  enemies  of  the
         Government and on return they will be viewed as enemies and will be
         killed.


         Since I have been aware of (JA's) presence in the UK, we meet every
         once a week or sometimes once in two weeks.  I always invite him to
         my house for my dinner.  I have  six  children  and  (JA)  is  very
         friendly and lovable with them all.  We consider (JA) as  a  family
         member and my family will be very sad to see him go."

98.  It is right to point out that BA's evidence and I  J  Davda's  findings
    in respect of it, appear in her determination, that was of  course  set
    aside for error of law and with none of her findings preserved. I  have
    therefore considered Mr BA's statement afresh as part of my credibility
    assessment as to the truth of the Appellant's accounts and  claims  and
    of course have taken into account that though Mr BA was not present  to
    give evidence in support of the Appellant before me, he did  provide  a
    statement before the First-tier Tribunal and had given oral evidence in
    support of the Appellant on that occasion.


Letter of Zardad Faryadi with Certified Translation dated 13 December 2011


99.  Before setting out the contents of the letter, it would be as  well  if
    I refer to a BBC News on-line article that I received from Ms  Heybroek
    that describes Mr Zardad as an Afghan warlord found guilty  of  torture
    and hostage taking in his home country for which he  was  sentenced  to
    twenty years' imprisonment.  His conviction was described as a landmark
    case at the Old Bailey and was  thought  to  be  the  first  time  that
    torture offences committed in one country were prosecuted  in  another.
    The judge  recommended  that  Zardad  be  deported  after  serving  his
    sentence. It appears that the evidence was  that  Zardad  controlled  a
    series of military checkpoints between Kabul and Jalalabad and was  "in
    a position of real  power".   It  was  found  that  he  was  personally
    involved in acts of torture and hostage taking as well  as  authorising
    his men. It was reported that one of the key legal  challenges  of  the
    case had  been  to  show  that  although  Zardad  did  not  necessarily
    administer torture himself he was still responsible through the men  he
    controlled at his checkpoints. An Old  Bailey  jury  found  him  guilty
    after a lengthy  retrial,  of  numerous  instances  of  hostage  taking
    between 1992 and 1996.


100. The translated version of Mr Zardad's letter reads as follows:


         "Dear Solicitor,


         I know (JA's) father (HMA) very well.  I am from Logar Province and
         (HMA) is the resident of Logar Province Mohammad Agha  District  as
         well and he is the commander Hizb-e-Islami.  (HMA)  from  my  tribe
         and when there were fighting between Hizb-e-Islami and  Ahmad  Shah
         Masood, (JA's) father also fought against  the  Northern  Alliance.
         At present I am in jail but I have heard from the people  that  the
         whole power of Kabul is with Northern Alliances now.  It's bad luck
         of our people that they are taking revenge of  each  other.   Allah
         may give relief from these bad habits to our people and I wish they
         all lived together in one country.  These were my information  that
         I wrote.  I am ill please do not bother me again.


         With regards.


         Zardad Faryadi."


Letter from MNB dated 28 November 2011

101. The letter displays MNB's address and then states as follows:

         "To whom it may concern


         This is to certify that (HMA) resident of Mohammad Agha District in
         Logar  Province  of  Afghanistan  was  one  of  the  prominent  and
         outstandingly active commanders of Hizb-e-Islami, Afghanistan.   He
         was well-known and famous for his active role in the field  and  as
         well his loyal association with his party.  I would like to mention
         that I used to work  for  Hizb-e-Islami  as  a  high-ranking  media
         operator during the period of 1985-1997.


         Yours faithfully".





Expert Report of Peter Marsden, MBE dated 2 December 2008

102. This report is  some  five  years  old  but  I  am  told  that  it  was
    commissioned by those representing the  Appellant  in  support  of  his
    earlier appeal.  Mr  Marsden's  qualifications  are  set  out  in  some
    considerable detail in the first two  pages  of  his  report.   He  has
    worked full-time as Information Co-ordinator for the  British  Agencies
    Afghanistan Group and has also been a Research and Information  Advisor
    to the British Agencies Afghanistan Group.  He formerly managed a  team
    of three staff to support the British aid effort  in  Afghanistan.   He
    has also produced articles in a monthly review giving  an  analysis  of
    political, economic,  humanitarian,  cultural  environment  details  on
    Afghanistan.  He has written extensively  on  Afghanistan  including  a
    book published in 1998 entitled "The Taliban War Religion and  the  New
    Order in Afghanistan".  He is also the author of numerous studies, book
    chapters, papers and articles on all aspects of the  situation.   I  am
    therefore satisfied that Mr Marsden is  well-qualified  to  comment  on
    country conditions in Afghanistan, but, as I say and stress, the report
    before me is some five years old.  Nonetheless, I would agree  with  Ms
    Heybroek who submitted that the report still contained useful and  more
    specific information in relation to the risks that the Appellant  might
    be  subjected  to  on  return  to   Afghanistan   in   his   particular
    circumstances.

Photographs

103. It was accepted by Ms Isherwood that the Appellant did  in  the  course
    of his interviews with the  Respondent,  hand  over  the  originals  of
    photographs that he claimed depicted him with fellow members of Hizb-e-
    Islami.  Ms Isherwood told me that regrettably she could not locate the
    originals from her file.  I must therefore rely solely upon the  copies
    of those photographs that are before me.

104. I note in that regard that reference is made to the  original  "colour"
    photographs produced by the Appellant within the Secretary  of  State's
    letter of refusal of 15 October 2008.  It was noted that the  Appellant
    claimed that it showed him and other people from Hizb-e-Islami and that
    two of those photographs depicted his brother.  It was noted  that  the
    photographs were not dated, although the Appellant  claimed  they  were
    taken some time in 2006.  The Appellant claimed that those  photographs
    were taken with his consent but it was considered that there was no way
    of identifying any of the people in the pictures nor was there any  way
    of identifying in which country they were taken. I  consider  that  all
    those observations were perfectly valid and proper.

105. The Appellant in evidence claimed that  he  was  depicted  in  each  of
    those photographs. He was invited to  circle  on  each  picture  as  to
    exactly where he was depicted.  However some of the pictures are  taken
    at a distance and it is very difficult to be sure in relation  to  them
    if they are in fact pictures of  the  Appellant.   I  am  certainly  no
    expert in matters of identification of this nature and I feel  that  it
    would not in the circumstances be appropriate for me to express a  view
    as to whether those photographs depict the  Appellant  as  claimed.   I
    have concluded that in such circumstances the photographs do not assist
    me and I have therefore placed no reliance upon them.

106. It has not been suggested by the Secretary of State  that  the  letters
    from Zardad and Mr MNB in support of the  Appellant's  appeal  are  not
    genuine but I was invited by Ms Isherwood to place little reliance upon
    them.

The Appellant's ID Card with Translation

107. This is  of  course  an  important  document  that  the  Appellant  has
    produced to reject the contention of the Respondent that the  Appellant
    is not as claimed an Afghan national.  For  reasons  to  which  I  will
    refer later, I am satisfied that the Appellant is as claimed an  Afghan
    national and as such I find that the ID card  to  be  a  document  upon
    which I can rely.

108. In so doing, I am mindful of the guidance within the  starred  decision
    of the Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed* [2002] UKIAT 00439 as to the approach
    the decision maker should take to the  reliability  of  documents.   It
    would be an error for that decision not to be followed  and  considered
    all those very many cases, indeed the very considerable majority, where
    the issue is  not  whether  the  document  in  question  is  forged  or
    authentic but whether it is  reliable  or  not.   This  distinction  is
    vital.  The document produced might be on the right  paper,  even  with
    the right stamp or a signature but might be unreliable because  of  the
    way in which it was, for example procured.

Legal Framework

109. In terms of the Appellant's asylum and human rights (Articles 2  and  3
    ECHR) appeals, the burden of proof is upon the Appellant to a  standard
    defined as a reasonable degree of likelihood.  The question is answered
    by looking at the evidence in the round and assessed at the time of the
    hearing of the appeal.  It follows that in considering the  Appellant's
    particular circumstances, I have to consider to the requisite  standard
    of  proof,  whether  on  return  to  Afghanistan,  the  Appellant   has
    established a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and whether on return  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that he would face a real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm
    within the meaning of 339C of the Immigration Rules and  whether  there
    are substantial grounds for believing  that  on  return  the  Appellant
    would face a real risk to his life (Article  2)  or  being  exposed  to
    treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

110. In reaching my conclusions as to whether the Appellant will be at  real
    risk on return, I am further mindful of  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    339K of the Immigration Rules that deals  with  the  approach  to  past
    persecution and paragraph 339O relating to internal relocation.

111. The standard of proof in determining the likelihood of a  risk  to  the
    Appellant's protected rights under Articles 2 and 3  is  the  same  low
    standard as it is for persecution for a Convention reason.






The Determination of Immigration Judge Wyman promulgated 29 January 2009

112. It is a feature of the appeal history of  this  particular  case,  that
    whilst the subsequent determination of IJ Davda has been set aside  for
    error of law, the earlier determination of Immigration Judge  Wyman  of
    2009 continues to stand.

113. It was common ground between myself and the parties' that the  findings
    of IJ Wyman in his determination must form the  starting  point  of  my
    consideration of the present appeal.  I do so mindful of  the  guidance
    within the starred decision of the Tribunal in Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT
    00702.  The most relevant points of that guidance were for the  present
    purposes as follows:

         "(1) The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
             starting point ...


         (6)  If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on facts
             that are not materially different from those put to the  first
             Adjudicator and proposes to support the claim by  what  is  in
             essence the same evidence as that available to  the  Appellant
             at that time, the second Adjudicator should regard the  issues
             as settled by the first Adjudicator's determination  and  make
             his findings in  line  with  that  determination  rather  than
             allowing the matter to be re-litigated ...".

114. The Tribunal in Mubu and Others (Immigration Appeals  -  Res  Judicata)
    Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00398 (IAC) has held inter alia as follows:

         "The guidelines set out in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702;  are
         always to be applied to the determination of a factual  issue,  the
         dispute as to which  has  already  been  the  subject  of  judicial
         determination in an appeal against an earlier immigration  decision
         involving the same parties.  This is so whether the finding in  the
         earlier determination was in favour, or against  the  Secretary  of
         State".

Assessment

The Appellant's Nationality

115. I have had absolutely no difficulty in concluding  that  the  Appellant
    is an Afghan national from the village of Zaidabad in Logar Province as
    he has throughout claimed.

116. Indeed  and  with  great  respect  to  Ms  Isherwood,  I  was  somewhat
    surprised to find that at the outset of the hearing on 4  January  2013
    in the course of her further cross-examination of  the  Appellant  over
    his identity card, she clearly began  to  take  great  issue  with  his
    claimed nationality and in her closing submissions invited me  to  find
    that the ID document upon which he relied, was not  reliable  and  that
    the Appellant was not from Afghanistan.

117. I say this because as I earlier recorded at the outset of  the  hearing
    before me on 17 April 2013, Ms Isherwood told me that although she  did
    not have permission to concede on the  Secretary  of  State's  original
    stance that the Appellant was not a citizen of  Afghanistan  she  could
    however tell me that her submissions were "going to be  very  brief  on
    the point".

118. It is right to say to say that in the  Secretary  of  State's  original
    Letter of Refusal dated 15 October 2008, the Appellant' claim to be  an
    Afghan national was rejected and indeed  on  that  basis  it  was  also
    rejected that he was ever a member of Hizb-e-Islami  and  that  he  had
    ever been of interest to the Afghan authorities and that  he  had  fled
    Afghanistan for Pakistan to evade the Afghan authorities.

119. However, even in that letter, it was recognised that the Appellant  was
    able to state the basic aims of Hizb-e-Islami and correctly name  their
    leader. Further that he correctly stated the colours of the Afghan flag
    and six provinces in Afghanistan.

120. A reading of the  Letter  of  Refusal  14  December  2010  as  a  whole
    demonstrates that the Secretary of  State's  reasoning  was  no  longer
    predicated on a dispute as to the Appellant's true nationality  at  its
    core,  but on the premise that the Appellant had failed  to  provide  a
    credible consistent and accurate account of the events he  claimed  had
    led him to depart from Afghanistan and that it was for  those  reasons,
    that he was not at risk in Afghanistan from the Afghan authorities.

121. More particularly and as recognised  by  the  parties  and  mindful  of
    Devaseelan principles, it was clear that at paragraph 49 of IJ  Wyman's
    determination, he accepted that the Appellant was  an  Afghan  national
    from Logar Province indeed he had this to say:

         "49. Taking all these matters into account, namely the  Appellant's
             Afghan identity card, his evidence from his statement and  the
             comments of Dr Marsden, I find that the Appellant is an Afghan
             national.  I accept that he comes from  the  village  of  Zaid
             Abad in Logar Province".

122. That finding as the parties have  recognised,  must  form  my  starting
    point in terms of my consideration as to the true  nationality  of  the
    Appellant. Indeed it is only if fresh evidence is produced  to  suggest
    to the contrary that I can properly revisit this issue.  No such  fresh
    evidence has been produced.  The ID card now before me, was  considered
    with care and examined by IJ Wyman together  with  the  other  relevant
    evidence to which he  referred  upon  which  he  reached  his  positive
    conclusion on the issue of the Appellant's nationality.

123. I nonetheless allowed Ms Isherwood to pursue her  cross-examination  of
    the Appellant in relation to the ID  card,  mindful  that  a  certified
    translation of the card had  not  been  before  IJ  Wyman.  It  was  Ms
    Isherwood's submission that when looking at  other  references  to  the
    name of the Appellant's father, there appeared to be two full names and
    a surname.  Only the names (M A) appeared on the Appellant's  ID  card.
    Further it was dated 2007, when according to the Appellant in  2007  he
    was working for Hizb-e-Islami whilst maintaining that he  had  obtained
    the ID card in 2007 with no problems.  She maintained that this  simply
    could not have happened if as he claimed in 2007, he was fighting  with
    the Hizb-e-Islami.  At a previous hearing, the Appellant gave  evidence
    that he obtained the ID card before he joined the Hizb-e-Islami but  Ms
    Isherwood submitted he could not possibly have  obtained  it  in  these
    circumstances, as the card showed it was issued in 2007.

124. I am not persuaded by this contention.  It is apparent to  me  that  it
    has always been the Appellant's evidence that he was aged  13  when  he
    joined Hizb-e-Islami.  His ID card was issued in March  2007.  At  that
    time, the Appellant was aged 13 in that  his  birthday  was  not  until
    April 2007.  I find therefore that there was no  contradiction  in  his
    claiming that he joined Hizb-e-Islami when he was aged 13 but  obtained
    the ID card in March 2007 before he joined.  I am also mindful that the
    Appellant in evidence could not recall exactly when in  the  course  of
    his 13th year he joined Hizb-i-Islami but he was  consistent  that  the
    card was obtained beforehand.  He was not 14 when he got the card.

125. My finding in this regard has been further reinforced by the  confident
    manner in which the  Appellant  gave  evidence  before  me  as  to  the
    situation of his village, its distance from Kunar and  from  Kabul  and
    more particularly the manner in which when  asked  he  immediately  set
    about drawing a diagram of his house and its relation to  other  houses
    within the compound where he lived.  The drawing of the sketch plan and
    the oral evidence that he gave in support of it was could but only have
    been given by someone who in that regard was telling  the  truth  about
    who he was and where he  lived.   I  was  particularly  struck  by  the
    comfortable and confident manner of his evidence  in  this  regard  and
    indeed in response to a request that took him by surprise, in terms  of
    drawing a sketch plan of his home, that could but  only  be  consistent
    with a witness of truth.

126. This can no better be exemplified than  by  my  setting  out  below  my
    record of the evidence he gave on this matter;

         "The house was built around the yard.  I left in 2008.  I was 15.


         The house was in a yard surrounded by four mud walls -  a  sort  of
         compound.  Our house was in a terrace of three houses.  It was  the
         middle one.  Our village is Zahidabad.  There are lots of  families
         living there it's a big village with a population of between  1,000
         and 1,500 people.


         The nearest town is called Poli-Kandari -  20  minutes  walk  away.
         The nearest city is Kabul about 35 to 40 minutes by car.

         Q.   How many doors to your room.


         A.   Only one door.  There is at the right hand corner of each room
             a door.


         The night my father was taken I was sleeping in the middle room.  I
         was next door to my parents' room.


         The walls are made of mud.  It is a poor village but they are  made
         very thick.  In winter there is lots of snow and wind  and  so  the
         houses have to be strongly built.

         Each wall is about to 1 to 1 foot thick.

         The walls around the yard are even stronger - much thicker about 2
         foot thick to protect the compound from the winds.

         Mud and straw is  mixed  together  for  solidity.   It  is  largely
         brought down from the surrounding mountains.

         As to the windows (here he indicates  his  sketch  plan)  with  the
         exception of two of them they look out on to  the  compound.   They
         are all small windows set in wooden frames.

         Pashtun, my language is also spoken in Pakistan and some in India".



127. Taking all above matters into  account  cumulatively  and  mindful  not
    least of the lower standard of proof,  I  have  had  no  difficulty  in
    concluding that the Appellant is whom he claims and is  a  national  of
    Afghanistan.

IJ Wyman's Determination

128. I have already referred to his unequivocal finding that  the  Appellant
    was an Afghan national.  But it is apparent to me that over  paragraphs
    52 to 54 of the  Judge's  determination,  he  also  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had low-level involvement with Hizb-e-Islami:

         "50. The next key issue is whether or not the Appellant was  a  low
             level member of Hizb-e-Islami.  The Appellant's  evidence  was
             that his father was a commander in the Hizb-e-Islami and  died
             when he was approximately 8 or  9  years  old.   He  has  also
             stated his brother (SA) is heavily involved with Hizb-e-Islami
             and  has  been  an  active  member  since  his   father   died
             approximately eight years ago.


         51.  There appears to be some contradictory information as  to  who
             is recruited to Hizb-e-Islami.  The COIR  Report  stated  that
             many of  the  recruits  to  Hizb-e-Islami  are  well-educated;
             however, other documents such as  the  report  of  Dr  Marsden
             state  the  Hizb-e-Islami  recruits  are  often  from   family
             members.


         52.  I accept the Appellant's evidence that it was his brother  who
             recruited him into the Hizb-e-Islami.  In  such  a  rural  and
             underdeveloped society such as  Afghanistan,  it  is  easy  to
             understand that family links will be important  in  recruiting
             members to these organisations.   This  is  confirmed  in  the
             report of Dr Marsden who stated that it  was  common  practice
             for various mujahideen and militia groups  in  Afghanistan  to
             use the services of boys aged around 12-14 to play  a  support
             role in relation to their operation.


         53.   The  Appellant  explained   in   his   interview   that   his
             responsibilities  included  cooking  food,  guard  duties  and
             putting bullets into rifles.  The Appellant has  never  stated
             he was involved as a fighter for Hizb-e-Islami.  The Appellant
             also stated that after approximately five days, he would  then
             return to his mother's house.


         54.  I accept that the Appellant did have low  level  with  Hizb-e-
             Islami from the age of approximately 13 for a  period  of  two
             years".

129. I also see that  at  paragraph  56,  IJ  Wyman  found  the  Appellant's
    evidence as to the circumstances that caused  him  to  go  into  hiding
    "rather vague and confusing".  He did not  accept  it.   He  could  not
    accept the Appellant's evidence that his brother was so  concerned  for
    his safety that he arranged for his maternal uncle to get  him  out  of
    Afghanistan and send him to England.  IJ Wyman observed  the  Appellant
    had not explained why his brother felt that his  life  was  worth  more
    than his own.  I also note that the IJ did not find the photographs the
    Appellant produced, added anything to the claim and of course that is a
    finding that corresponds with my own (see above).

130. It is apparent that IJ Wyman did not accept that  the  Appellant  could
    not return to his village this was essentially on the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had stated that it was his brother who had been  involved  in
    Hizb-e-Islami and had been living in the  mountains  for  the  previous
    seven to eight years  since  the  death  of  their  father.   IJ  Wyman
    concluded that his brother therefore would be  able  to  speak  to  the
    other Hizb-e-Islami members and explain that he was  he  who  sent  his
    brother to England if in fact that information was not already known.

131. With all due respect to the Learned Judge, what in  such  circumstances
    is surprising, is that  he  felt  the  need  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant  could  safely  relocate  elsewhere  in  Afghanistan   having
    concluded that he had failed to establish a well-founded of persecution
    in his  home  town.   Nonetheless  the  Judge  did  consider  that  the
    Appellant would be safe from the government authorities if he  returned
    to an area outside his home province and found that the Appellant could
    not be relocated to a rural area outside  of  his  province.   In  that
    regard he relied on the country guidance decision in RQ [2008] CG UKAIT
    00013 that stated that internal relocation outside Kabul  was  unlikely
    to provide a sufficiency of  protection  as  the  areas  outside  Kabul
    remained under the control of local warlords  and  the  population  was
    suspicious of strangers.  This was a point also raised by the expert Dr
    Marsden in his report.

132. IJ Wyman considered whether or not the Appellant  could  be  internally
    relocated to Kabul and he concluded that whilst he fully  accepted  the
    detailed knowledge of the expert, he preferred the evidence set out  in
    the county guidance cases.  He considered  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    relatively young man with very limited knowledge and experience of Hizb-
    e-Islami.  In his own evidence he  was  not  a  fighter  but  was  more
    involved with making food and on guard duty he  would  thus  have  very
    limited information to provide to the authorities if  he  was  arrested
    and questioned.

133. I make the point that I am required to consider whether  the  Appellant
    would be at future  risk  if  returned  to  Afghanistan  based  on  the
    evidence as it stands as at the date of my determination and not as  at
    the date of the promulgation of IJ Wyman's determination some four  and
    a half years ago.

134. The evidence before  me  of  course  includes;  a  letter  from  Zardad
    Faryadi; the Appellant's correspondence with the British Red Cross and;
    the further evidence of the Appellant before me and  that  of  his  two
    witnesses.  I have of course, also had the benefit  of  the  translated
    version of the Appellant's ID card as well as recent country background
    material not least as contained in the Country  of  Origin  Information
    Report (COIR) of 15 March 2013,  together with the case law guidance of
    the Court of Appeal in KA (Afghanistan) [2012] EWCA  Civ  1014  and  EU
    (Afghanistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 32 as well as other relevant and  related
    case law all of which I have carefully considered against the  backdrop
    of the Appellant' particular circumstances as I have found them.

The Appellant's Credibility

135. I have had regard as my starting point, to the  findings  of  IJ  Wyman
    that include his positive findings that  the  Appellant  is  an  Afghan
    national (a finding which I have further endorsed) and that he was,  as
    claimed, a low level member of Hizb-e-Islami and recruited by his older
    brother.

136. It was suggested to me that IJ Wyman made no finding as to whether  the
    Appellant's brother was  involved  in  Hizb-e-Islami  or  indeed  their
    father. However it is apparent to me that given IJ Wyman's finding that
    the Appellant  was  recruited  into  the  Hizb-e-Islami  by  his  older
    brother, it must in all logic follow, that the Learned Judge must  have
    also been satisfied that the Appellant's brother was also a  member  of
    that organisation, although it is fair to say that he made  no  finding
    as to the position that  the  Appellant's  brother  held  with  Hizb-e-
    Islami.

137. I have of course assessed the credibility of  the  Appellant's  account
    in the context of my consideration  of  the  evidence,  both  oral  and
    documentary, in its totality

138. I have had the benefit of seeing and hearing  the  Appellant  give  his
    evidence over two days and at some length much of which was taken up in
    his responses to close and detailed cross-examination on the part of  a
    highly experienced Presenting Officer.  I was struck by  the  confident
    manner in which the Appellant gave his evidence throughout.  I did  not
    detect  the  slightest  attempt  to  prevaricate.   I  had  the   clear
    impression of a person who was anxious to be as helpful as he could  in
    his responses to the many questions put to him.  On the rare  occasions
    when he did not understand the question he always asked if it could  be
    repeated and upon such clarification  the  question  met  with  a  full
    response. These are not the actions of someone who is inventing a story
    to support his claim but that which one would expect from a witness  of
    truth.

139. My careful consideration of his evidence  demonstrates  an  unshakeable
    consistency within his  account  that  runs  like  a  thread  from  his
    interview records through to his statements and  finally  his  detailed
    and  lengthy  evidence  before  me.   I  do  not  therefore  share   Ms
    Isherwood's submission that his evidence as a whole was extremely vague
    or that his responses to difficult questions was  constantly  met  with
    the response that he was "uneducated".   Indeed a consideration of  his
    evidence shows that his reference to being uneducated solely related to
    questions put to him about events that took place  in  his  village  in
    Afghanistan at a time when he was a child.  Indeed the  evidence  shows
    that when he arrived in this country he was relatively  uneducated  and
    was unfamiliar with life in a  foreign  country  and  could  not  speak
    English, a situation which has since dramatically changed.

140. Ms Isherwood also maintained that the Appellant gave  "generally  bland
    answers" to questions put to him regarding  the  Appellant's  brother's
    activities.  I do not agree.  Indeed as the Appellant  constantly  made
    clear, he could only speak of his brother's activities from the vantage
    point of what he understood to be those activities in the sense that he
    was aware that his brother was a senior officer  in  Hizb-e-Islami  and
    undertaking amongst other things fighting  activities  in  relation  to
    which he too was following the orders of senior officers.  It  was  not
    surprising that he could not go into any greater specific detail.

141. My impression and evaluation as  to  the  quality  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence has been reinforced upon my consideration of the  evidence  of
    Ms AF, formerly the Appellant's foster mother who since  the  fostering
    period ended has continued to have the Appellant living in her home  as
    part of her family without seeking payment  from  him  or  indeed  from
    Camden  Social  Services.   She  no  longer   considers   herself   the
    Appellant's foster mother but his de facto mother.  She was clear  that
    she regarded the Appellant as if he were her  real  son.   Ms  AF  gave
    heartfelt evidence before me and I found her to be both a qualified and
    most impressive witness.  I had no reason to doubt  anything  that  she
    told me.  I therefore  accept  what  she  says  about  the  Appellant's
    character describing him as "honest and reliable -  very  respectful  -
    calm and pleasant - (and a) positive role and pillar of the community".



142. I was also impressed with the evidence of MT who was been tutoring  the
    Appellant at Couldson Sixth Form  College  who  described  him  amongst
    other things as "extremely polite and respectful, diligent and cheerful
    ... a great asset ... extremely friendly and supportive of  his  fellow
    students ... popular and engaging ... highly principled".  Ms  MT  also
    remarked as to the way in which the Appellant "shown exemplary strength
    of character in enduring the strain and not allowing  it  to  undermine
    his spirits or his efforts to work and study".

143. Those character references and  those  of  others  in  the  Appellant's
    local community here in the United Kingdom,  who  have  provided  their
    letters in terms of the Appellant's character and  in  support  of  his
    appeal together presents a comprehensive profile of an upstanding young
    man and one who qualities would not  lead  him  to  tell  lies  whether
    before the Tribunal or in his normal daily life. They shed  a  positive
    light on his character that has assisted me greatly  in  assessing  the
    credibility of his account and claims.

144. My positive findings of credibility have been of assistance  to  me  in
    determining the weight  and  reliability  that  I  can  attach  to  the
    evidence that the Appellant produced in support of his claim  that  his
    father was formerly a senior and leading commander in the Hizb-e-Islami
    and who was subsequently killed.

145. It has been held by this Tribunal  (see  ST  (Corroboration  -  Kasolo)
    Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119 that inter alia an appeal must be based  on
    the evidence produced but the weight attached to oral evidence might be
    affected by a failure to produce other evidence  in  support.   It  was
    further held in TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 that where  there  were
    circumstances in which evidence corroborating an  Appellant's  evidence
    was easily obtainable, then the lack of such evidence would affect  the
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility.  It follows  that  where  in
    assessing an Appellant's credibility it is observed that the  Appellant
    is relying on facts where there is no supporting evidence  where  there
    should be and no credible account for its absence then a decision maker
    would commit no error of law when relying in part on  those  facts  for
    rejecting an Appellant's account.

146. This is not however, the situation in the present case.   Indeed  quite
    the reverse. The Appellant has explained the circumstances under  which
    through his solicitors he made contact with  Zardad  Faryadi  currently
    serving a twenty  year  prison  sentence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    obtained from him a letter in which he unequivocally confirmed that the
    Appellant's father was someone that Mr Faryadi knew very well.  He  too
    was from Logar Province and  he  could  confirm  that  the  Appellant's
    father was a commander in Hizb-e-Islami and indeed was from his  tribe.
    I accept that the logistics would  have  in  any  event,  prevented  Mr
    Faryadi from attending the hearing to give oral evidence in support  of
    the Appellant's appeal and no doubt in the circumstances why  he  ended
    his letter by saying that he was unwell and did not wish to be  further
    troubled.  That of course is not the only letter  in  support  of  this
    aspect of the Appellant's evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  produced
    because he has also put forward a letter from Mr MNB of  Mohammad  Agha
    District in Logar Province stating that the Appellant's father was "one
    of the prominent and outstandingly active commanders  of  Hizb-e-Islami
    in Afghanistan ... (who) was well-known and famous for his active  role
    in the field as well as his loyal association with his party."   Whilst
    mindful that Mr MNB's credentials have not been  specifically  verified
    he does claim in his letter that he used to work for  the  organisation
    "as a high ranking media operator during the period of 1985  to  1997".



147. I find no reason why these two gentlemen should  provide  such  letters
    in support of the Appellant's appeal in circumstances where there is no
    evidence to suggest that either of them has  in  any  way  any  further
    connection with the Appellant other than the knowledge  of  his  father
    and his father's former activities.  The weight that I attach to  their
    evidence, has taken  account  of  the  fact  that  neither  person  has
    attended the hearing of the Appellant's appeal  where  in  giving  oral
    evidence,  the  veracity  of  their  claims  could  be  better  tested.
    Nonetheless, I find that given my positive findings  in  terms  of  the
    Appellant's credibility, I can in such circumstances attach  weight  to
    these letters that have served to  reinforce  my  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant's father was as claimed, a high ranking commander in  Hizb-e-
    Islami who was killed in action.

148. There is no direct  evidence  as  to  the  rank  that  the  Appellant's
    brother held but as I have earlier pointed out, it  is  clear  that  IJ
    Wyman found that the brother was serving in that organisation and again
    given my consideration of the evidence in its totality and my  positive
    credibility findings in relation to the Appellant, I find  that  I  can
    accept not least to the lower standard of proof, that he was an officer
    in that organisation as the Appellant has claimed.

149. This leads me to the key issue of this appeal, namely whether in  those
    circumstances the Appellant has established that he would be at  future
    real risk of persecution were he now to be returned to Afghanistan.

Future Risk

150. I have borne in mind the guidance of the Court of Appeal not  least  in
    KA Afghanistan and EU (Afghanistan).

151. In considering that guidance in the context of the present case, it  is
    apparent that a failure by the Secretary of State to discharge her duty
    to endeavour to trace family members demonstrates that in  that  regard
    she has not acted in accordance with the law.

152. I pause there because as submitted by Ms Isherwood  many  years  passed
    before the Appellant took the trouble to contact the British Red  Cross
    asking them to endeavour  to  trace  the  whereabouts  of  his  mother,
    brother and nephew.  Ms Isherwood identified that failure as indicative
    of the Appellant's lack of credibility.  I  do  not  share  that  view.
    Indeed I prefer the explanation given by the Appellant that  he  feared
    earlier contacting the Red Cross,  because  he  was  worried  that  any
    enquiries they made on the ground, in  particular  his  village,  would
    place his family members in difficulties and embarrassment and it might
    be misconceived that such enquiries  suggested  that  his  family  were
    working hand in glove with the  Afghan  authorities.   That  claim  was
    indeed borne out by the evidence of AF who told me that during meetings
    with the Appellant's social  worker  at  which  she  was  present,  the
    question had come up and it emerged that there was a lot of  fear  with
    young boys from Afghanistan using organisations  like  the  Red  Cross.
    Indeed AF continued that all three boys who had been  placed  with  her
    for fostering did not want to use that service due  to  fear  of  their
    lives.  She explained "they see it as something that would come back on
    themselves".

153. Despite the Secretary of State's failure  to  trace  as  required,  the
    fact remains that the onus remains on  the  Appellant  to  establish  a
    proper foundation for the grant of relief,  and in a  given  case,  the
    lack of evidence from the Respondent  concerning  the  availability  of
    family support of the Appellant neither establishes nor reinforces  any
    of the grounds that the Appellant might put forward  in  terms  of  his
    case for protection.

154. I am also mindful that in EU, Sir Stanley Burnton who gave the  leading
    judgment pointed out inter alia, that whilst breaches of  the  duty  of
    the Secretary  of  State  in  addressing  a  claim  might  lead  to  an
    independent justification for leave to remain in which the paradigm was
    the Article 8 claim of an  asylum  seeker  whose  claim  had  not  been
    expeditiously determined, that to grant leave to remain to someone  who
    had no risk on return, whose Convention rights would not  be  infringed
    by his return and who had no other independent claim  to  remain  here,
    was to use the power to grant leave to remain for a purpose other  than
    that  for  which  it  was  conferred.   His  Lordship   observed   that
    unaccompanied children who arrived in this country from Afghanistan had
    done so as a result of someone, presumably their families,  paying  for
    their fare and/or for a so-called agent to  arrange  their  journey  to
    this country.   The  cost  incurred  by  the  family  would  have  been
    considerable, relative to the wealth of an average Afghan family as the
    motivation for their incurring that cost  might  be  that  their  child
    faced risk if he or she remained with them in Afghanistan or  it  might
    simply be they believe their child would have a  better  life  in  this
    country.  Indeed Ms Isherwood in her closing submissions relied heavily
    on his Lordship's observation in maintaining  that  the  Appellant  had
    simply come here for economic betterment and to further  his  education
    and that the Appellant's family would be disappointed if  he  in  those
    circumstances, were now to be returned to them.

155. However in the context of my finding in  the  present  case,  I  accept
    that the Appellant has lost all contact with his  mother,  brother  and
    nephew despite his recent efforts and earlier  efforts  indeed  through
    the Afghan Society in London and that he  has  no  knowledge  of  their
    present whereabouts. I have also made it clear, that  on  my  findings,
    the Appellant did not simply leave Afghanistan with  the  help  of  his
    maternal uncle in order to achieve economic betterment in this country,
    but out of fear for his life and safety given that the authorities  had
    recently been to the family home seeking  the  Appellant's  whereabouts
    having learned that he was involved with Hizb-e-Islami.

156. I see no reason to doubt his claim that his elder brother with whom  he
    hid for several months thereafter, was, as one  might  expect  from  an
    elder brother, more concerned to ensure the safety and welfare  of  his
    younger brother above his own safety.  It was after all the Appellant's
    brother who indeed and not least on  the  findings  of  IJ  Wyman,  who
    recruited the Appellant to Hizb-e-Islami and no doubt in consequence of
    events that had since transpired, now felt particularly responsible for
    him.

157. In AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT  00163  (IAC)  it  was
    held inter alia that despite a rise in the number  of  civilian  deaths
    and causalities and an expansion of the geographical scope of the armed
    conflict in Afghanistan, the level of indiscriminate violence  in  that
    country taken as a whole was not at such a high level as to mean  that,
    within the meaning of Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  a
    civilian, solely by being present in the country,  faced  a  real  risk
    that threatened his life or person. In the context of the present  case
    I have found that the Appellant cannot be  classified  as  an  ordinary
    civilian.

158. In PM and Others (Kabul - Hizb-e-Islami) Afghanistan  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
    00089 the Tribunal  held  in  respect  of  the  ability  to  internally
    relocate to Kabul that if Appellants  showed  that  they  had  a  well-
    founded fear of their home area it was reasonable  to  expect  them  to
    live in Kabul, that was not "an entirely  lawless  place".  There  were
    houses to rent at a price and work  despite  a  fairly  high  level  of
    unemployment.  There was no satisfactory evidence to  suggest  that  it
    would  have  been  unreasonable  for  the  three  Appellants  in   that
    particular case, to live there or that they would  be  unable  to  lead
    other than a relatively normal life.   However  the  Appellant  in  the
    present case is aged 19.  In DS (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 305 Lloyd
    LJ referred to what he called "the eighteenth birthday point" where  in
    considering the duty  to  endeavour  to  trace,  he  commented  on  the
    contention that it did not endure beyond the  date  when  an  Applicant
    reached that age. His Lordship continued "It cannot be  the  case  that
    the assessment of risk on return  is  subject  to  such  a  bright-line
    rule."  He questioned whether a membership of a particular social group
    ceased on the day of a person's 18th birthday and continued:

         "It is not easy to see that risks of the relevant kind to who as  a
         child would continue until the eve of their birthday would cease at
         once the next day".

159. His Lordship continued that given the kinds of risk in issue  including
    the forced recruitment or the sexual exploitation of  vulnerable  young
    males, persecution was not respectful of birthdays and that apparent or
    assumed age was more important than chronological age.

160. That is the context in which I  have  considered  the  safety  of  this
    Appellant in terms of his relocation to Kabul given my finding that the
    Appellant was and is clearly at real risk in his home town.  These  are
    factors that I cannot possibly ignore.

161. In RQ (Afghan National Army -  Hizb-e-Islami  -  risk)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2008] UKAIT 00013 it  was  held  that  unless  there  were  particular
    reasons, it would not be unduly harsh to expect an  Appellant  with  no
    individual risk  factors  to  relocate  to  Kabul  and  assist  in  the
    rebuilding of his country.  However on my findings, the Appellant  does
    not meet that profile, in that I have found that this is  an  Appellant
    who has individual risk factors and that there are therefore particular
    reasons why it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  him  to  relocate  to
    Kabul. I find this is not a case where  internal  relocation  to  Kabul
    would be reasonably  available  to  the  Appellant  in  his  particular
    circumstances.

162. My conclusion  in  that  regard  has  been  further  reinforced  by  Ms
    Heybroek's observation that his tribal family name would in  any  event
    identify the Appellant as a member of one of the  tribes  involved  and
    commonly known to be involved in Hizib-e-Islami.  Further he would have
    to obtain government documents even in Kabul in order  to  live  there.
    He would need an ID card.  Given that I accept that when the  Appellant
    fled Afghanistan he was wanted by the authorities this would place  the
    Appellant in almost insuperable difficulties in obtaining  such  an  ID
    card to enable him to expect to have a reasonable life in Kabul without
    risk of discovery by the Afghani authorities.

163. I find that that  future  risk  to  the  Appellant  in  his  particular
    circumstances has been further compounded by my  consideration  of  the
    background country material before me.

164. In that regard I have paid particular  attention  to  the  COIR  of  15
    March 2013.  Reference is made to insurgents having remained focused on
    infiltrating routes from the  south-eastern  provinces  towards  Kabul,
    Kunar (where  the  Hizb-e-Islami  forces  are  based)  and  Logar  (the
    Appellant's province) and there is reference to an increase in security
    incidents between 1 May and 31 July compared  to  the  same  period  in
    2011.  There is reference to armed  clashes  and  improvised  explosive
    devices constituting the vast majority of events.

165. The report refers to the UNAMA Mid-Year Report of 2012 which  describes
    the situation of civilians in regard to  anti-government  elements  who
    are said to have been responsible  for  80%  of  civilian  causalities,
    killing 882 civilians and injuring 1,593 others during  the  first  six
    months of 2012.  UNAMA has reiterated its concern for the continued use
    of indiscriminate tactics by Anti-Government Elements and the toll such
    methods exact on civilians.

166. There is reference to the US  State  Department  Report  of  2011  that
    talks  of  "Official  impunity  and  lack  of  accountability   (being)
    pervasive" and of  crimes  committed  by  the  NDS  and  ANP  officials
    including torture and abuse. There is also  reference  to  a  September
    Human Rights Watch Report linking the Afghan  Local  Police  (ALP)  and
    armed militia to extensive human rights abuses citing in June that  the
    ALP allegedly detained two boys overnight, beat them and hammered nails
    into one boy's feet while he was in custody.

167. The report makes reference to the grey area within certain elements  of
    Hizb-e-Isalmi whereby some of the more moderate members are within  the
    current Afghan government whilst others continue their  anti-government
    activities and indeed some have aligned themselves with elements of the
    Taliban.

168. The picture that is  painted  is  one  where  even  today,  the  Afghan
    authorities continue to perceive  supporters  and  members  of  Hizb-e-
    Islami  as  acting  against  the  government  and  a  threat   to   the
    government's authority and the country's security.

169. For all of the above reasons, I have concluded that not  least  to  the
    lower standard of proof, the Appellant has established that if he  were
    now to be returned  to  Afghanistan,  he  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution in Refugee Convention terms  by  reason  of  his  political
    opinions imputed or otherwise.  It is further apparent to me   for  the
    above reasons, that not only would the Appellant be at such risk in his
    home town but also in Kabul to which he would be returned.

170. In light of my finding, it follows that the Appellant  has  established
    there  are  substantial  reasons  for  believing  that  his  return  to
    Afghanistan would further place the United Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
    obligations under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

171. Having established that the Appellant upon return to Afghanistan  would
    be at real risk, it must inevitably follow, that in terms of Article  8
    of the ECHR, the Appellant's removal would amount to a disproportionate
    interference with his private and family life rights, such as to  place
    the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under the ECHR. For the
    sake of completeness I would add that on the evidence before me in that
    regard,  that  I  have  above  assessed,  I  am  satisfied   that   the
    relationship that the Appellant enjoys with his de facto mother and her
    family clearly goes significantly beyond the normal emotional ties.

Conclusions

172. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

173.  I set aside the decision.

174.  I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

175. For the avoidance of doubt, an anonymity order has been made  under  r.
    14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting
    the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  members  of
    the public to identify the Appellant or any member of his family.


Signed                                  Date  11 June 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
