

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06216/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford Phoenix House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20 April 2016                           |On 25 April 2016               |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                    [K K]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

    1. The Respondent notified the  Appellant  on  24  March  2015  of  her
       decision to refuse to grant  asylum  or  ancillary  protection.  The
       appeal against that decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Batiste ("the Judge") following a hearing  on  15  June  2015.
       This is an appeal against that decision. It is not necessary for  me
       to provide any factual detail of the claim.

    2. First-tier Judge Baker granted permission to appeal on 15 July  2015
       as it was arguable that the Judge had erred in rejecting claims that
       the Appellant's deceased husband had been recognised as a refugee in
       Belgium as there was no evidence to that effect.

    3. Mr Diwnycz conceded, despite the rule 24 notice, that the Judge  had
       materially erred in law in that there did appear to have  been  some
       evidence he had in fact been recognised in Belgium a refugee.

    4. Mr Greer agreed with Mr Diwnycz.


    5. So did I. The Judge had her husband's birth  certificate  which  was
       issued by the Commissioner General for Refugees, a Belgian Residence
       Permit issued on 1 September 2008, and an untranslated document said
       to be the letter confirming the grant of entitled to  be  recognised
       as a refugee by the competent authority in  Belgium.  It  was  noted
       that the Appellant was not represented then but had been previously.
       Whilst the Judge cannot be criticised for not placing  weight  on  a
       document that had not  been  translated,  there  was  force  in  the
       argument that the other documents are unlikely to have  been  issued
       if he had not in fact been entitled to be recognised as a refugee.


    6. Both representatives submitted  that  this  material  error  of  law
       affected the decision to such an extent that the decision could  not
       stand and the matter would need to be remitted for a de novo hearing
       with no facts being preserved. I  agreed  that  this  was  the  most
       appropriate course of action.

Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    The matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
    hearing before a Judge other than Judge Batiste. The time estimate is 3
    hours and a Tamil speaking interpreter is required.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
21 April 2016
