

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06264/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Tuesday 20 October 2015                    |On Thursday 22 October 2015  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                   MR S V
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mrs Williock-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:          Miss Seehra, Counsel

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a  protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department.
   For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they were  in  the
   First-Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
   Appellant in this particular appeal.

2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He arrived in  the  UK  on  15
   February 2012 and claimed asylum on 14 May 2012.  His claim was  rejected
   on 12 August 2014 and he was served with notice of removal as an  illegal
   entrant.  He appealed against the decision also on human rights  (Article
   8) grounds as his wife and daughter are in the UK.

3. The Appellant's appeal was  allowed  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
   grounds by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Wilsher in a decision promulgated on
   13 July 2015 ("the Decision).  The Respondent sought permission to appeal
   the Decision on the basis that the Judge wrongly applied the findings  in
   GJ and others (post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013] UKUT 00319
   ("GJ") to the facts of the case.  The Respondent does not  challenge  the
   allowing of the appeal on human rights grounds.  Permission to appeal was
   granted by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on 9  September  2015  on  the
   basis that the Judge had arguably misdirected himself as to the law given
   the risk categories as set out in GJ.  The matter comes before the  Upper
   Tribunal to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal  Decision  involved
   the making of an error of law.

Submissions

4. Mrs Williocks-Briscoe submitted that  the  Judge  had  not  given  proper
   consideration to the Appellant's profile when applying  the  guidance  in
   GJ.  The Judge found that the Appellant would be on a "stop list".  There
   was no evidence that a failure to report would lead  to  a  person  being
   included on a stop list.  There was no evidence that the authorities have
   issued an arrest warrant or Court order against him (which might disclose
   a reason for the Appellant to be on  a  stop  list).  Nor  is  there  any
   indication of any adverse interest being shown in him since he  left  Sri
   Lanka.  Once it is accepted that there is no basis for this  finding,  it
   is unclear on what a finding of risk  on  return  could  be  based.   The
   Appellant surrendered to the authorities in 2009 at the end of the  civil
   war.  He was not targeted.  He was not a LTTE member or  combatant.   The
   issue for the Judge is whether the Appellant would be  perceived  by  the
   Judge to be a "de-stabilising influence" and therefore a  current  threat
   to Sri Lanka.  There is no evidence that the Appellant has been active in
   diaspora activity.  The Appellant relies in his Rule 24 statement on  the
   observation in MP & Ors v SSHD  [2014] EWCA Civ 829 that an asylum seeker
   could be at risk even absent diaspora activity but that  comment  related
   to an asylum seeker with a very different (and higher) profile than  this
   Appellant.

5. Ms Seehra submitted that the Decision provides  a  detailed  analysis  of
   the claim.  The Appellant has a complicated past.   He  was  detained  in
   2000 and placed on reporting conditions.  The finding that he would be at
   risk for failing to report relates to the fact that this is not the first
   time that the Appellant failed to report and when he did so in  the  past
   he was arrested on that account (in 2004).  He has a profile of coming to
   the adverse attention of the authorities on four occasions.  He has  been
   detained in the past.  It is also the  case  that,  when  he  surrendered
   himself to the authorities in 2009, he was detained for  six  months  and
   then harassed by the authorities to identify LTTE members.  The issue  is
   not what involvement the Appellant had with the LTTE but what involvement
   the authorities perceive he had and the continuing adverse interest after
   his release  from  detention  at  the  end  of  the  war  reflects  their
   perception of him as someone of continuing interest.  This  coupled  with
   his past detentions  on  four  occasions  and  the  fact  that  he  might
   plausibly be on a stop list is sufficient to find that he is at  risk  on
   return.  Even if the finding that the Appellant would be on a  stop  list
   was not open to the Judge due to a lack of evidence of an arrest  warrant
   or Court order, the Appellant would still be at  risk  as  GJ   indicated
   that those on a watch  list  would  still  be  monitored.   That  factor,
   coupled with the continuing adverse interest after the  end  of  the  war
   suggests that the authorities' perception of the Appellant would still be
   as a de-stabilising influence and he would  still  be  at  risk  on  that
   account.

Decision and reasons

6. The Judge sets out at [2] of the Decision the details of the  Appellant's
   claim and I do not repeat those details.  In short summary, the Appellant
   was involved with the LTTE as a welder working  on  their  vehicles  from
   1998 to 2000 in his home area.  He was arrested  in  2000  and  detained.
   His arrest was due to him not being listed on the family registration for
   his wife's family home where he was then staying.  He  was  detained  for
   two and a half years until November 2002  when  his  father  secured  his
   release by payment of a bribe.  He was ill treated during  detention  and
   he admitted during that  period  his  involvement  with  the  LTTE.   The
   Appellant was placed on reporting conditions and signed for a few  months
   but then ceased.  He was arrested again in 2004 based on his  failure  to
   report.  This was during  the  period  of  the  peace  process.   He  was
   detained for two and a half months and  again  released  after  paying  a
   bribe and placed on reporting conditions.  He was again arrested later in
   2004 for a week and a half.  In May  2009,  he  surrendered  to  the  Sri
   Lankan army and stayed in the army camp for about six months after  which
   he was told to report at the local  EDP  and  PLOTE  bases  so  that  the
   authorities could maintain contact with him.  He was questioned  by  them
   after his release about LTTE members.   The  Appellant  came  to  the  UK
   having discovered that his wife and daughter were here.   They  are  both
   British  citizens  having  been  granted  exceptional  leave   and   then
   indefinite leave.  As I note above, the Appellant's appeal  succeeded  on
   human rights grounds and the Decision is not challenged on that aspect.

7. The Judge sets out at [6] of the Decision, his findings  in  relation  to
   the asylum claim as follows:-
      "[6]  The principal country guidance case  on  Sri  Lanka  is  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG   [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC).  The principal risk category that applies to  the  appellant  is
    set out at paragraph 356 and in the head  note  7(d),  being  a  person
    whose name appears on a computerised  "stop"  list  accessible  at  the
    airport comprising a list of those against  whom  there  is  an  extant
    court order or an arrest warrant.  The overriding test  is  whether  or
    not the government of Sri Lanka thinks that an individual  may  pose  a
    genuine risk to the unity of the Sri Lankan state.  Given the  findings
    of fact that I have made, it is  plain  that  the  appellant  has  been
    detained by the authorities on four occasions in 2002, 2004  twice  and
    2009.  He has failed to continue reporting on at least  two  occasions.
    On a previous occasion when he failed to  report  he  was  re-detained.
    There is I find a real risk that his name would appear on a  stop  list
    because he has  breached  his  bail  conditions  again  in  2009.   The
    appellant has been subjected to extensive questioning  given  his  long
    term residence in a Tamil area and his activity as a support worker for
    the LTTE.  His account of being an innocent person was disputed and the
    intelligence services wished to secure  further  information  from  him
    during the questioning that he underwent.  For all these reasons I find
    that he would be at real risk of being either stopped at the airport or
    if he were allowed to pass through the airport being subject to further
    investigation and arrest once he was back in his home area.  The  local
    authorities are reasonably likely to have a record  that  he  abandoned
    reporting conditions  in  2009.   If  he  were  detained  he  would  be
    reasonably likely to be tortured.  The reason for the risk  of  torture
    is his imputed  political  opinion.   This  appeal  therefore  must  be
    allowed on refugee grounds."

8. I start with the issue of whether the Judge's finding that the  Appellant
   is likely to be on a "stop list" involves an error of law.   The evidence
   in relation to "stop lists" in GJ appears at [309] where it said  that  a
   person will be on a stop list by reason of an outstanding Court order  or
   arrest warrant which in turn emanates from a submission at [170] that the
   Sri Lankan authorities have two databases - a stop list and a watch list.
    No detail is given of why such an order or warrant might exist so as  to
   lead to a person being placed on a stop list.  There is  some  suggestion
   at [131] that an arrest warrant might be issued if a person was  released
   informally  from  detention  but  this  appears  to  be   discounted   as
   speculative.  The Appellant does not rely on any evidence that there is a
   Court order or an arrest warrant in existence against him.  However,  the
   Appellant was re-detained previously on the basis of a  previous  failure
   to report and, in light of the lack of detail about when a Court order or
   arrest warrant might be issued, this was a finding which was open to  the
   Judge on the facts of this case.

9. Even if the finding that the Appellant is likely to be  on  a  stop  list
   were not open to the Judge, I accept  Ms  Seehra's  submission  that  the
   Appellant is likely to be on a watch list (as the Judge found).  In  that
   event, the issue is  whether  the  Appellant  may  be  perceived  by  the
   authorities as a de-stabilising influence.  Notwithstanding the  lack  of
   diaspora activity or high profile within the LTTE in the past,  when  the
   Appellant's past history is considered  as  a  whole  and  based  on  the
   reasoning at [6] of the Decision, the finding that the Appellant would be
   at risk on this account is one which was open to the Judge.   I  may  not
   have reached the same conclusion on this evidence but I am not  satisfied
   that the Decision misapplies the guidance in GJ  to  the  facts  of  this
   case.  Accordingly, I am not  satisfied  that  the  Decision  contains  a
   material error of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

I do not set aside the Decision
Signed      [pic]Date  21 October 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
