
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/06184/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2013                            |On 12 December 2013          |
|Prepared 8 November 2013                      |                             |


                                   Before

             LORD BOYD SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY



                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SAMUEL RUPIYA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Masolo, of Messrs C K Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wyman who in a determination dated  14
    August 2013 allowed, on human rights grounds,  the  appellant's  appeal
    against a decision to refuse asylum made by the Secretary of  State  on
    12 June 2013.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in the  appeal  before
    us we will for ease of reference refer to her as the respondent as  she
    was the respondent in the First-tier.   Similarly  although  Mr  Samuel
    Rupiya is the respondent  before  us  we  will  refer  to  him  as  the
    appellant as he was the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  born  on  27  July  1961.   He
    entered Britain as a visitor on 25 August 2001.  On 22 February 2002 he
    applied for an extension of stay for medical treatment as he  had  been
    diagnosed as HIV positive.  That application was refused on 20 February
    2003.

4.   The appellant applied for asylum on 17 March  2005.   That  application
    was refused but the appellant's appeal against the refusal was  allowed
    by Immigration Judge Boyd on 27 January 2006.

5.   An application for reconsideration was then made by  the  Secretary  of
    State  and  although  that  was  refused  in  the  Tribunal  a  further
    application was made  in the Administrative Court.  The application  in
    the Administrative Court was not determined for three years when it was
    remitted to the Upper Tribunal who heard  the  appeal  on  1  September
    2010.  The Designated Immigration Judge who heard the appeal found that
    the original determination contained an error of law and set aside that
    decision. He went on to remake the decision and dismissed the appeal on
    asylum and human rights grounds in a   determination  dated  8  October
    2010.

6.   In January 2011 the appellant made a fresh claim for asylum.   Although
    that claim was refused on 12 June 2013  the  appellant  was  granted  a
    further right of appeal.   It  was  in  these  circumstances  that  the
    appellant's appeal came before Judge Wyman on 31 July 2013.

7.   The judge considered all aspects of the  appellant's  claim.   He  made
    clear findings that the appellant was not entitled to asylum as he  did
    not have a well-founded fear of persecution in Zimbabwe.  He noted that
    Judge Boyd, who had allowed the appellant's appeal  in  2005,  had  not
    found the appellant to be credible and had found that he did not have a
    well-founded fear of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  but  had
    applied the then country guidance in  AA  (Zimbabwe)  CG  [2006]  UKAIT
    00061 which had said that there was a risk for  involuntary  returnees.
    He pointed out that case law had changed significantly since that  date
    and referred to the current country guidance case of EM  (Zimbabwe)  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00098 and, having noted that there was  significantly  less
    politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe,  found that  the  appellant
    would not face persecution for a Convention reason on return.

8.   The judge noted that the appellant's  representative  stated  that  the
    appellant  was not making a separate claim on the   basis  of  his  ill
    health under Article 3 but that he wished the factors relating  to  his
    ill health to be considered  as part of his Article 8 claim. The judge,
    having stated that he believed that when  the  appellant  had  come  to
    Britain he had been extremely ill, and had been able  to  obtain  anti-
    retroviral therapy here and he needed to continue on medication for his
    HIV infection for the remainder of his life, considered  the  treatment
    available for those with HIV in Zimbabwe and concluded that he did  not
    find there was any evidence that the appellant's  health  would  be  at
    risk if he were returned due to the non-availability of medication.

9.   With regard to the appellant's links with Britain  he  noted  that  the
    appellant had married here and lived with his wife but that  they  both
    had children in Zimbabwe.  In paragraphs 102 and 103 he noted that  the
    appellant's wife's children who had been born in 2000 and 1997 were  in
    Zimbabwe and that the appellant had a daughter there and a son in South
    Africa.  He stated  that  they  both  had  extended  family  living  in
    Zimbabwe.  He noted that neither the appellant nor his wife had  family
    in Britain "save for wider extended family."

10.  He noted that Mrs Rupiya worked  part-time  in  Britain  and  that  the
    appellant worked, unpaid as a pastor in the church.  He said,  however,
    that there was no documentary evidence of that and no  bank  statements
    or wage slips had been provided to confirm that he was in regular  paid
    employment.  He concluded that there was very little information  about
    the appellant's links to the  United  Kingdom  with  various  religious
    groups, clubs or undertaking voluntary work.

11.  In paragraphs 111 onwards he stated  that  this  was  an  unusual  case
    because  of  the  issue  of  delay.   He  noted  that  the  appellant's
    application for asylum had been refused but allowed by  Judge  Boyd  in
    January 2006 and the judge said it was not known why it took four years
    for the appellant's case to be returned to the Tribunal.  In  paragraph
    113 he referred to the case of EB Kosovo [2008] UKHL 41 and went on  to
    say in paragraphs 114 onwards:-

         "114.    In this case, it is not in dispute that the appellant  won
             his asylum appeal in January 2006.  However the case was taken
             back to the Upper Tribunal in September 2010 - over four years
             later.  Clearly, the appellant developed various  social  ties
             in the United Kingdom during the extensive  period,  including
             to the person he later married.


         115. However what I find significant is that the delay can be shown
             to be the result of a dysfunctional system.  The appellant was
             successful in his asylum appeal hearing back in January  2006.
             He therefore had every expectation that he  would  be  granted
             leave to remain.  The appellant did not go underground  -  but
             has been compliant with his  reporting  conditions  throughout
             this period.


         116. I believe it is unfair to the appellant that over  four  years
             later, his case is taken back before the  Upper  Tribunal  and
             his asylum appeal then dismissed, especially at a time that he
             was not represented.


         117. It is for this reason, and this reason alone, that  I  believe
             the appellant's claim should be allowed under Article 8 as the
             delay in this case, caused only by the respondent  means  that
             it is an unlawful interference with the right to  respect  for
             the appellant's private and family life now established in the
             United Kingdom."

12.  The judge therefore allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

13.  The Secretary of State appealed, stating that the judge had  failed  to
    give any or adequate reasons for a finding on a  material  matter  when
    considering the appellant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  It was
    argued that the judge had erred in not placing weight on  the  relevant
    sections of the Immigration Rules and therefore had not had  regard  to
    the Secretary of State's view as  to  where  the  balance  between  the
    individual's rights and public interest lay.

14.  The second ground of appeal stated that  the  delays  which  had  taken
    place in processing the case should not be  determinative.   The  judge
    had failed to correctly identify the effects of the delay and  had  not
    followed the judgment in EB Kosovo in that regard.  The grounds  stated
    that while delay was a weighty factor in assessing  proportionality  it
    could not be a determinative one. They referred to the judge's findings
    that not much evidence had been provided  of  the  appellant's  private
    life here.  The grounds pointed out that  the  appellant  had  ties  in
    Zimbabwe and there were no insurmountable obstacles  to  his  returning
    there to renew his private and family life.

15.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davidge on 3 September 2013.

16.  At the hearing of the appeal before us Mr Deller first stated  that  he
    wished to rely in particular on the second ground of appeal.  He stated
    that the reality was that  there  had  been  no  delay  caused  by  the
    Secretary of State.  What had happened between 2006  and  2009  had  in
    fact been due process because of the changing country guidance at  that
    time.  The fact that the appellant knew that the decision of Judge Boyd
    had been challenged should have led him to realise that he  should  not
    have the expectation of being granted leave to remain.  There had  been
    no unfairness to the appellant.  He had been able to remain in  Britain
    to await the outcome of the challenge.  He did not qualify for leave to
    remain and the conclusions of Judge Boyd were in error. Judge Wyman had
    therefore  erred in his assessment  of  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

17.  Ms Masolo relied on a skeleton argument  arguing  that  the  judge  had
    properly considered the Article 8  rights  of  the  appellant  and  had
    reached conclusions that  were  open  to  him.   She  argued  that  the
    proportionality assessment was balanced and focused on all  aspects  of
    the appellant's claim and that the judge had properly applied the ratio
    of the judgment of the House of Lords in  EB  Kosovo.   She  emphasised
    that the appellant could not have produced evidence of work as  he  had
    not been allowed to work  here.   She  referred  to  the  psychological
    impact on the appellant of removal  and  indeed  the  distress  he  had
    suffered because his situation had not been resolved between  2006  and
    2010.  She claimed that he had had a legitimate  expectation  of  leave
    being granted.  She referred to the family life which the appellant had
    established here.

18.  We found that there was a material error of law  in  the  determination
    of the Immigration Judge.  It is of note that the judge makes it  quite
    clear that the only reason that he was allowing the appeal on Article 8
    grounds was that he felt that the appellant had been  treated  unfairly
    because of the delay in dealing with his  appeal  rights  when  he  was
    initially refused asylum.  He indicated that his conclusion was reached
    because he was following the judgment of  the  House  of  Lords  in  EB
    Kosovo.

19.  That contention is simply wrong.  It is not the case that the ratio  of
    the judgment in EB Kosovo is that where there is delay that  can  be  a
    determinative factor in assessing rights under Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
    What the judgment makes clear is that delay  is  one  of  a  number  of
    factors that can be taken into account but that the  principle  way  in
    which delay can benefit an applicant  is  where,  while  the  applicant
    remains in Britain, he has build up private and family life here to the
    point where it would not be reasonable for him to be removed.  Delay is
    not  a  freestanding  factor  when  assessing  the  proportionality  of
    removal.

20.  Moreover, the reality is that the delay which  would  militate  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to remove would have to be delay
    for which the Secretary of State was culpable.  That is clearly not the
    case here.   There  was  delay  between  the  initial  refusal  of  the
    appellant's application for leave to remain on medical grounds and  his
    claim for asylum.  That is delay for which the  appellant  was  himself
    responsible as indeed was the delay between the decision of  Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shaerf in October 2010 and  the  fresh
    claim in January 2011.  The delay between the decision  of  Judge  Boyd
    and that of Judge Shaerf was not the responsibility of the Secretary of
    State.  Rather it was caused by due process while the  application  was
    effectively  "stacked"  with  others  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  while
    consideration was given by that court to  country  guidance  decisions.
    The delay that took place while the application  by  the  Secretary  of
    State was proceeding in the High Court was a  delay  which  could  have
    enabled the appellant to strengthen his  private  and  family  life  in
    Britain but those factors were specifically given  no  weight   by  the
    judge when he weighed up the proportionality of the  decision.   It  is
    quite clear that he based his decision simply on his belief that  delay
    had taken place and that that delay was unfair  to  the  appellant  and
    that that, of its own entitled him to conclude that  the  decision  was
    disproportionate.  That conclusion of the judge was clearly wrong.

21.  Having stated that we found that there were material errors of  law  in
    the determination and having given brief reasons for our conclusion  we
    considered it appropriate to proceed with the hearing and after  having
    given Ms Masolo time to take further  instructions  we  heard  evidence
    from the appellant.  He relied on his  statement  and  stated  that  he
    called Britain his home and  that  he  had  relatives,  friends  and  a
    community here which meant that this was where his life was rather than
    in Zimbabwe.  He stated that he had been tormented  psychologically  in
    the period between 2006 and 2010 because he had not heard anything  and
    had been prescribed cocodomol from his doctor.  He  said  that  he  had
    been affected financially because he had not been allowed to work.   He
    had been concerned about his children.

22.  We asked him what the immigration status of his wife was.   He  replied
    that she had been a student for some years and was waiting to hear.  He
    stated that he did take drugs for his  HIV  and  for  his  cholesterol.



23.   Mr  Deller  submitted  that   the   decision   to   remove   was   not
    disproportionate.  No  other  issues  other  than  the  rights  of  the
    appellant under Article 8 were now live before us.  He again emphasised
    that delay had been caused  by  proceedings  in  the  Court  of  Appeal
    regarding country guidance.  He emphasised  that  there  was  a  public
    interest in maintaining appropriate immigration control and  there  was
    nothing particular or exceptional about the appellant's  circumstances.
    He referred to the judgment of the House of Lords in N (Uganda)  [2005]
    UKHL 81 and to relevant country guidance  regarding  the  treatment  of
    those with HIV in Zimbabwe.

24.  In reply Ms  Masolo  stated  that  we  should  take  into  account  the
    appellant's medical condition when considering his rights under Article
    8 as well as the fact that the appellant had been here since 2001.   He
    had been diagnosed with HIV  shortly  after  his  arrival.   There  was
    evidence in the bundle that there were shortages of drugs in  Zimbabwe.
    She argued that particularly given the length of time the appellant had
    been here and the fact that he had set up family  life  with  his  wife
    here it would be disproportionate for him to be removed.

25.  We have considered all relevant factors with regard to the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  We  note  the  comments  of  Judge
    Wyman that the only factor which should  be  taken  into  consideration
    when considering the proportionality of removal was delay.  He  clearly
    found, in paragraphs 102 through 110 where  he  set  out  his  detailed
    findings, that the other relevant factors did not make the  appellant's
    removal disproportionate.  He was correct to point out that  there  was
    little evidence of the appellant's work here  or  indeed  that  of  his
    wife.  He was correct also to emphasise that both the appellant and his
    wife have children in Zimbabwe.  He correctly applied the  judgment  in
    RS and Others (Zimbabwe) CG [2010] UKUT noting that  it  was  found  in
    that decision that returning individuals to Zimbabwe who were diagnosed
    with HIV/AIDS was not a breach under the ECHR of the  rights  of  those
    returned.  He noted that significant numbers of people  were  receiving
    treatment for HIV/AIDS in Zimbabwe both under  the  public  system  and
    from non-governmental  organisations  and  international  organisations
    privately.

26.  While it is relevant that the appellant has been here  since  2001  the
    reality is that apart from a short period when he entered as a  visitor
    the appellant has never had leave to remain.  He has not,  it  appears,
    had paid work here and although he married here his wife, who  is  also
    Zimbabwean, has no leave to  remain.   As  they  both  have  family  in
    Zimbabwe it is appropriate to expect them both to return there.
27.  We can therefore only conclude that the removal  of  the  appellant  to
    Zimbabwe would be a proportionate interference  with  the  private  and
    family life which he has built  up  here  and,  having  set  aside  the
    decision of the Judge of the First-tier allowing the appellant's appeal
    under Article 8 of the ECHR, we remake the decision  and  also  dismiss
    the appeal on human rights grounds.

Decision

This appeal is  dismissed  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
