
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06993/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 3 July 2013                                  |On 9 August 2013           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     SS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  order  in  this  appeal  and
    there has been no application before us to discharge  that  order.   No
    report of these proceedings shall directly, or indirectly, identify the
    appellant.  A failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  a
    contempt of court.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1988.  She appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a refusal by the Secretary of State, of
    10 July 2012, to vary her leave to remain and also against  a  decision
    to remove her pursuant to Section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Mr R G  Walters  heard
    the appellant's appeal on 23 August 2012.  In summary  the  appellant's
    case at that time was that she was  a  Sri  Lankan  national  of  Tamil
    ethnicity who had lived her entire life prior to coming to  the  United
    Kingdom in Colombo.  Her father had been abducted in 1989 and  to  this
    day it is not known what happened to him.  She was arrested in 2009  by
    the Sri Lankan police who suspected that she had connections  with  the
    LTTE as a consequence of the fact that a cousin who was staying in  the
    family house at the time had assisted  the  LTTE.   The  appellant  was
    detained for two days and she was thereafter released.

 3. The appellant was subsequently granted entry clearance to come  to  the
    United Kingdom as a student and she arrived here on 11  March  2010  to
    study HND Travel and  Tourism  at  the  City  College.   The  appellant
    travelled back to Sri Lanka for a holiday on 22 August  2010  returning
    to the United Kingdom on 20 September 2010.  She also returned  to  Sri
    Lanka on 11 March 2011.  Whilst in Sri Lanka she suffered  from  dengue
    fever and having recovered from that illness  she  eventually  returned
    back to the United Kingdom on 16 April 2011.  The appellant stated that
    she discontinued her studies in March 2011.

 4. She attended a Hero's Day celebration in London  in  November  2011  in
    memory of the Tamil people who had given  their  lives  for  the  Tamil
    cause.  This was at the Eastbury Comprehensive School in Barking.   She
    states in her witness statement that  she  had  wanted  to  attend  the
    demonstration against  Rajapaksa's  visit  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    November/December 2010 but she was unable to  do  so  because  she  was
    unwell with stomach problems.  She also did not attend the  Mullivaikal
    Remembrance Day celebrations in May 2011 because this was just  over  a
    week after her former boyfriend had broken up with her and she was  too
    depressed to think about going to the  celebration.   She  did  however
    attend the Mullivaikal Remembrance Day demonstration on  19  May  2012.
    As a consequence of her attendance her picture found its way  into  two
    newspapers which are published in Sri Lanka and in one of which she was
    quoted within the newspaper article accompanying the picture, as making
    anti-government statements.

 5. The appellant claims that her mother informed her that she had appeared
    in the Veerakesari and the Sudar Oli newspapers on 22 May 2012  and  31
    May 2012 respectively.  She further claims that on 1 June 2012 the  CID
    attended the appellant's family home  in  Sri  Lanka  making  enquiries
    about the appellant, that her mother was not there at the time but they
    left a message that her mother was to report to Kotahena Police Station
    for enquiries.  Her mother did not attend as requested  and  thereafter
    moved to stay with a friend in the outskirts of Colombo.   She  further
    stated that on 6 June 2012 her mother contacted her to say that the CID
    had visited her twice more, and that although thereafter the  appellant
    had attempted to contact her mother on  many  occasions  she  had  been
    unable to do so and did not know what has happened to her.  On 18  June
    2012 she spoke to her aunt in Sri Lanka who was also trying  to  locate
    her mother but she had also  not  heard  anything  about  her  mother's
    whereabouts.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Walters dismissed the appeal on Refugee Convention,
    humanitarian protection and Article 3 ECHR grounds in  a  determination
    dated 10 September 2012.

 7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nicholson in a  decision  dated  4  October  2012.   The
    matter then came before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Macdonald  on  18
    December 2012 and, in a lengthy decision  signed  on  3  January  2013,
    Deputy Judge Macdonald concluded that the making of the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error on  a  point  of
    law and he  set  aside  that  decision.   The  Deputy  Judge  gave  the
    following reasons for his conclusions:

         "7.  On the appellant's evidence she  is  someone  who  has  strong
             political views which are against the Sri Lankan  authorities.
             It is true, as the  judge  said  in  paragraph  59,  that  the
             appellant had  produced  no  country  evidence  to  show  that
             persecution was taking place against either  persons  who  had
             demonstrated in London  or  against  their  relatives  in  Sri
             Lanka.  The difficulty with that finding is that it  does  not
             sufficiently connect with the profile of the appellant who had
             done more than simply attend a demonstration in London.    She
             appears in two articles in newspapers namely "Virakesari"  and
             "Sudar Oli".  Whatever the real truth of her political  views,
             her claim that she faced a real risk of persecution had to  be
             based  on  not  only  her  attendance  at  the  demonstrations
             mentioned in her statement but also the fact that she appeared
             in two newspapers where she was particularly critical  of  the
             government and where it  is  within  judicial  knowledge  that
             there is a wealth of current background material  highlighting
             human rights abuses  against  those  who  have  some  kind  of
             interest in the LTTE.  Given that the judge did  not  properly
             assess the appellant's personal circumstances it is clear that
             this was an error in law and that the judgment  cannot  stand.
             It seems to me that what the judge was required to do  was  to
             assess whether it was reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant
             would  be  interrogated  at   the   airport   and,   answering
             truthfully, what answers the appellant would be bound to give.
              In the absence of such reasoning I  am  concluding  that  the
             judge erred in law and that a fresh hearing will be required."

 8. The Deputy Judge adjourned the hearing and directed that a decision  on
    the appellant's appeal should be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.

 9. The appeal initially came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  sitting
    alone on 10 May 2013, however on that occasion the Secretary  of  State
    produced new documentation from the  appellant's  former  college,  the
    admission of which Ms Jegarajah on behalf of the appellant objected to.
     Given that the appellant had not had an opportunity to consider  these
    documents in any detail the hearing was adjourned.

10. The appeal next came before the current panel on 3 July.  At the outset
    of the hearing Ms Jegarajah requested an adjournment on the basis  that
    it was understood that the Upper Tribunal were to issue a fresh country
    guidance case relating to Sri Lanka  in  the  few  days  following  the
    hearing.  This application was refused; however an indication was given
    that the Tribunal would hear the oral  evidence  to  be  given  by  the
    appellant and then would require submissions to be made in writing, the
    Secretary of  State  being  given  seven  days  to  make  such  written
    submissions after the date the country guidance case first appeared  in
    the Tribunal's  website  and  the  appellant  being  given  seven  days
    thereafter  to  make  her  written  submissions  in   response.    Such
    submissions were received by the Tribunal in a timely fashion after the
    posting of the country guidance case on the Tribunal  website  and  are
    summarised below.

11. Mr Avery subsequently renewed the Secretary of State's  application  to
    admit evidence that had not been placed before the First-tier Tribunal.
     This evidence consisted of a number of documents and  e-mails  written
    by the City College,  the  educational  institute  that  the  appellant
    previously attended in the United Kingdom, sent  to  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The first document is a form  sent  by  the  Principal  of  the
    college to the migrant reporting e-mail of the UK Border Agency  on  16
    June 2011.  The form sets out the appellant's details and the name  and
    duration of the course that she was attending  with  the  college.   It
    notes that the appellant enrolled in March 2010 and  that  all  was  ok
    until early 2011 at which point  the  college  lost  contact  with  the
    appellant.  The form also observes that the appellant received a formal
    warning about her progress and lack of payment in October 2010 and that
    she was excluded on 16 June 2011 for  "non-attendance,  zero  progress,
    and non-payment of fees".  The second document is an e-mail of 22  June
    2012 sent from the principal of the college to a local enforcement team
    of the UK Border Agency.  This e-mail observes that the  appellant  was
    excluded from the college in June 2011 but that on  22  June  2012  she
    attended  the  college,  asking  them  to  produce  a  letter  of   her
    attendance.  The college refused to  produce  the  letter  because  her
    attendance had only been 9%.   There  are  then  a  number  of  e-mails
    between a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer (not Mr Avery) and  the
    college.

12. Ms Jegarajah objected to the production of these documents on the basis
    that they had not previously been produced in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in circumstances in which it was reasonable to expect that  they  would
    have been.

13. Having considered the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    and in particular Rules 2 and 15 (2A), we concluded that  it  was  just
    and fair to admit the documentation given the nature of their  contents
    and given the fact that the  appellant  had  now  been  given  adequate
    opportunity to address any matters referred to therein.

14. The appellant was then called to give evidence before the Tribunal, she
    adopting the contents of her witness statement of  21  August  2012  as
    being true and accurate.

15. Under cross-examination the appellant stated that she first attended  a
    demonstration in the United Kingdom on Hero's Day  in  2010.   She  had
    also attended Mullivaikal demonstrations in the United Kingdom but  did
    not attend in the year she arrived here because she was having "monthly
    problems".  At this point Mr Avery directed the  appellant's  attention
    to the contents of her witness statement in  which  the  appellant  had
    stated therein that she had not attended the Mullivaikal demonstrations
    in 2010 because she had been too busy setting up with her college.  The
    appellant indicated that she had been unable to mention the true reason
    she had not attended the  demonstration  at  the  time  of  making  her
    witness statement.

16. Mr Avery then  asked  the  appellant  why  she  had  not  attended  the
    demonstrations against Rajapaksa's visit in November and December 2010,
    to which the appellant replied that she was new to the country at  that
    time so she had been unable to attend.  Mr Avery then pointed out  that
    in her witness statement the appellant had indicated that she  had  not
    attended such demonstrations because at that time she had  had  stomach
    problems.  In response the appellant stated that she must have mixed up
    the two questions today and that the evidence that she had given in her
    witness statement was the correct evidence.

17. In relation to her attendance at college the appellant  confirmed  that
    this had been low because she had suffered from illness for some  time,
    including a cold and including an occasion on which she fell on ice and
    had to remain at home for a week or so.  She accepted that she had been
    excluded from college in 2011.

18. Mr Avery's cross-examination then  turned  to  the  problems  that  the
    appellant claimed that her mother had had.   The  appellant  stated  in
    evidence that her mother had first informed her that the CID  had  been
    to the family home on 1 June 2012, she was then asked was this the only
    time that they came to the house and she responded by saying that  they
    also attended on 5 June.  Mr Avery then asked the appellant to  confirm
    whether the  authorities  had  been  on  just  two  occasions  and  the
    appellant confirmed that this was so.  The  appellant's  attention  was
    then drawn to question 82 of her asylum interview at which time she had
    asserted that the authorities had visited  the  family  home  on  three
    occasions.  In response the appellant stated that she had misunderstood
    the earlier question put by  Mr  Avery.   The  appellant  continued  by
    stating that she had last spoken to her mother on 6 June who,  on  that
    occasion informed her that the CID had been to the house again and that
    she had moved to a different place through fear.  She further confirmed
    that her mother has a mobile phone in Sri Lanka.   However  asked  when
    she first tried to contact her mother after 6 June she stated that this
    had occurred on 20 June and that she  had  not  tried  to  contact  her
    earlier because she had believed her mother to  be  safe.   Her  mother
    normally called her and when no such call had been received  she  tried
    to call her mother.  She confirmed that she had not  had  contact  with
    her mother since 6 June.

Submissions

19. The respondent  relied  on  the  refusal  letter,  submitting  that  in
    addition, her credibility is  undermined  by  the  documents  from  her
    college indicating that she was having significant  problems  with  her
    studies prior to the break down in her relationship with her  boyfriend
    which she had said left her unable to concentrate on her  studies.   It
    is also submitted that  her  evidence  indicates  that  she  is  not  a
    committed  anti-government   activist,   given   that   initially   her
    participation in anti-government events were sparse and  there  was  an
    inconsistency in the reasons advanced for that in interview and in what
    she had said in oral evidence.

20. The respondent further asserted that the appellant's evidence about the
    CID visits to her house in Sri  Lanka  was  confused,  and  lacking  in
    credibility, leading to doubts that she had  attracted  attention  from
    the CID.

21. The respondent concluded by submitting that although the appellant may,
    through the publication of newspaper articles,  appear to  fall  within
    of GJ & Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  00319
    (IAC), she does not present a profile that would attract the  interests
    of the Sri Lankan authorities, given that their approach  is  based  on
    sophisticated intelligence.

22. Ms Jegarajah submitted that, as the appellant has been photographed  in
    two nationalist newspapers, and an  interview  with  her  published  in
    which she espouses views which are anti-state or would be so perceived.
    Further, if interrogated about her involvement in the protests  or  her
    political views, she would face persecution if she  told  the  truth  -
    that she is committed  to  self-determination  and  redress  for  those
    killed and abused during the war   -  views  which  she  could  not  be
    expected to suppress.

Findings and Reasons

23. As regards the appeal on asylum grounds, the burden of proof is on  the
    appellant  to  demonstrate  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that she would, if returned to Sri Lanka, face a real risk of
    being persecuted for one or more of the reasons referred to in  Article
    1(A) of the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees,  that
    is to say by reason of her race, religion, nationality, membership of a
    particular social group or political  opinion.   As  confirmed  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Karanakaran  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2000] Imm AR 271, this standard of proof  (which  we  shall
    refer to as the lower standard)  applies  both  to  the  assessment  of
    prospective harm and to the evidence of past events.

24. When arriving at our conclusions below we confirm that we did so having
    considered the whole of the evidence in the round.  We did not form our
    view as to the credibility of any part of the appellant's case  without
    first having looked at the evidence  in  its  entirety,  including  the
    country background situation as set out in the documentation before  us
    and in the relevant country guidance authorities.

25. In her Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 5 July 2012  the  Secretary  of
    State accepted the  following  matters  of  fact  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim:

    (i)  that she had been arrested in 2009 as a consequence of the  police
         having had a suspicion that she was  a  member  of  the  Liberation
         Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).  It was  further  accepted  that  the
         appellant was officially released from this detention;

    (ii) the appellant attended her studies in  the  United  Kingdom  until
         March 2011;

    (iii)     the  appellant  attended  the  Mullivaikal  Remembrance   Day
         demonstration in the United Kingdom on 19 May 2012;

    (iv)  a  photograph  of  the  appellant   attending   the   Mullivaikal
         Remembrance Day demonstration  appeared  in  the  news  publication
         entitled "Virakesari" on 22 May 2012;

    (v)   a  photograph  of  the  appellant   attending   the   Mullivaikal
         Remembrance Day demonstration, along  with  a  quotation  from  the
         appellant, appeared in the Sudar Oli news  publication  on  30  May
         2012.

26. The Secretary of State did not withdraw the  above  concessions  during
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal or during the hearing before
    us, as a consequence of this we proceed to  determine  the  appellant's
    appeal on the basis that the evidence as reflecting the concessions  is
    to be found to be credible.

27. There are however a number of core aspects of the  appellant's  account
    that we do not accept as truthful.  We do not  accept  it  is  credible
    that the appellant attended the demonstration in May  of  2012  because
    she had committed views on Tamil separatism.  The appellant arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2010.  We find if she were committed to the Tamil
    separatist cause to the extent that she asserts she is, she would  have
    attended the Mullivaikal Remembrance Day celebrations in 2010 and  2011
    and she would also have attended the demonstrations against Rajapaksa's
    visit to the United Kingdom in November and December 2010.

28. We have considered carefully the explanation the appellant provides for
    failing to attend these demonstrations but do not accept  that  she  is
    telling the truth in this regard.  We observe that the  appellant  gave
    differing explanations as between her substantive asylum interview  and
    the evidence before the Upper Tribunal.  Although when this was pointed
    out to her during the course  of  cross-examination  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal she reverted  back  to  the  evidence  given  in  her  witness
    statement and substantive asylum interview, the  only  explanation  she
    could offer for giving a different account under  cross-examination  is
    that she got confused and misunderstood  the  questioning.   There  was
    nothing confusing about the questioning of Mr Avery, who undertook  his
    cross-examination with admirable clarity. We find  that  the  appellant
    gave differing accounts as to the reasons  she  failed  to  attend  the
    aforementioned  demonstrations  in  the  United  Kingdom  because   the
    explanations she provided were not truthful or credible.

29. We also reject the appellant's evidence that the CID  had  visited  her
    mother on numerous occasions in Sri Lanka and that her mother  had  now
    gone  missing.   Her  evidence  in  this  regard  contains  significant
    inconsistencies and when looked at as a whole we  conclude  that  those
    inconsistencies are such so as to lead us to  disbelieve  substantially
    the appellant's evidence in this regard.  We do accept,  however,  that
    the CID visited the appellant's family home in Colombo on 1  June  2012
    and that her mother was not present at the home at that time.  This has
    been a consistent strand of the appellant's account  running  from  her
    screening interview onwards.  It is notable however that the  appellant
    does not mention that the CID came on more than one occasion during the
    course of her screening  interview,  that  during  the  course  of  her
    substantive asylum interview the appellant stated that the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities  had  visited  the  family  home  in  Sri  Lanka  on  three
    occasions, and yet before the Upper Tribunal in  cross-examination  the
    appellant initially stated that the CID had only come on two  occasions
    to the family house.  When the inconsistency was  pointed  out  to  the
    appellant  during  the  course  of  her  cross-examination  she  simply
    indicated that she had misunderstood Mr Avery's questioning.   We  have
    reviewed the questions asked by Mr Avery and found them to be  entirely
    clear and we find that in fact the appellant gave an  incorrect  answer
    during the course of her cross-examination  because  her  evidence  was
    untruthful.  We are reinforced in this finding by the evidence given by
    the appellant during cross-examination that she had  not  attempted  to
    make contact with her mother after 6 June  until  20  June  2012,  this
    being despite the fact that her mother had informed her on 6 June  that
    she was fearful of what would happen to  her.   We  find  this  totally
    implausible. It is also inconsistent with the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant at paragraph 12  of  her  witness  statement,  in  which  she
    asserts that she attended the Asylum Screening  Unit  on  8  June  2012
    because she had found out that her family could not locate her mother.

30. We must now assess whether, on the accepted facts, there is a real risk
    of the appellant suffering persecutory treatment  upon  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.  In doing so  we  have  carefully  considered  the  very  recent
    country guidance decision of GJ & Others. We observe that this  country
    guidance case replaces all previously existing  country  guidance  case
    law on Sri Lanka.

31. The headnote to GJ & Others materially states as follows:

      (2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern has changed since
      the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri Lanka  itself  is  a
      spent force and there have been no terrorist incidents since  the  end
      of the civil war.

      (3) The government's present objective is to identify Tamil  activists
      in  the  diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil  separatism  and   to
      destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment  6(1)
      to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983, which prohibits the 'violation
      of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus  is  on  preventing
      both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any  similar  Tamil  separatist
      organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

      (4) If a person is detained by the Sri Lankan security services  there
      remains a real risk of ill-treatment or harm  requiring  international
      protection.

      (5) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for a person
      at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the government now
      controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils are required to return to a
      named address after passing through the airport.

      (6) There are no detention facilities  at  the  airport.   Only  those
      whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from the airport.
       Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities are  or  become
      interested exists not at the airport, but after arrival in their  home
      area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID or police within
      a few days.

      (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution  or
      serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
      otherwise, are:

         (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to  the
             integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or
             are perceived to have a significant role in relation to  post-
             conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal
             of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

          b) Journalists (whether in print or other media) or human  rights
             activists, who, in either case, have criticised the Sri Lankan
             government, in particular its human rights record, or who  are
             associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri  Lankan
             government

      (8) The Sri Lankan authorities' approach  is  based  on  sophisticated
      intelligence, both as to  activities  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
      diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that many Sri Lankan Tamils
      travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that  everyone  in  the
      Northern Province had some level of involvement with the  LTTE  during
      the civil war.  In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an  individual's  past
      history will be relevant only to the extent that it  is  perceived  by
      the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
      Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

      (9) The authorities maintain a computerised  intelligence-led  "watch"
      list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is not  reasonably
      likely to be detained at the airport but  will  be  monitored  by  the
      security services after his or her return. If that monitoring does not
      indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise
      the unitary Sri Lankan state or revive the  internal  armed  conflict,
      the individual in question is not, in general, reasonably likely to be
      detained by the security forces.  That will be a question of  fact  in
      each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by such an
      individual.

32. We have no doubt that the Sri Lankan authorities have  on  record  that
    the appellant was detained in 2009 on suspicion of being  a  member  of
    the LTTE but that  record  would  also  show  that  the  appellant  was
    released from detention without any  further  requirement  for  her  to
    report.  It is not reasonably likely that the record  from  2009  would
    indicate anything other than that it was concluded that  the  appellant
    was not of interest at that time.  This is reinforced by the fact  that
    the appellant was able to exit and then re-enter Sri Lanka on  numerous
    occasions subsequent to 2009 without having  any  difficulties  at  the
    airport whatsoever.

33. As indicated above the appellant attended the  Mullivaikal  Remembrance
    Day celebration in London in 2012.  It is reasonably  likely  that  the
    authorities would have taken photographs of that demonstration.  It  is
    difficult to know whether the appellant would have been identified from
    those photographs given  the  large  numbers  of  people  who  attended
    demonstrations, but this is not a matter that we need determine because
    we are prepared to accept  the  authorities  are  aware  the  appellant
    attended demonstrations, this being as a consequence of the  fact  that
    she  appeared  in  two  newspapers  published  in  Sri  Lanka,  with  a
    photograph of her in those newspapers at the demonstration holding up a
    placard stating "Tamil Women".

34. This fact even taken together with the appellant's previous arrest  and
    detention, would not lead us to conclude that she would be at real risk
    of suffering from persecutory treatment were she to return to Sri Lanka
    now.   However,  not  only  was  the  appellant  photographed  at   the
    demonstration but she was also quoted in the Sudar Oli newspaper in the
    following terms;

         "Student Miss  S  S  of  Kotahena,  Colombo  while  expressing  her
         opinion,

             'our relatives were massacred at Mullivaikal without any  kind
             of sympathy or consideration.  In  northern  areas,  including
             Vanni, massacres are still continuing without any sympathy  or
             consideration for life.  Many of  our  relatives  have  fallen
             victims in the Mullivaikal battle.  It is essential  that  war
             crime enquiry should be brought against those  committed  this
             type of massacre.

             Incidents of young women being subjected  to  forced  sex  and
             then killing them still continues in the northern area.  I had
             joined in this programme to  shed  tears  thinking  about  our
             relatives who were massacred at Mullivaikal.  I have had  lost
             many of relatives during the final battle at Vanni.  Therefore
             it is essential to expedite the war crime enquiry against  the
             Sri Lankan government under the  present  circumstances.   All
             our relatives should unite together and take action'."

35. We note also that the enquiry by the CID  occurred  shortly  after  the
    newspaper articles in question were published, and  we  consider  that,
    given the sensitivity on the part of the Sri Lankan authorities to  the
    views such as those expressed by the  appellant,  that  the  visit  was
    prompted by the publication of the articles.

36. We are satisfied that, given the nature of the views expressed in  this
    article, published in Sri Lanka,  that  it  would  have  attracted  the
    adverse attention of the authorities. While  the  appellant  is  not  a
    journalist, she is, we consider reasonably likely to  be  perceived  as
    being a human rights activist  working  for  Tamil  separatism  and  to
    destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state, this  being  irrespective  of
    the sophistication of their intelligence and the  appellant's  lack  of
    true commitment to the Tamil cause. The terms of the  quotation,  which
    is  in  the  public  domain,  carries  significant  criticism  of   the
    government and makes  clear  allegations  of  the  involvement  of  the
    Rajapacksa regime in war crimes.

37. Given the adverse interest in the appellant whose  identity  is  known,
    and as it is known that she is in the United Kingdom, we are  satisfied
    in the light of the material set out in GJ & Others  and  the  guidance
    given that, in the particular circumstances of  this  case,  where  the
    appellant's views as expressed in a newspaper  have  already  attracted
    adverse attention, and would be perceived as a threat to the state, she
    would be again taken into detention to  determine  the  extent  of  her
    activities. As noted in GJ & Others, there is  therefore  a  real  risk
    that she would,  on  account  of  her  perceived  political  views,  be
    subjected to ill-treatment of sufficient severity to engage the Refugee
    Convention and article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.   It  has  not
    been submitted to us, nor do we accept, that the appellant's activities
    are such that she should  be  excluded  from  protection,  and  we  are
    therefore satisfied that to remove her to Sri Lanka would be in  breach
    of the Refugee Convention and the Human Rights Convention. We allow her
    appeal on those grounds.

Summary of Conclusions

For reasons already given the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  did
involve the making of an error of law and is set aside.

We re-make the decision by allowing the appeal  on  Refugee  Convention  and
Human Rights Convention (Article 3) grounds.

The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains in place.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date 5 August 2013

