
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06153/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 23rd February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [M B]
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss O Wybraniec (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on 2nd September  1942.
    The Appellant's immigration history is that the Appellant applied for a
    multientry visit visa to the  United  Kingdom  in  2001.   There  is  a
    difference between the dates recorded by the Secretary  of  State,  who
    contends that that visit visa expired on 10th November 2001,  and  that
    of the Appellant, who through her Counsel states that it expired on 7th
    December 2001.  There is  some  small  amount  of  relevance  in  those
    variations of dates but on 3rd December 2001 an application was made by
    the Appellant for leave to remain as a carer of her pregnant niece  and
    the Appellant was granted further leave to remain until March 2003.  If
    the Appellant's dates are correct then  the  application  was  made  in
    time.  If they were not then it was made when she was an overstayer.  I
    anticipate it makes little difference to the current application.

 2. On 10th March 2003 the Appellant made a further application  for  leave
    to remain  which  was  refused  on  23rd  June  2003.   Thereafter  the
    Appellant became an overstayer.  On 17th September 2013  the  Appellant
    claimed asylum in the UK on the basis that there was no-one to care for
    her in Sierra Leone and she feared that if she returned to Sierra Leone
    she would face persecution due to refusing to join the Bondo Society as
    a Digba upon inheriting the position from her deceased sister.  In that
    role the Appellant would  be  required  to  perform  FGM  on  girls,  a
    practice to which she is opposed.

 3. On 21st March 2015 the Appellant's appeal  was  refused  by  Notice  of
    Refusal issued by the Home Office.  The  Appellant  lodged  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal came before First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Swinnerton sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  18th  September
    2015.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  7th  October  2015   the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds and
    the Appellant was found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 4. On 19th October 2015 the Appellant lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended inter alia:-
      i) that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had misapplied the  standard  of
         proof;
     ii) that the judge had misapplied the test for reintegration;
    iii) had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  material
         matters; and
     iv) had failed to take into consideration material matters, namely  the
         Appellant's medical and care needs

 5. On 4th November 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett found that  the
    first ground showed no arguable error as the standard  referred  to  is
    from Directive 2002/83/EC, and that the second ground showed  no  error
    as the judge was not satisfied there were obstacles  to  reintegration.
    However the judge did find that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    erred in failing to say why it was not credible that the Appellant  had
    no family members in Sierra Leone.  The Secretary of State responded to
    the Grounds of Appeal by way of a Rule 24 reply on 12th November  2015.



 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Miss Wybraniec.  Miss Wybraniec is extremely familiar with this
    matter.  She appeared before the First-tier Tribunal, she is the author
    of the Grounds of Appeal and she has also prepared for this  hearing  a
    skeleton argument.  The Secretary of State proceeds by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Tufan.

The Issues

 7. I have recited above the decision of 4th November 2015 when  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimmett gave permission to appeal on the basis that  it
    was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge in hearing  the  appeal
    had failed to say why it was not credible that  the  Appellant  had  no
    family members in Sierra Leone under Ground 3 of the  appeal.   I  note
    that the reasons for decision are silent as to the further reasons  for
    Ground 3 and that no reference is made whatsoever pursuant to Ground  4
    in its entirety.  I acknowledge and accept the submission made by  Miss
    Wybraniec which is not opposed by Mr Tufan, namely that  following  the
    guidance given in Nixon (Permission to  appeal:  grounds)  [2014]  UKUT
    3618 that irrespective of whether permission to appeal  is  granted  on
    all of the grounds advanced or some thereof only, a  reasoned  decision
    is always required in respect of each and every ground which reinforces
    the necessity of considering  all  grounds  with  scrupulous  care.   I
    consequently note  and  accept  that  in  the  absence  of  a  reasoned
    decision, either granted or refusing  permission  to  appeal  on  other
    matters under Grounds 3 and  4,  that  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to
    proceed on the basis that permission is granted  in  respect  of  those
    grounds also.

 8. Consequently the position before me relates to an  appeal  pursuant  to
    Article 3 and Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.  It
    is noted, and I record, that there is not an extant appeal before me on
    asylum or humanitarian protection grounds.

The Appellant's Health

 9. The Appellant appears in person with the  support  of  two  ladies  who
    advised me that they are her nieces.  One is her niece [MS], who is the
    author of a witness statement and gave evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I am also aware of a medical report dated 1st September 2015
    from Dr Bethany West of the Cognitive Impairment and  Dementia  Service
    West London Mental NHS Trust which concludes that after discussion with
    her senior registrar  it  appears  that  the  Appellant  has  a  severe
    cognitive impairment which fits a vascular dementia F018.  A care  plan
    thereafter is recited.  That report was before the First-tier Tribunal.



10. I have had the benefit of observing the Appellant.  Clearly I  have  no
    medical training.  However on two occasions during the  course  of  the
    hearing the Appellant became agitated and had to be restrained  by  her
    attending nieces (both of whom  spoke  English)  from  getting  up  and
    wandering around the court.  It was clear that the  Appellant  did  not
    understand the process and  was  unable  to  communicate.   I  made  no
    evaluation but it was agreed that that was no reason  for  the  hearing
    not proceeding on the error of law.  However, it is relevant so far  as
    directions given herein and on the Appellant's ability  to  participate
    in any rehearing.  Mr Tufan on behalf of the Secretary of  State  noted
    and acknowledged the position.

Submissions/Discussion

11. I am gratefully assisted in this matter by the intervention of Mr Tufan
    who acknowledges that Article 8 has been inadequately considered in the
    opinion of the Secretary of State by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He
    accepts that the Appellant has some family life and therefore Article 8
    could be engaged.  He also concedes that in such circumstances it would
    also be appropriate to remit the appeal under Article 3  albeit  it  is
    the Secretary of State's belief that such appeal could not succeed.

12. Miss Wybraniec acknowledges this  position  and  is  grateful  for  the
    concession made by the Secretary of State.   She  makes  no  concession
    however with regard to the claim pursuant to Article 3.  She refers  me
    in some detail to paragraphs 20 to 39  of  her  skeleton  argument  and
    relies upon these as being the basis  upon  which  there  are  material
    errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

15. I agree with the submissions of  both  legal  representatives  in  this
    matter.  The consideration of Article 8 is covered in five  very  short
    paragraphs and is completely inadequate.  The judge has failed to  give
    due consideration to the observations made in GS (India) and  Others  v
    SSHD [2015] 1 WLR 3312 where Laws J affirmed that in medical  cases  if
    an Article 3 claim fails:
         "Article 8 cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
         - the capacity to form  and  enjoy  relationships  or  a  state  of
         affairs having some affinity with this paradigm."

    I consequently note the  submission  made  by  Miss  Wybraniec  on  the
    Appellant's behalf that even if the  Appellant's  claim  were  to  fail
    under Article 3 her  close  relationship  with  her  nieces  and  their
    families in the UK requires leave to be granted on the basis of Article
    8.  To that extent and the failure to consider Articles 3 and  8  fully
    and properly in the light of the testimony by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, must constitute material errors of law and  I  consequently  set
    aside the decision and remit the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    giving appropriate directions which are set out herein in the  decision
    paragraph.

Notice of Decision
 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and is set aside.  The basis upon which the appeal is set aside and the
    issues outstanding relate solely to the Appellant's appeals pursuant to
    Article 3 and Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.
 2) That the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross
    to be relisted on the first available date after 1st July 2016 with  an
    ELH of  two  hours  before  any  judge  other  than  Immigration  Judge
    Swinnerton.
 3) That  the  Appellant's  solicitors  obtain  a  medical  report  from  a
    nominated consultant setting out the extent of the Appellant's vascular
    dementia,  her  current  and  forthcoming  care  needs  and  her   life
    expectancy.
 4) It is ordered that such report to be prepared, filed  at  the  Tribunal
    and served upon the Secretary of State by 1st June 2016.
 5) That there be leave to the Appellant's solicitors to file and serve up-
    to-date witness statements from the Appellant's nieces  in  support  of
    the Appellant's appeal, such witness statement evidence to be filed and
    served at least fourteen days prior to the restored hearing.
 6) That a Temne interpreter is required.  In the event  that  the  medical
    evidence shows that the Appellant will not be able  to  understand  any
    testimony nor to provide any testimony, then  there  be  leave  to  the
    Appellant's representatives to make application to excuse the  personal
    attendance  of  the  Appellant  at  the  restored  hearing.   If   such
    application is made and is  granted  then  the  Appellant's  solicitors
    should advise the Tribunal as to whether  the  witnesses  who  will  be
    attending on her behalf require a Temne interpreter or not.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
