
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA061202015
      AA016452015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2016                             |On 24 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     N H
                                     Z H
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms C Fletcher, Counsel instructed by Malik and
Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  dated  2  October  2015.   The
    appeal relates to a decision by First-tier Tribunal Andrew  promulgated
    on  5  August  2015.  The  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  against   the
    Respondent's  decision  refusing  the  Appellants'   applications   for
    protection and on human rights grounds.

2.    The background to the appeal is that the Appellants are sisters.  They
    had arrived in the United Kingdom as  minors  with  their  father.  The
    father's claim for asylum had failed. The Appellants' claim for  asylum
    related to a fear of their stepmother who they claimed had links to the
    Police. It was said that the First  Respondent  would  be  forced  into
    marriage  by  her  and  that  both  Appellants  would  be  forced  into
    prostitution.

3.    The Judge dismissed  the  appeal,  in  effect,  because  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection or that their father would provide them  with
    assistance as he would be removed with them.

4.    The real issue, as identified clearly by the grant  of  permission  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins, is the tension at  paragraph  22  of  the
    Judge's decision where she said that the  Appellants'  father's  health
    had deteriorated but  that  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  medical
    evidence to suggest that the Appellants' father was  so  unwell  as  to
    mean he could no longer help the Appellants to safely relocate.

5.    At the hearing before me  Ms  Fletcher  referred  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal. She said that there had been medical evidence before the Judge.
    It was submitted that the Judge had considered  the  evidence  and  the
    impact on the father. The Appellants  have  nowhere  to  return  to  in
    Pakistan. The Police in Pakistan  are  corrupt.  Paragraph  19  of  the
    skeleton argument before the Judge was referred  to.  There  was  clear
    reference to it being unduly harsh for the Appellants to return as lone
    women or otherwise. The deterioration in the father's health has had  a
    significant impact on why the Appellants cannot return to Pakistan. The
    family are struggling with the effects of the stroke.

6.    Mr Harrison in his submissions said that he  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    Reply. The Appellants' father's asylum claim had been refused.  He  was
    appeal rights exhausted on 5 March 2012 but he has not been removed  to
    date. At the last hearing an assurance was  given  that  they  will  be
    removed as a family should  the  daughters'  claims  be  dismissed.  At
    paragraph 23 the Judge had  considered  both  sides  in  terms  of  the
    medical evidence. The Rule 24 is strident in its language.

7.    I then heard further submissions from Ms Fletcher. I  pointed  out  to
    the parties that there did not appear  to  be  a  final  conclusion  in
    respect of internal relocation in the decision. This was accepted to be
    so.

8.    I had reserved my decision.

9.    In my judgment there is a material error of law. The  House  of  Lords
    decisions in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  AH  (Sudan)
    [2007] UKHL 49 and Januzi and others v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2006] UKHL 5 make it  clear  that  the  test  for  internal
    relocation is the consideration of whether it would be unduly harsh  or
    unreasonable for there to be internal relocation.

10.   Although it is not usually an error law for a Judge not  to  refer  to
    either of these cases, the lack of reference to them in this  instance,
    along with the lack of a clear final conclusion in respect of  internal
    relocation shows a material error of law. The Judge did consider issues
    relating to the sufficiency of protection but that was not  the  answer
    to internal relocation issues.

11.   When  coupling  that  error  with  the  fact  that  it  would  be  the
    Appellants' father who would provide the protection to  the  Appellants
    on return to Pakistan with the medical ailments  he  appeared  to  have
    means that the decision cannot stand.

12.   In the circumstances I conclude that the matter  has  to  be  reheard.
    None of  the  findings  from  the  Judge's  decision  relating  to  the
    Protection claim shall  stand.  The  only  grounds  of  appeal  by  the
    Appellants related to the protection claim so  that  is  what  will  be
    reheard.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law.

The Appellant's  appeal  is  remitted  to  be  reheard  at  the  First  Tier
Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is made because the appeal relates to asylum.





Signed                                       Date: 11 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


