
[pic]
|                                      |                               |
|Upper Tribunal                        |Appeal Number AA.07572.2012    |
|Immigration and Asylum Chamber        |                               |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at:   North Shields
On:         Wednesday 17th July 2013

                                   Before

                                Judge Aitken
                       Deputy Chamber President (HESC)


                                   Between


                                                        AM
                                  Appellant




                            (Anonymity Direction)

                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT    Respondent




For the Appellant:           Mr S Tetty
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                                Determination

   1. This matter appeared before me following the decision  of  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge Campbell who decided on 22nd October 2012  as  follows:


      "1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to remove him from the
      United Kingdom was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  D  J  B
      Trotter ("the judge") in a determination promulgated  on  1st  October
      2012. The appellant claimed to be at risk  on  return  to  Iran  as  a
      person sought by the authorities of that country, on the basis of  his
      political activities  and  attendance  at  demonstrations.  The  judge
      concluded that parts  of  the  appellant's  account  were  not  to  be
      believed. In particular, he found that the  appellant  had  not  shown
      that he was wanted by the Iranian authorities.

      2.   In the grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to
      appeal, it is contended that the judge erred in law in his approach to
      and assessment of medical evidence contained in a  report.  The  judge
      appeared to find, at paragraph  26  of  the  determination,  that  the
      report supported the appellant's case, but he did not go  on  to  make
      any further findings. If the medical report supported the  appellant's
      account of injury and ill-treatment it was incumbent upon the judge to
      make findings, showing that what appeared in  the  report  was  either
      accepted or rejected. The judge went on to  make  adverse  credibility
      findings but without addressing the medical report.

      3. This ground is arguable. The judge clearly had the report in  mind,
      as is apparent from paragraph 19  of  the  determination,  where  that
      evidence is summarised together with part of the appellant's  account.
      The report is also mentioned, as appears in the grounds, at  paragraph
      26 of the determination. The judge there  records  that  he  has  paid
      particular attention to it and the same paragraph includes  a  summary
      of the findings contained in it. The judge's  findings  of  fact  then
      appear at paragraphs 27 to 32 of the determination, but the report  is
      not mentioned at all. The determination does not show  what  part  the
      report played in the judge's analysis and  it  is  arguable  that  his
      adverse credibility findings have been made without regard to  it.  In
      other respects, the appearance of the determination suggests  that  it
      has not been proofed (as the question marks at the end of paragraph 25
      suggest).

      4.   This ground, and all the grounds, may be  argued.  Permission  to
      appeal is granted."

   2. On  13th  December  2012  Upper  Tribunal  judge  Eshun  recorded  the
      following:

      "The respondent in the Rule 24 reply does not oppose  the  appellant's
      appeal. The Upper Tribunal, pursuant to rule 34, has decided without a
      hearing that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  contain  an
      error of law, as identified in the grant of permission, read with  the
      grounds of application, and should be set aside  and  re-made  by  the
      Upper Tribunal.

      The appeal will accordingly proceed to a hearing for  the  purpose  of
      considering evidence relevant to the re-making of the decision on  the
      basis that none of the findings of fact  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      shall stand."


   3. The hearing before me proceeded  on  the  basis  that  no  facts  were
      preserved from earlier hearings. The appellant gave evidence before me
      adopting the  explanations  he  gave  in  interview  and  the  further
      explanations he gave in  a  statement  dated  20th  August  2012.  His
      account is that he was a taxi driver in Iran but disaffected with  the
      regime in Iran and prone to protests against  it.  This  stemmed  from
      punishment by lashing for being in the company of a young lady  whilst
      without a chaperone.


   4. On 10th June 2009 he attended a demonstration and his activities  came
      to the attention of the Bonyad, an organisation which  offers  support
      to the relatives of those martyred for Iran, in the  appellant's  case
      his father. In December 2009 he attended  one  of  the  well  reported
      demonstrations against the Presidential  election  result.  He  became
      involved in a scuffle with a police officer and injured  his  leg  but
      was able to escape, nonetheless he was arrested on 19th January  2010,
      he was lashed and fined.


   5. This did not dissuade him and he returned to demonstrate on 29th March
      2010, he was seen wearing green wrist  and  headbands  and  they  were
      forcibly cut from him whilst he was in the crowd. He arranged  medical
      treatment for tendon injuries via his sister who is a doctor  and  the
      medical records indicate that the injury  is  a  glass  injury  in  an
      attempt to protect him.


   6. He was served with a summons to attend court on 5th March 2010. In May
      2010 he was sentenced to imprisonment, but the appeal was  allowed  in
      part in July. He received a further summons on 1st September 2010.


   7. In late 2011 and early 2012 he was distributing fliers denouncing  the
      regime jointly with  a  friend.  That  friend  was  arrested  and  the
      appellant fearing he would be identified  by  his  friend  fled  Iran,
      crossing into Turkey on foot thereafter utilising a lorry  to  get  to
      the United Kingdom.


   8. The appellant produced a number of photographs of injuries  and  scars
      to his body, there was also  a  comprehensive  medical  report  of  Dr
      Lesley Lord. Dr Lord can fairly be described as an expert in the  area
      of  scar,  wound  and  injury  interpretation,  having  a  number   of
      qualifications and long experience as a Police surgeon and  undertaken
      over  300  examinations  similar  to  those  of  the  appellant.   Her
      conclusions, which I accept, are as follows:

      "27. The appearance of his nose is typical of a blow to the nose.   He
      did not take part in any contact sports such as boxing  or  wrestling.
      While it could have been as a result of  his  accident  I  would  have
      thought that it  would  have  been  corrected  during  all  his  other
      treatment. It is therefore most likely due to  being  punched  on  the
      nose as he described during his detention in 2009.

      28. The scar on his forehead is diagnostic of an incited  wound  (full
      thickness injury  caused  by  a  sharp  object).  It  shows  signs  of
      stitching. It is in the position of a headband and so is where I would
      expect it if his headband had been sliced through.

      29. The scars on his right wrist are diagnostic of incised wounds  and
      both show signs of stitching. The horizontal scar is at a slight angle
      and is in the position I would expect if his wristband had been sliced
      through. The vertical scar is in the position  I  would  expect  if  a
      further incision had to be made to repair a tendon cut through by  the
      original wound.

      30. All the other scars on his arms and the scar below his right  knee
      are diagnostic of healed lacerations and  as  one  would  expect  from
      being knocked over. Some show signs of stitching.

      31. The scars on either side of the ankle are diagnostic  of  surgical
      scars and are in the position one would expect if there  was  internal
      fixation of a fracture.

      32. There were no scars or marks on his back despite two  episodes  of
      lashing. It is my experience  that  the  bruising  caused  by  lashing
      usually disappears after about  three  months  and  pigmentation  only
      remains in people with very dark skin such as Africans."


   9. I do not take Dr Lord to be suggesting in paragraph 27 anything  other
      than that the mechanism which caused the injury is most likely  to  be
      as described, rather  than  the  location  and  date  being  accurate.
      Her findings are therefore supportive of the appellant  since  all  of
      his scars are consistent with his account, in particular the  injuries
      to his wrist and head are rather more unusual than the other areas and
      carry more weight accordingly. Mr Dewison sought to make a point about
      the appellant claiming he had the pins removed from his ankle either 5
      or 9 years after  the  operation,  and  the  medical  information  the
      respondent had indicated they would be removed  after  a  few  months.
      Since the  injuries  certainly  were  sustained  it  is  difficult  to
      understand what benefit the appellant might gain form exaggerating the
      time the pins remained in his legs, Mr Dewison indicated it tended  to
      show unreliability, that may be  so,  but  since  it  is  in  an  area
      unrelated  to  his  claim  it  does  affect  his  credibility  to  any
      significant extent.


  10. The appellant produced a number of documents to support his  case.   I
      can give very little weight to the medical  documents,  the  appellant
      indicates they were produced by unorthodox methods  since  his  sister
      was able to get access to his records out of hours. Official documents
      such as medical records carry weight  because  of  the  difficulty  in
      obtaining anything but an official version, and  the  likelihood  that
      the official version was recorded properly by someone under a duty  to
      do so contemporaneously. Here the appellant  freely  states  that  the
      records of injury to his wrist were knowingly falsified at the time to
      read as being from glass injuries and that the records as a whole were
      not produced through proper official channels. These factors  tend  to
      demonstrate that although the documents are official looking, they  do
      not carry the weight of the state's inviolable processes, rather  they
      have been knowingly adapted by an individual for his own purposes.  Mr
      Tetty submitted that I should take into account  the  honesty  of  the
      appellant in admitting this, and  I  shall,  however  it  is  of  less
      account than an official document one has  trust  in  looking  at  the
      situation overall.


  11. Mr Dewison had comments to make regarding the  court  documents  which
      were produced by the  appellant.  In  particular  a  point  which  the
      respondent had previously raised was that one  summons  document  bore
      the equivalent of 1st September 2010 as  its  date,  and  yet  as  the
      appellant claimed to have been convicted  in  July  2010  it  made  no
      logical sense for this to be so. This document is now accompanied by a
      correction note from the translators indicating that it is their error
      and the date was  in  fact  the  equivalent  of  1st  July  2010.  The
      significance is that the document is now part of a logical sequence of
      summons and verdict. I have indicated that this is not a point  to  be
      held against the appellant on the assumption that the  respondent  has
      had an opportunity to examine the document as it was  handed  to  them
      and has until now had the opportunity t see what the date is in  Farsi
      on that document. I  had  indicated  that  the  respondent  must  make
      application if it was suggested that the correction note did  not  now
      represent the face of that document, since none has  been  forthcoming
      it  is  clear  that  the  documents  in  that  respect  at  least  are
      unremarkable.


  12. Even resolving the dates in the appellant's favour, as it is clear one
      must the form of documents is still troublesome. At C5 is a summons to
      attend the Police Prosecutors office within 3 days of  1st  July  2010
      (it is now known). There are some formal parts of the form  indicating
      that a warrant will be issued for non attendance and that if a  lawyer
      or any witnesses are to be called they should be  "introduced".  There
      is a threat to decide the case in the appellant's absence if  he  does
      not attend.  The  form  appears  relatively  unremarkable  in  itself.
      However at C7, on the same day with the same reference numbers  Branch
      13 of the Farsi Provincial Appeal Courts issues what appears to  be  a
      decision reducing the appellant's sentence for taking part in the same
      assault and insult specified on  the  summons.  The  two  do  not  sit
      together neatly. However it does seem to me possible that the  summons
      was triggered by the verdict and requires the appellant to  attend  to
      take his punishment in this case 4  months  imprisonment.  The  formal
      parts do not  match  the  procedure  exactly,  but  it  would  not  be
      impossible for an official document to be used in slightly mis-matched
      circumstances, or at least I can envisage its use  in  that  way.  The
      overall effect is to lessen the weight which can be attributed to  the
      documents because they do not  form  a  seamless  bureaucratic  record
      according with his account, but  nor  are  they  worthless  since  his
      account accords closely to them.


  13. The appellant was generally consistent in his accounts,  save  in  one
      particular respect, when he gave  evidence  before  Judge  Trotter  he
      indicated that he went to the hospital at noon to have his  wrist  and
      head seen to, arranged by his sister. Under cross examination  and  in
      re-examination he  denied  having  said  that  and  was  adamant  that
      although he might have said something to the effect that  he  went  to
      the hospital when it was quieter, and since the shift change  was  3pm
      it could be just after that or when it was dark he did not say noon or
      1pm. The Judges notes are clear "It was done about  noon"  That  is  a
      plain inconsistency with regard  to  his  evidence  and  it  adversely
      affects his credibility. As against that the  appellant  has  given  a
      lengthy interview which is  rich  in  detail,  he  answered  over  150
      questions and the detail in the questions is often as long towards the
      end as it is at the beginning, this tends to support his account since
      the inconsistencies are few  and  far  between.  I  note  also  he  is
      prepared to treat in  a  somewhat  offhand  manner  his  avoidance  of
      military service in his interview, something it seems to  me  unlikely
      he would do if he felt he needed to find reasons to improve his  case.



  14. Looking at all of the evidence I consider that there is a serious risk
      that the appellant may be telling the truth about his  conflicts  with
      the regime in Iran. In SB (risk on return-illegal exit) Iran CG [2009]
      UKAIT 00053 the Upper Tribunal held that events in Iran following  the
      12 June 2009 presidential elections have led to a government crackdown
      on persons seen to be  opposed  to  the  present  government  and  the
      Iranian judiciary has become even less independent.  Persons  who  are
      likely to be perceived by the authorities in Iran  as  being  actively
      associated with protests against the June 12 election results may face
      a real risk of persecution or ill treatment. Being a  person  involved
      in court proceedings in Iran who has engaged in conduct likely  to  be
      seen as insulting either to the judiciary or the justice system or the
      government or to Islam constitutes another risk factor  indicating  an
      increased level of risk of persecution or  ill  treatment  on  return.
      Taking those risk factors into account I find that the  appellant  has
      established that he would be at risk of  persecution  were  he  to  be
      returned to Iran.


                                  Decision


The decision is remade.

The appeal is allowed on Refugee Grounds and Human Rights Grounds

Under Rule 14(1)  The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 The
appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless and
until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No report of these proceedings
shall identify this appellant or any member of their family either directly
or indirectly.

Note that a failure to comply with this direction could lead to proceedings
for contempt of Court
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                Judge Aitken
                                             Deputy Chamber President (HESC)
                                                       Tuesday, 30 July 2013
