
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/07597/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reason Promulgated   |
|On January 12, 2016                  |On January 14, 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms Mair, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
Respondent  Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant,  citizen  of  Cameroon  originally  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a student and on April 28, 2014 he applied for  asylum.  The
    respondent  refused  his  application  on  September  15,  2014   under
    paragraph 336 HC 395. The appellant appealed this decision  on  October
    1, 2014 under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

 2. The appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McDade  on
    November  20,  2014  and  all  of  the  appellant's  applications  were
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on December 4, 2014.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision on December 18,
    2014. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Denson on January 7, 2015 on the basis it was  arguable  there
    was material error in law based on contradictory findings in paragraphs
    [2] and [6] and a failure to have  regard  to  parts  of  the  evidence
    submitted on the appellant's behalf.

 4. The matter came before me on the above date and on that  date  I  heard
    submissions from both Ms Mair and Ms Johnstone.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    ERROR IN LAW

 6. Ms Mair adopted her skeleton argument and submitted that there  were  a
    number of material errors in  the  decision.  Although  the  respondent
    would argue that the error in paragraph [2] was  a  mere  typographical
    error she submitted that it was fundamental to the decision and  showed
    a significant discrepancy in the Judge's findings on credibility.  This
    error was compounded by the Judge's  failure  to  have  regard  to  the
    bundle of evidence consisting of text messages and other printouts. The
    judge had commented on the evidence from Cameroon but bearing  in  mind
    the evidence submitted it had been  incumbent  in  the  Judge  to  give
    reasons for rejecting the UK based evidence and  simply  rejecting  the
    claim  based  on  adverse  findings  on  the  Cameroon   evidence   was
    insufficient. The Judge  failed  to  give  proper  findings  or  cogent
    reasons for rejecting the claim.

 7. Ms Johnstone relied on the Rule 24 response dated January 26, 2015. She
    submitted the Judge had properly considered all  of  the  evidence  and
    rejected the evidence from the United Kingdom  because  there  were  no
    witnesses or statements to support his account and taking into  account
    the adverse findings about his time in Cameroon the Judge was  entitled
    to reject his claim and was not obligated to  make  findings  on  every
    piece of evidence. Whilst there were documents contained  in  both  the
    respondent's bundle and appellant's bundle there  was  no  evidence  to
    show where this evidence came from. The letter at page 61 was based  on
    what the administration officer had been told and  her  evidence  could
    not be tested. The organisations referred to in the letter did not send
    any representatives to show his involvement with them.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to consider the evidence in the round and reject the evidence.



 8. Ms Mair submitted his activities were akin to sur plas  activities  and
    the fact his earlier account was rejected  did  not  mean  his  current
    evidence should be rejected without proper consideration.




    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

 9. The appellant had come to the  United  Kingdom  and  according  to  the
    evidence had studied here for a period  of  time  before  applying  for
    asylum in 2014. His application stemmed from a conversation he had  had
    with his brother and a letter he received from his father.

10. The Judge considered the available evidence that emanated from Cameroon
    and in a detailed decision set  out  between  paragraphs  [3]  and  [6]
    considered the evidence and made a number of findings. At paragraph [7]
    of her decision the Judge briefly referred to  his  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom. It is the Judge's approach to  this  evidence  that  Ms
    Mair submits is deficient.

11. I am satisfied that there is a failure by the  Judge  to  consider  the
    evidence submitted in  this  appeal  by  the  appellant  and  contained
    between pages 17-51, in particular, of the  appellant's  bundle.  There
    were also other messages submitted to  the  respondent  at  an  earlier
    stage.

12. The Judge made findings that were  open  to  her  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's activities in Cameroon. Ms Mair did not seek  to  challenge
    those findings and those findings remain  the  starting  point  of  the
    Judge's assessment. However, I am satisfied it  was  incumbent  on  the
    Judge to consider the evidence submitted primarily in  the  appellant's
    bundle and by failing to do so, despite Ms Johnstone's  submissions  to
    the contrary, I find there is an error in law.

13. I do not find the typographical error in paragraph [2]  amounts  to  an
    error in law as it is clear from the  overall  determination  that  the
    appellant's account was rejected.

14. Having found there is an error I have considered whether  it  would  be
    appropriate to proceed without further evidence being called.  Although
    the previous hearing was on November 20, 2014 there was no  application
    made to adduce further  evidence  even  though  the  directions  issued
    provided for that.

15. I therefore intend to remake this decision without hearing any  further
    evidence and basing my decision on the evidence  that  was  before  the
    First-tier tribunal.

16. My starting point is to adopt the findings made by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal McDade in  relation  to  all  matters  that  occurred  in
    Cameroon. In  particular, I adopt the following findings:

      a. The appellant produced no reliable documentary evidence  or  called
         any witnesses to support the assertions he  made  about  events  in
         Cameroon. The circumstances of his  claimed  receipt  of  documents
         together with the circumstances in relation to the absence  of  any
         witnesses weakened his case.

      b.  It  was  not  reasonably  likely  that  E  would  have  given  the
         appellant's details to the police as this would have implicated E.

      c. The documents contained at paragraphs 52-54 were not given to R  as
         the appellant claimed and the use of these letters were an  attempt
         by the appellant to construct a fabricated account to both the Home
         office and the Tribunal in order to support an asylum claim.

      d. The failure of R to attend the hearing and  give  evidence  further
         undermined the credibility of his claim.

      e. The letter at page 54 was self-serving and was not signed  by  him.
         The circumstances in which it came to  arrive  in  the  appellant's
         hands are curious and no weight would be attached to this document.



      f. No documentary evidence to support  his  mother's  illness  or  his
         uncle's death was adduced  and  no  weight  is  attached  to  these
         claims.

17. The appellant's claim is that he is bi-sexual and his actions here mean
    that if he were returned to Cameroon and wished to continue his  sexual
    behaviour then he would be at risk due to Cameroon's intolerance.

18. This is ultimately a credibility assessment as to whether the appellant
    is gay and if he is whether he would be prevented from doing so  if  he
    were returned to Cameroon.

19. The existence of text messages does not mean that the  content  of  the
    messages are truthful. The messages included in the respondent's bundle
    are an assortment of conversations. The messages are said to come  from
    a dating website but no further information was adduced about this.  It
    is unclear when these messages originate from  as  the  "year"  is  not
    included in the messages. However as they were submitted by him  before
    the refusal letter was issued It is safe to assume that  they  pre-date
    September 2014. None of these messages refer  to  any  actual  meetings
    having taken place between the appellant and the other persons  in  the
    conversation. The appellant's intention in these  messages  has  to  be
    considered in the round and  against  the  background  of  the  earlier
    adverse findings set out in paragraph [16] above.

20. I turn now to the appellant's bundle of documents and in particular the
    content of messages between pages 17 and 51. The year of  the  messages
    is not identified as before but these messages appear in a similar form
    to the ones contained in the respondent's bundle.

21. There is a conversation between the appellant and a person  called  "J"
    and there is a reference to  a  possible  meeting  on  August  30.  The
    conversation is then silent  until  September  20  albeit  there  is  a
    reference to a liaison between them at some  stage  between  these  two
    dates.

22. There is also  a  conversation  between  the  appellant  and  a  person
    referred to as "s" and these chats cover a two week period at  the  end
    of May and beginning of June albeit the year  is  unknown.  Although  a
    meeting was suggested nothing came of the meeting.

23. Further evidence of him chatting to other males appears  between  pages
    43 and 48 but apart from demonstrating a string of texts  between  them
    they do not show anything more.

24. The final  document  put  forward  is  a  letter  at  page  61  of  the
    appellant's bundle. This letter is dated October 22, 2014 and refers to
    the appellant going to Birmingham LGBT offices in Birmingham on October
    14, 2015 and talking to Maria  Hughes.  He  did  not  disclose  to  her
    anything about his activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  only
    reference to his sexuality appears  to  be  what  happened  to  him  in
    Cameroon. She did not appear to have any in depth conversation and  the
    fact she found his account credible has  to  be  assessed  against  the
    background that she has not  seen  the  refusal  letter  or  any  other
    documents. The fact she referred him to an asylum seekers social  group
    or a "Brum bi group" does not add any weight especially as she did  not
    attend the hearing and explain her conclusions.

25. I accept the appellant has engaged in text messages  but  they  do  not
    prove he is gay or would be  at  risk.  They  refer  to  one  attempted
    meeting in May/June and to a possible meeting in  August/September  but
    little else. This appellant had been here for a number of  years  prior
    to visiting the Birmingham LGBT offices but he  produced  nothing  that
    supported his claim or difficulties be they here or in Cameroon.

26. He came to the United Kingdom and he has produced little evidence  that
    he is gay apart from the above text messages. In light of  the  earlier
    findings and his motives I do not accept on the evidence that he is gay
    or would, if returned to Cameroon, be at any risk. I  am  satisfied  he
    did not place himself at risk in Cameroon when he was there  and  I  am
    not satisfied he had any gay relationships  in  Cameroon.  As  for  his
    activities in the United Kingdom I am not satisfied he has produced any
    persuasive evidence that would suggest he is now gay and would want  to
    live openly as a gay man in Cameroon.

27. Having considered all of the evidence I reject his claims for asylum or
    humanitarian protection and I find he is not need of  protection  under
    Article 2 or 3 ECHR. The Article 8 decision had not been challenged and
    that earlier decision stands.

    DECISION

28. There was a material error and I set aside the original  decision  save
    in so far as Article 8 ECHR was concerned.

29. I dismiss the appellant's claims for asylum or humanitarian  protection
    and I find he is not [in] need of protection under Article 2 or 3 ECHR.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

