
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07918/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2016                             |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    B O H
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Pickering, Counsel, instructed by Switalski
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Duff (the judge), promulgated on  16  October  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal was against  the
    Respondent's decision of 30 April 2015,  refusing  a  protection  claim
    made on or about 11 November 2014.

 2. The Appellant claimed to be an Iraqi national from the Jalwala area  of
    that country. He also initially claimed to have been born in 1997. Both
    of these assertions were doubted by the Respondent. In any  event,  the
    RFRL stated that even if he could not return to his  home  area,  there
    was an internal relocation option available to him in the  KRG/IKR  (if
    not elsewhere).



The judge's decision

 3. It is clear from the decision that the age issue  was  not  pursued  by
    Miss Pickering (who appeared below). At paragraph 19  the  judge  notes
    the concession that the Appellant could not succeed on refugee grounds,
    and that only Humanitarian Protection grounds  were  being  argued  (in
    particular, Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive).

 4. At paragraph 24 the judge states that he  accepted  the  expert  report
    from  Professor  Yaron  Matras.  In  paragraphs  25  and  26,  however,
    criticisms are made of  that  report.  Paragraph  27  contains  certain
    discreet adverse  credibility  findings  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    evidence on his age and identity documentation.  In  paragraph  28  the
    judge finds that the Appellant's  family  were  wealthy,  and  that  he
    maintained contact with them from the United Kingdom.

 5. Paragraph 29 is important. The judge finds that  the  Appellant  is  an
    Iraqi  Kurd  whose  family  circumstances  were  as  described  in  the
    preceding paragraph. He goes on to state:

           "It is not  clear  to  me  from  where  in  Iraq  the  appellant
           originates. On the basis of his clear  ethnicity  and  Professor
           Matras' report I consider it most likely that he originates from
           somewhere in the IKR, but I do not come to any  firm  conclusion
           in relation to that...were he to choose to do so this  appellant
           would be able to obtain documentation demonstrating  who  is  he
           and where he  genuinely  comes  from.  There  are  a  number  of
           possibilities as to where the appellant originates. Even if this
           appellant does not originate from within the  IKR  it  would  be
           possible, as he is a Kurd, to go to Baghdad and then - with  the
           assistance of his wealthy father - travel to the IKR..."

 6. The judge then concludes at paragraph 30 that much of what he  has  set
    out previously may not be relevant in any event because  the  Appellant
    lacked certain documentation which in  turn  rendered  return  to  Iraq
    unlikely.

 7. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. Miss Pickering's admirably concise grounds raised  two  points;  first,
    the judge erred in his consideration of the expert report; second,  the
    judge failed to adequately apply the country guidance  decision  in  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).

 9. Permission to appeal was granted only on the second  ground  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on 13 November 2015.



The hearing before me

10. At the outset I raised the issue of whether the judge  had  in  reality
    dealt with the appeal only on the limited basis of the  non-feasibility
    of return, given what he said in paragraph 30. Miss Pickering submitted
    that the judge had clearly dealt with substantive matters going  beyond
    this narrow point. Mr Dewison did not seek to argue to the contrary.

11. Miss Pickering confirmed that she was relying solely on ground two. She
    submitted that the judge had failed to make clear findings on where the
    Appellant actually came from, where  his  family  were,  which  of  the
    various relocation matters applied to the Appellant, and how  he  might
    travel from Baghdad to the IKR. In short, she submitted that the  judge
    had failed to properly engage with what was required under AA.

12. Mr Dewison submitted that the judge had done his best in light  of  the
    problematic evidence before him. There  were  no  findings  on  certain
    matters, but there was nothing the judge could have done.



Decision on error of law

13. Whilst I have a deal of sympathy for  the  judge,  there  are  material
    errors of law in his decision.

14. I have considered the judge's decision on the basis  that  he  was  not
    restricting himself to dealing with the  feasibility  of  return  only.
    That is not how the Respondent put her case, either in the RFRL  or  in
    the Presenting Officer's submissions (see paragraph 20). Before me,  Mr
    Dewison did not seek to suggest otherwise. It is clear enough from  the
    decision that the judge did in fact deal with  numerous  matters  lying
    beyond the  narrow  ambit  of  the  feasibility  of  return  issue,  as
    described in AA itself and HF (Iraq) and Others [2013] EWCA Civ 1276.

15. The errors of law all relate to the need for detailed findings of  fact
    and assessment thereof in light of AA. As we know, and  without  having
    to set out relevant passages here, the guidance  in  AA  is  relatively
    lengthy and precise. In short terms, the judge has, I find,  failed  to
    make clear findings of fact on the following matters, all of which  are
    material to the application of AA:

   i. Where the Appellant in fact originated  from  (there  is  actually  no
      expressly finding that he did not come from Jalwala). This issue  goes
      to the question of CSID documentation and potential relocation;

  ii. Where his family resided in Iraq (this goes to the issue of  potential
      relocation);

 iii. A number of the relocation factors set out  in  paragraph  15  of  the
      headnote in AA;

  iv. How the Appellant would be able to travel to the IKR and reside  there
      (paragraphs 19-20 of the AA headnote).

16. I appreciate that the judge found the Appellant's father to be  wealthy
    and that there was contact between the two. However,  this  alone  does
    not adequately address the various matters required to be considered by
    AA.

17. For the above reasons, the judge's decision is set aside.



Disposal

18. Having regard to paragraph 7 of the Practice Statements, I am remitting
    this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. There are a number  of  matters
    upon which findings of fact need to be made.  As  the  various  factual
    elements are essentially all intertwined,  the  only  findings  of  the
    judge that can properly be preserved are those in paragraph 27  of  his
    decision. The refugee claim was conceded before the judge and there has
    been no attempt to resurrect it before me.

Anonymity

19. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant from serious harm, having regard to the interests of  justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the parties:

   1. The remitted appeal is concerned only with the Humanitarian Protection
      claim, in particular Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  and
      the application of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC);
   2. The finding of First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff that the Appellant is an
      Iraqi Kurd and his findings  at  paragraph  27  of  his  decision  are
      preserved. No other findings of the judge are preserved;
   3. The expert report of Professor Matras is unchallenged in terms of  its
      contents;
   4. Any further evidence relied upon by either party must  be  filed  with
      the First-tier Tribunal and served upon the other side no  later  than
      10 days before the remitted hearing;
   5. Both parties shall comply with any further directions from the  First-
      tier Tribunal.


Directions to Administration:

   1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal;
   2. The remitted appeal shall be heard at the North Shields hearing centre
      on a date to be fixed by that centre;
   3. The remitted hearing shall not be heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Duff;
   4. A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required for the remitted hearing;
   5. There is a 3-hour time estimate for the remitted hearing.




Signed                                       Date:  31 March 2016


H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

