
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07307/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Liverpool                   |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Monday 16 January 2017            |On Tuesday 7 February 2017           |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   MRS I A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq, Legal Representative, Adam solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although anonymity was not granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  case
involves protection issues and  it  is  therefore  appropriate  to  make  an
order.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge L.A.L. Paul promulgated  on  27  June  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 27 February 2015 refusing to vary her leave to remain
       and directing her removal under section 47 Immigration,  Asylum  and
       Nationality Act 2006; also refusing  her  asylum  and  human  rights
       claims.  The appeal against the Decision relates only  to  dismissal
       of the asylum claim.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Iran.  The basis of  the  Appellant's
       claim is that she  says  she  is  a  Muslim  who  has  converted  to
       Christianity and will be at risk on that account.  She says that she
       converted when visiting her son in  Sweden  in  January  2012.   She
       returned to  Iran  thereafter  and  says  that  she  then  joined  a
       Christian group and evangelised with them. She and her husband  came
       to the UK in August 2013  as  visitors.   The  Appellant  says  that
       whilst she was in the UK, her daughter contacted her from  Iran  and
       informed her that the authorities had raided  the  house  church  to
       which she  belonged  and  had  seized  incriminating  documents  and
       photographs.  It is said that others from the house church had  been
       detained and the Appellant's house had been  sealed  off.  She  then
       claimed asylum.  Her husband has also been baptised as  a  Christian
       in the UK.


    3. This is a slightly unusual case.  The Respondent accepted  that  the
       Appellant is a Christian but does not accept that she was originally
       a Muslim. The Respondent did not accept therefore that she would  be
       at risk generally for having renounced her religion and it  was  not
       accepted that the Appellant would  come  to  the  attention  of  the
       authorities on that account.  Her account of the events on which she
       relied as the trigger for her claim was disbelieved.


    4. The Judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that she  did  not  find
       the Appellant credible.   Permission to appeal was refused by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Davidge on 29 July 2016.  Permission  to  appeal
       was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson principally on the basis
       that the Judge had failed to explain why she had not given weight to
       the evidence of the Appellant's son, whose evidence it is  said  was
       not challenged.


    5. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      The grounds and submissions


    6. The Appellant's first ground concerns the evidence of two  witnesses
       whose evidence was said to be key to  the  Appellant's  case.   They
       were the Appellant's husband and son.  It is noted at  [16]  of  the
       Decision that some questions were put to the Appellant's husband but
       it is there reported that no questions were asked of the Appellant's
       son.  His statement confirmed  that  his  mother  had  converted  to
       Christianity.  There  are  no  findings  made  in  relation  to  the
       evidence  of  either  witness.   Mr  Sadiq  submitted  that  it  was
       incumbent on the Judge to make findings whether they  were  or  were
       not believed.  I drew his attention to what the Judge says  at  [37]
       of  the  Decision  concerning  the  husband's  evidence.   Mr  Sadiq
       submitted that this was not a direct finding  that  the  Appellant's
       husband is not a credible witness.  In any event, the fact  remained
       that no findings were made in relation to the son's evidence.


    7. The second  ground  concerned  a  continuation  of  the  Appellant's
       challenge to the finding of the Respondent that  the  Appellant  has
       never been a Muslim based on  what  it  is  said  is  a  fundamental
       misunderstanding of the central tenets of the Muslim  faith  and  an
       improper focus on the history and background  to  the  Muslim  faith
       rather than an investigation as to the practices  of  the  religion.
       This submission is recorded in  the  Decision  at  [23].   Mr  Sadiq
       developed this submission by giving as an example  the  Respondent's
       failure to appreciate  that  there  is  a  distinction  between  the
       pillars of the Muslim faith for  a  Shia  Muslim  and  for  a  Sunni
       Muslim.  The Respondent has, he says, focussed on those in the Sunni
       Muslim religion rather  than  the  Shia  faith  which  is  what  the
       Appellant claims to have practised.  The  Respondent  had  therefore
       misunderstood in what she says at [14] of the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter  that  the  Appellant  had  in  fact  answered  the  question
       correctly. The Judge has compounded that error.  He referred also to
       [15], [18] and [19] of the reasons for refusal letter.


    8. In relation to this ground Mr Sadiq also directed  my  attention  to
       the questions asked of the  Appellant  at  interview  from  question
       [141] to [162].  He pointed out that those are largely  directed  at
       the Appellant's knowledge of what is said about Jesus Christ in  the
       Muslim religion rather than focussing on what  a  practising  Muslim
       would know about his or her faith.  He submitted (or more accurately
       gave evidence) that Jesus Christ is mentioned in only twenty  places
       in over six thousand  verses  in  the  Qur'an.   He  said  that  the
       Respondent's focus on the Appellant's inability  to  answer  certain
       questions, for example, about Mohammad's dates of birth  and  death,
       are not contained in the Qur'an but are  matters  of  historic  fact
       which the Appellant could not be expected to know. He referred  also
       to the letter from the  Appellant's  representatives  following  the
       interview  which  explained  the  difficulties  with  the  line   of
       questioning which the Respondent pursued and why that could not lead
       to a conclusion that the Appellant had never been a Muslim.


    9. Mr Sadiq accepted that the Judge had recorded his submission in  the
       Decision about the distinction between a Shia and Sunni at [29]  but
       said that the issue continued to be explored in an  inadequate  way,
       with  the  Presenting  Officer  continuing  to   misunderstand   the
       difference between the pillars. As a result, he said, the Judge  had
       similarly misunderstood the Appellant's case.




   10. The third ground concerns the documentary evidence.  That is  to  be
       found at pages [19] to [40] of the  Appellant's  bundle.   Mr  Sadiq
       accepted that the grounds wrongly  referred  to  birth  certificates
       when there were none.  However, he  directed  my  attention  to  the
       marriage certificates which, as the  Judge  notes  at  [41]  of  the
       Decision purport to show that the Appellant,  her  husband  and  son
       (AR) are Shia Muslims.  He submitted that the Judge failed  to  take
       those into account when reaching his adverse  credibility  findings.
       Instead, the Judge had reached the finding that  the  Appellant  was
       not credible at  [40]  of  the  Decision  before  dealing  with  the
       documents at [41].  Mr Sadiq also submitted that the Judge  was  not
       entitled to reach the conclusion she did, since these documents also
       go to the credibility of the Appellant's son and  he  had  not  been
       asked about them.


   11. In response, Mrs Aboni submitted  that  the  grounds  are  simply  a
       disagreement with the  findings  and  an  attempt  to  re-argue  the
       appeal.  She submitted  in  summary  that  the  Judge  had  directed
       herself appropriately and considered all the evidence.


   12. In relation to ground one, she noted that the Judge had referred  to
       having received evidence from both the Appellant's husband  and  son
       at [16] of the Decision.  She also there noted that the  Appellant's
       son was not  cross-examined.   Credibility  issues  were  raised  in
       relation  to  the  husband's  evidence  at  [37]  of  the  Decision.
       However, having found that the  Appellant's  own  evidence  was  not
       credible for cogent reasons, the Judge did not need to refer to that
       evidence.  The finding that the Appellant was not credible was  open
       to the Judge.


   13. In relation to ground two, she referred to [29] of the Decision  and
       pointed out that the Judge in that paragraph and what  followed  was
       not satisfied as to the Appellant's answers for  reasons  which  are
       there given (see in particular [29] to [32] of  the  Decision).  The
       Appellant was  given  every  opportunity  to  explain  discrepancies
       arising from the interview record.


   14. Mrs Aboni accepted that it would have been preferable if  the  Judge
       had dealt with the documentary evidence before making final findings
       on credibility.  However, she  submitted  that  any  error  in  this
       regard was not material because the overall  findings  on  the  oral
       evidence were fatal to the Appellant's  case.   The  documents  were
       considered in the overall context  of  the  background  evidence  in
       relation to forged and fraudulent documents.  The findings were made
       also in the context of the Appellant having practised  deception  in
       the past.


   15.  Following discussions, both parties agreed  that,  if  I  found  an
       error of law, it would be appropriate to remit  the  appeal  as  the
       challenge is to adverse credibility findings.








    Discussion and conclusions


   16. I deal first with the second of the  Appellant's  grounds,  in  part
       since this was the main  thrust  of  the  submissions  and  in  part
       because it  is  the  starting  point  for  the  adverse  credibility
       findings in the Decision.  I have considered carefully the  line  of
       questioning in the interview record, the letter from the Appellant's
       representatives and the  relevant  paragraphs  in  the  reasons  for
       refusal letter.


   17. The Judge dealt with this element of the Appellant's case at [29] to
       [33] of the Decision.  Given the importance of this aspect  both  to
       the Appellant's case and her challenge to the Decision, I  set  this
       out in full below:-


           "[29] The RFRL gives reasons at paragraphs 11 to 26  as  to  why
           the Respondent does not accept that the Appellant was a  Muslim.
           I do not intend to repeat here all of the arguments  and  points
           raised in the RFRL, but I entirely agree with  the  Respondent's
           conclusions.  At the hearing, Mr Sadiq made the point  that  the
           Appellant is a Shia Muslim and not a Sunni Muslim, and that  she
           had been asked questions in the AIR that she would not have been
           able to answer, either because she  would  not  have  known  the
           answer   as   a   Shia   Muslim,   or    because    they    were
           technical/historical  questions   about   Islam,   rather   than
           questions about her day to day life  as  a  Muslim.   I  do  not
           accept this.  The Appellant is a 65-year-old woman who,  on  her
           evidence has been a Shia Muslim up until 2012, when she suddenly
           converted to Christianity at the age of 61 years old.  She makes
           no mention in her AIR of the difficulties she has  in  answering
           the interviewer's questions, on the  basis  of  the  differences
           between the Shia and Sunni faiths.  She reports  that  she  read
           the Qur'an weekly in her Farsi language, and yet  she  can  only
           name 4 of the 5 pillars of the Shia Islamic faith (F16, qu 69).
            [30] At the hearing, the Appellant again struggled to give this
           information and then the meaning of the 5 pillars  of  the  Shia
           faith.  She was hesitant and it took her a very long time.   She
           had to be asked repeatedly to give the information  and  in  the
           end she said that she could not remember.  It  was  put  to  the
           Appellant that it  is  unbelievable  that  any  Muslim  who  has
           studied the Qur'an and done Hajj would not know the  5  pillars,
           to which the Appellant responded by  saying  "you're  right  but
           I've forgotten it".
            [31] The Appellant  has  produced  a  witness  statement  which
           rebuts some of the points made by the RFRL, but I find that this
           was prepared in the main by the Appellant's  representatives  as
           it contains  many  details  of  the  Islamic  faith,  which  the
           Appellant  simply  could  not  comment  upon  at  the   hearing.
           Similarly, at the hearing, it was  Mr  Sadiq  who  provided  the
           information regarding the Appellant's Shia faith, and  the  type
           of information that she would be expected to know.  At no  point
           did the Appellant herself say that  she  was  unable  to  answer
           certain questions because of the differences in  being  a  Sunni
           Muslim to a Shia Muslim.  I find that the  Appellant  was  being
           vague  and  evasive  at  the  hearing,  and  this  damages   her
           credibility.
           [32] In his summing up, Mr Sadiq said that the Appellant  should
           have been asked general questions regarding her faith.   In  her
           evidence in chief, Mr Sadiq asked  the  Appellant  if  she  knew
           about certain aspects of her faith, such as  could  she  explain
           the meaning of Ramadan.  All of the questions required "yes"  or
           "no" answers and obviously the Appellant said that she could  do
           the 3 things asked of her, but was not actually asked to  do  so
           to prove her knowledge.  This issue was pursued further in cross-
           examination, and Mr Dillon extensively explored the issue of the
           5 pillars as set out above, and this  cross  examination  proved
           that the Appellant did not in fact know the answers.
           [33] I find that the Appellant had been a practising Muslim  for
           61 years, she would have been able to answer  the  questions  in
           the AIR or at the hearing, or, at the very  least  explain  that
           the Shia Islamic faith differs from the Sunni Islamic faith.   I
           find that this damages the Appellant's credibility."


   18. I readily  accept  based  on  the  evidence  at  page  [47]  of  the
       Appellant's bundle the point which  is  made  about  the  difference
       between the five pillars of the Shia Islamic faith as opposed to the
       Sunni faith.  The Respondent does appear therefore to have relied in
       error  on  the  Appellant's  inability  to  answer   that   question
       correctly.  The difficulty for the  Appellant  though  is  that  the
       Judge too appears to have accepted this.  Her  reasons  are,  first,
       that the Appellant named only four of the five pillars in  interview
       ([29]; see question [69] of the interview  record).   Secondly,  the
       Appellant struggled to answer  the  question  also  at  the  hearing
       ([30]).  Thirdly, the Appellant conceded that she ought to know  but
       had forgotten ([30]).  There is  therefore  no  misunderstanding  of
       that issue by the Judge.


   19. Dealing with this ground more widely, I  see  nothing  inappropriate
       about the way in which the questioning proceeded at  interview.   It
       appears, for example, that the reason why the  interviewer  focussed
       on how Jesus is dealt with in the Islamic faith emerged  because  of
       the Appellant's answer that her interest in Christianity arose  from
       her interest in  Jesus  when  reading  the  Qur'an  (see  answer  to
       question [85] of the interview).  It  would  therefore  be  expected
       that she would be asked more about how that interest  had  developed
       and how Jesus was portrayed in the Qur'an.


   20. In any event, my main concern is the  line  of  questioning  at  the
       hearing and not in the course of the interview.  It is evident  from
       what is said  at  [32]  of  the  Decision  in  particular  that  the
       Appellant was unable to answer even straightforward questions  about
       practice of the Islamic faith.  The Judge was entitled  to  rely  on
       that inability not  least  because  the  questions  which  were  put
       emerged from evidence in chief which  were  followed  up  in  cross-
       examination.  Those were clearly therefore questions which Mr  Sadiq
       (who also appeared below) considered that the Appellant ought to  be
       able to answer.


   21. For those reasons, ground two is not  made  out.   I  turn  then  to
       consider ground one.  I have read the statements of the  Appellant's
       husband and son. The statement of the Appellant's  husband  confirms
       that he and his wife were both Muslim before they both converted  to
       Christianity.  He confirms that his wife converted whilst in Sweden.
        That latter point is dealt  with  by  the  Judge  at  [37]  of  the
       Decision and disbelieved for the reasons  there  given.   The  Judge
       there does not accept the husband's account.


   22. The position in relation to  the  Appellant's  son  though  is  less
       clear.  True it is as  Mrs  Aboni  submitted,  that  the  Judge  has
       recorded that he has received evidence.  It is also the case that it
       is recorded that the Appellant's son was not cross-examined.   There
       are certainly  issues  and  discrepancies  arising  from  the  son's
       successful asylum claim.  Although the appeal decision in that claim
       could not be found, it appears from the papers which were  produced,
       in particular the son's statement, that he obtained  asylum  on  the
       basis that his father was detained and his mother had  escaped  Iran
       four months previously.  That statement is dated 21  December  2011.
       The Appellant's husband says that he  has  never  been  arrested  or
       detained and whilst it is true that the Appellant was in  Sweden  at
       the time, that was by way of a  visit  to  her  other  son  and  not
       because she had fled Iran.  That much is  recited  at  [41]  of  the
       Decision and may well give  cause  to  doubt  the  evidence  of  the
       Appellant's son.  He had however provided a statement to the  effect
       that, notwithstanding the conversion of his mother,  father,  sister
       and brother, he remained a Muslim.  It is curious that this was  not
       explored in cross-examination.  In any event, the Decision is silent
       as to whether his evidence is believed.


   23. That then brings me on to the  documentary  evidence  which  is  the
       focus of ground three. The Judge's findings about the documents  are
       set out at [41] of the Decision.  I would not find an error  of  law
       simply on account of this paragraph following  the  Judge's  finding
       that the Appellant has always been a Christian which appears in  the
       preceding paragraph.  As Mrs Aboni  accepted,  it  might  have  been
       better if the Judge had recorded that evidence prior to the  finding
       at [40] of the Decision.  However, the Judge there says that she has
       considered all the evidence in the round and I also accept  that  if
       the remaining findings on credibility are sustainable, the Judge may
       well have been entitled to reach the conclusion which she did  about
       the  documents,  particularly  since  the  documentary  evidence  is
       limited.


   24. The Judge's conclusions about the documents produced also have to be
       read in the context of what is reported  at  [34]  to  [36]  of  the
       Decision concerning  baptism  certificates.   On  this  aspect,  the
       Appellant's evidence was highly unsatisfactory.  It was inconsistent
       as to the existence of those certificates and there were a number of
       internal discrepancies in that evidence.


   25. The only documentary evidence of significance  in  relation  to  the
       Appellant's claim appears at pages [19] and [22] of the  Appellant's
       bundle, being the  translations  of  the  Appellant's  own  marriage
       certificate and that of her son, AR.  The particulars of  the  dates
       of birth, marriage, names  etc  appear  consistent  with  the  other
       evidence.  I accept however that the Judge was entitled to take into
       account the background evidence as to the ease of  obtaining  forged
       or fraudulent documents and quite obviously if the forgery  was  one
       which was intended to withstand scrutiny, it would be expected  that
       the particulars would be correct.  I accept also that  it  is  quite
       legitimate for the Judge to take into account her  views  about  the
       credibility of the person or persons producing  the  documents  when
       considering whether they are genuine.


   26. However, I find that the Judge has erred in law  when  reaching  her
       findings on these  documents  for  the  following  reasons.   First,
       although the Judge does take into account  the  background  evidence
       when reaching her conclusion whether the documents are genuine,  her
       only reason for finding that they are not genuine is  based  on  the
       Appellant's credibility.  That reasoning process undermines what  is
       said at [40] about the evidence having been considered in the  round
       and tends to the view that the Judge has reached her  finding  about
       credibility without taking the documentary evidence into account.


   27. Second, the documentary  evidence  if  not  genuine  undermines  the
       evidence not only of the Appellant but also of her son to  whom  one
       of the documents relates.  Whilst, as I have noted  at  [22]  above,
       there may be some issues about  his  credibility  (or  that  of  the
       Appellant's husband or both) based on what is said by the  Judge  at
       [41] of the Decision, if a sustainable finding  was  to  be  reached
       about the document which relates to the Appellant's son he should at
       least have been asked about it and given the opportunity to explain.
        There ought at the very least to have  been  a  finding  about  the
       credibility of his evidence and reasons given for disbelieving  him.




   28. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  discloses  an
       error of law on grounds two and three. I  set  aside  the  Decision.
       Since the sole focus of  this  appeal  is  the  adverse  credibility
       findings, it is appropriate to remit this appeal to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for redetermination. Although I have found that there is no
       error in relation to ground one, I do not consider it appropriate to
       preserve any findings particularly in light of my finding  that  the
       documentary  evidence  has  not  been  taken   into   account   when
       considering whether the Appellant and her witnesses are credible.




      DECISION


    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge L.A.L.  Paul  promulgated  on  27
    June 2016 is set aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 7 February 2017

      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
