
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07654/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ Belfast                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 November 2016                   |On 15 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                          MRS RAHMA BASHIRU MOHAMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, Counsel, instructed by Killenwarke
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  S  Gillespie,  promulgated  on  17  December  2015
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 17
    April 2015 refusing her claim to protection and to remove her.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia and is accompanied in the  United
    Kingdom by two of her daughters born in 2009 and 2012.  She is of  Reer
    Hamar origin, her family having left Mogadishu in 2009.  The family had
    at that point relocated to Bucale.

 3. Whilst living there, in 2014, four members of Al-Shabaab  came  to  the
    house saying that they wished to take her eldest  daughter,  then  aged
    13, to marry.  They also wanted to  recruit  her  oldest  son  and  her
    nephew to fight for them, saying that they would return on 29 September
    2014 to do this.  At the time her husband was working on  a  farm  away
    from the family home which he frequently did  for  some  two  to  three
    months at a time.  She then arranged for the children  to  leave  in  a
    lorry, in the hope that they would be safe but had not heard from  them
    since.

 4. On 29 September 2014 Al-Shabaab returned to the  family  home  and,  on
    learning that the three children were gone, was told that if they  were
    not back the next day she would be  killed.   She  then  took  her  two
    youngest children and went to  a  home  of  a  friend  and,  using  her
    telephone, contacted her husband's brother in the USA so that he  could
    make arrangements to get her out of Somalia.  He financed an agent  who
    arranged flights from Somalia.

 5. The appellant's case is that she has no family  in  Mogadishu,  had  no
    prior occupation other than housewife and mother, has a  real  fear  of
    being killed or her children being killed and does not believe that she
    can survive in Mogadishu given her lack of financial means  and  family
    support which would result in her ending up in an IDP camp.

 6. The respondent's case is set out in the Refusal Letter dated  17  April
    2015.  The respondent accepted that the appellant is a Somali; that she
    is a member of the Reer Hamar clan; that  she  had,  as  claimed,  been
    subjected to a serious sexual assault at the age of  14;  that  it  was
    plausible she had left Mogadishu in 2009; but she did not accept, given
    the evidence about the manner in which Al-Shabaab  behaves,  that  they
    would have warned her that they wanted the children but then come  back
    at a time some days later.  It was, however, accepted that she had been
    supported by her husband who worked on a farm for  some  two  to  three
    weeks at a time but that it was unclear how she  could  have  lost  all
    contact with him and she concluded that the appellant was  not  a  lone
    female or that she had no support in Somalia.

 7. The respondent did not accept that  it  was  credible  that  Al-Shabaab
    would have given her four days' notice given how they operated.

 8. Having had regard to Country Guidance in  MOJ  and  Others  (Return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442,  she  concluded  that  as  the
    appellant had family to return  to  in  Mogadishu,  in  particular  her
    husband, she would not be at risk on return nor  was  she  at  risk  on
    account of her membership of the Reer Hamar clan.  She considered  also
    that the appellant had no well-founded fear of Al-Shabaab and  that  in
    any event, having had regard to MOJ and Others that  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh or unreasonable for to relocate to Mogadishu as she has  a
    husband and two other children there and there is  no  reason  why  her
    husband cannot continue to support her on her return.

 9. The respondent considered also it would not be a breach of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under Articles 2, 3 or  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention to return her to Somalia.

10. The judge heard evidence from the appellant as well as submissions from
    both representatives.

11. The judge found that:-

      1) The appellant had not shown she did not  have  means  of  financial
         support available to her, noting her answer at interview [Q80] that
         her brother-in-law had borrowed money from relatives  to  fund  her
         departure, discounting her  latest  claim  that  he  had  no  other
         relatives (see decision at [15]), given noting that her  solicitors
         had corrected an error at Q92 but  not  at  Q80;  and  respondent's
         assertion that  if  the  brother-in-law  had  provided  funds  from
         himself and from other family  members,  the  appellant  had  other
         means of financial support available to  her,  was  a  "sustainable
         assertion;"

      2) The appointment card from the British Red Cross had  been  produced
         post- decision to deal with the claim  that  it  was  unclear  why,
         having managed to get a  message,  funding  and  support  from  her
         brother-in-law in America she would not have got information  or  a
         message to her husband that she was leaving the family home;

      3) The claim with regard to the way in which Al-Shabaab  required  the
         handing over of the daughter, son and nephew was  incredible  [43];
         and that [44] the respondent's submission that it was not  credible
         that she would send the children away in a lorry  without  planning
         how she would make contact with them again;

      4) There had been some customising  of  the  appellant's  evidence  to
         address risk on return to Mogadishu as identified in MOJ [47] there
         being "no evidence that her husband is no longer living in  Somalia
         or incapable of being reunited with her in Mogadishu;"

      5) Having had regard to the background evidence in MOJ, and

             "Taking into account the unreliability of most of the  factual
             averments made by Mrs Mohamed, which I find to have been  made
             to show that she is at critical risk on return to Mogadishu, I
             determine that the conclusions reached  by  the  Secretary  of
             State are tenable with regard  to  this  family's  removal  to
             Mogadishu.  As a result, I find myself having to  dismiss  her
             appeal."

12. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      1) In  not  giving  sufficient  reasons  to  allow  the  appellant  to
         understand why her claim had not been accepted; in  particular,  at
         [42] it was unclear what the judge accepted or did not accept;

      2) In failing to cite  [43]  objective  material  indicating  why  the
         account of the appellant could not be true at least  to  the  lower
         standard applicable given her credibility on other issues that have
         already been accepted by the respondent;

      3) In misdirecting himself at [44] in that simply because a submission
         is "valid" it does not mean that the account given by the appellant
         is invalid or untenable, the judge was therefore not  applying  the
         low standard of proof properly;

      4) In failing properly to apply  the  country  guidance,  in  that  he
         failed to factor into account the  relevant  circumstances  of  the
         appellant as found.

13. On 20 January 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted  permission
    stating:-

         "The grounds of application for permission in appeal in my judgment
         make  only  one  sustainable  ground  of  appeal,  namely  that  in
         paragraph 45 of the judge's decision he sets out the considerations
         to be made when deciding if it is safe  for  an  individual  to  be
         returned to Mogadishu, but then makes no finding on the appellant's
         particular circumstances.  This is an arguable error of law."

14. There does not, however, appear to have been any  compliance  with  the
    decision in Ferrer on this point.  The ground is not  expressed  to  be
    limited nor is there any indication that the proper forms were sent  to
    the appellant explaining that she had the right to renew to  the  Upper
    Tribunal the application for permission on the grounds which  were  not
    admitted by Judge McDade.

15. In her Rule 24 notice dated 4 February 2016 the respondent  avers  that
    the judge's credibility  findings  at  paragraphs  [40]  to  [44]  were
    sustainable and it was clear that he did not find the appellant  to  be
    credible.  It is averred also that the judge  had  at  [48]  found  the
    appellant was not credible, agreeing  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
    reasons.

Discussion

16. This is a case in which a  large  part  of  the  appellant's  case  was
    accepted.  What was  not  accepted  is  that  the  appellant  had  been
    approached by Al-Shabaab, or that they had sought to take her  children
    and nephew or, they had returned, leaving her unharmed, and allowed her
    to leave the area.  It was not accepted  either  that  the  appellant's
    husband could not support her.

17. These issues have particular resonance given the guidance  in  MOJ  and
    Others in the headnote and in particular at paragraph (ix).

18. Contrary to what Mr McTaggart submitted I consider that the  judge  did
    at  [43]  give  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  doubting  the
    credibility of the appellant's account  about  how  Al-Shabaab  behaved
    towards her.  In the light of the background information about how  Al-
    Shabaab behaved, as referred to in the refusal letter, and on which the
    judge relied, this is a sustainable conclusion.  It is  also  the  case
    that what is said at [44] is, properly understood by  reference  to  Ms
    Campbell's submissions, a finding that is also sustainable.

19. With regard to the issues set out in paragraph [41]  again  I  consider
    that this was sustainable in that the judge gave adequate  reasons  for
    doubting the appellant's  explanation  as  to  why  she  did  not  have
    relatives in Somalia.   That  is  a  conclusion  open  to  him  on  the
    material.  Similarly, at [42]  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    doubting the appellant's account as to why she was not in contact  with
    her husband.  That, in the context of the respondent's case as  put  in
    the refusal letter into considerable detail, and  to  which  the  judge
    refers at [41] is a sustainable conclusion.

20. While I  do  have  concerns  regarding  the  use  of  the  phrase  "the
    submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State have  preponderant
    force in this case" and what is said at [48] as they appear,  on  first
    reading, to indicate that the judge, rather than  making  findings  for
    himself, was considering whether the Secretary of State's analysis  was
    one open to her, an approach applicable  only  in  an  application  for
    judicial review, those concerns are met, I do not consider  that,  when
    considering the decision as a whole, that is what the judge did.  While
    he could have expressed himself more clearly, it is nothing  more  than
    an observation that he had found merit in the respondent's  submissions
    as to the appellant's claims and credibility.

21. Whilst I note also Mr McTarggart's submission that the judge appears to
    have erred at [37] in referring to paragraph 2.1.16 of the guidance  as
    opposed to 1.2.16 that is not a matter raised in the grounds of appeal.
     Nor, for that matter, am  I  satisfied  that  it  would  have  been  a
    material point; the judge had given adequate  and  sustainable  reasons
    for concluding that the applicant would not be a single female head  of
    a household on return to Somalia.

22. It must also be noted  that  the  judge  does  not  make  any  specific
    findings after  setting  out  the  risk  categories  at  [45].   As  Mr
    McTaggart submitted, there is little indication, in this context,  that
    the judge applied MOJ.  But that of course is only in relation  to  the
    factors that need to be considered if the judge was satisfied that this
    exercise had to be undertaken in any event.

23. There is, I consider, merit  in  Mr  Whitwell's  submission  that  this
    decision must be understood in the light of the very clear and detailed
    refusal letter.  It is established law that the extent to which reasons
    are  adequate  is  dependent  on  the  circumstances.   Here,  it   was
    sufficiently clear from the refusal letter what the  appellant  had  to
    prove.  It is also clear in that context that the judge did not  accept
    parts of the appellant's evidence and, having heard from  her,  reached
    the same conclusions as the Secretary of State. His  conclusions  were,
    in the context of the appellant knowing what she had to show,  adequate
    and sustainable.

24. I consider also that having found that the appellant  was  not  a  lone
    female and had not shown that she had no support to rely upon on return
    to Mogadishu, that, properly applying MOJ, the judge did not need to go
    through the matters set out at [45].  For that reason, any  failure  to
    consider those factors is not an error capable of being material.

25. For these reasons, I am not satisfied that any of the grounds are  made
    out. I conclude that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    involve the making of an error  of  law  and  I  therefore  uphold  the
    decision.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error  of  law
    and I uphold the decision


Signed                                  Date:  14 December 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

