
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07739/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                               Mr Shafiq Ullah
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. P. Glass, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1996.

 2. He appealed  following  a  decision  of  the  respondent  refusing  him
    international protection on asylum, Humanitarian Protection  and  human
    rights grounds.  That appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Feeney who in a decision promulgated on 15 June 2015 dismissed
    it.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    on 29 July 2015 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McClure.   However,
    it was subsequently granted on a  renewed  application  in  a  decision
    dated 25 August 2015 by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum.  The reasons he gave
    for granting such permission were:

         "1.  The Grounds assert, inter alia, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge failed to consider a psychiatric  report  when  reaching
             her  conclusions  about  the  Appellant's  credibility.    The
             Consultant  Psychiatrist's  report  made  reference   to   the
             Appellant's  confused  state  of  mind  and  his  difficulties
             concentrating.  In his mental state examination the  Appellant
             was  said  to  have  struggled  over   standard   memory   and
             concentration tests and that he was  cognitively  impaired  as
             measured with standard  psychiatric  examination.   The  Judge
             however makes no reference to this evidence in her credibility
             assessment.  This arguably constitutes  a  material  error  of
             law.

         2.   I grant permission on all grounds."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. The appellant's claim is set out paragraph 22 of the  judge's  decision
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  The credibility of that claim was analysed
    by the judge at paragraphs 29 to  38  inclusive.   She  considered  the
    medical evidence and in particular a psychiatric  report  of  Dr  Linda
    Treliving dated 9 January 2015 at paragraph 57 of her decision  in  the
    context of the Article 3 claim.

 6. The nub of the grounds seeking permission to appeal is that  the  judge
    failed to take that medical evidence into account when considering  the
    appellant's credibility.  Highlighted within  the  report  at  page  14
    under the section headed "Credibility" is the following paragraph:-

         "Shafiq  is  cognitively  impaired  as   measured   with   standard
         psychiatric examination.  He has  difficulties  with  concentration
         and memory both of which will impact on  his  ability  to  remember
         events from the past.  There is some  suggestion  that  the  memory
         deficits protect the individual  from  the  horrors  of  repeatedly
         remembering the pain."

 7. Ms Glass relied upon the grounds seeking permission to appeal and urged
    me to accept that the judge had materially erred  in  failing  to  take
    account of this expert evidence within her credibility assessment.

 8. Ms Everett strongly resisted the argument put forward.   She  contended
    that the judge had made proper findings which were open to her  on  the
    evidence for concluding that the appellant's claim lacked  credibility.
    There should have been a more formal assessment  of  the  appellant  if
    medical evidence was to be relied upon within this context and  in  the
    light of the material that was available to  her  it  is  difficult  to
    ascertain how the judge could have come to any  other  findings  beyond
    those that she did.

 9. Whilst I accept that in consideration of the Article 3 issue the  judge
    has made reference and taken account  of  the  expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Treliving it is clear from  any  reading  of  her  decision  that  this
    evidence has played no part whatsoever in the credibility analysis that
    I have referred to above.  That amounts to a material error of law  and
    causes me to decide that the decision  has  to  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.  All parties were agreed that, in these circumstances, it was
    appropriate for the appeal to be considered  and  all  matters  decided
    afresh by the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that the appellant  here
    has been deprived there of a fair hearing.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
practice statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Feeney.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date 10 December 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

