
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07495/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2016                              |On 11 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                 FM (Libya)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Shazia Khan, Counsel instructed by Broudie
                    Jackson Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Geoff Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Abigail Hudson sitting at Manchester on 30 July  2015)  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  to
    recognise him as  a  refugee  or  as  being  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules  and/or  under
    Article 15(c)  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the  Qualification
    Directive").  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  discharged  an  anonymity
    direction previously made in the appellant's favour, presumably because
    she had dismissed his appeal on all grounds raised.  However, as he has
    been granted permission to appeal, I consider that the appellant should
    be accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a national of Libya, whose date of birth is [ ]  1993.
    He left Libya on 27 September 2013 and flew directly to  the  UK  using
    his own passport with a Tier 4 Student visa endorsed in it.  He arrived
    in the UK on the same day.  He  claimed  asylum  on  20  October  2014,
    shortly before his student visa expired.

 3. His claim was that he had lived in Tripoli prior to leaving Libya.  His
    family was originally from Rajban and they  were  all  members  of  the
    Rajban tribe.  He volunteered as a clerk in Tripoli for the  Ar  Rajban
    military council, which was a military battalion  affiliated  with  the
    Libyan National Army.  He had served in  this  capacity  from  February
    2012 until May 2012.  He had studied in the UK intermittently from July
    2012 until October 2014.  Whilst in the UK, he  had  received  a  phone
    call from his friend in Libya informing him that  militias  opposed  to
    the Libyan National Army had taken over Tripoli.  They had  confiscated
    the files of the employees of former government  offices  and  military
    battalions, including the Ar Rajban battalion.   His  family  had  fled
    Tripoli in September 2014 and  had  returned  to  their  home  area  of
    Rajban.  He had maintained contact with them since being in the UK, and
    he reported that they had encountered no problems living in Rajban.

 4. At question 67 of his asylum interview, the appellant was asked who was
    in control of Rajban.  He answered that the army was  in  control,  but
    there was a war going on in  the  surrounding  area.   In  the  western
    mountain area there were seven cities.   There  were  two  cities  like
    Zintan and Rajban which were united, and the other five cities belonged
    to the opposition.

 5. At Q & A 69, the appellant confirmed that he could not join his  family
    in the city of Rajban (two hours' driving distance from Tripoli) due to
    the surrounding conflict.

 6. In the subsequent decision letter, it was accepted  by  the  respondent
    that he had volunteered as a typing clerk for the  Ar  Rajban  military
    council and that he was from Rajban.  It was  not  accepted  he  had  a
    genuine subjective fear on return to Libya, having regard to  the  case
    law of AT and Others (Article 15c; risk categories) CG [2014] UKUT  318
    (IAC) which was promulgated on 14 July 2014.  This case held that there
    was not such a high level of indiscriminate violence in  Libya,  within
    the meaning of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  so  as  to
    mean that substantial grounds exist for believing  that  an  individual
    would, solely by being present there, face a real risk which  threatens
    his or her life or person.

 7. With regard to his asylum claim, he did not fall with any of the groups
    who were at real risk of persecution  or  Article  3  ill-treatment  on
    return to Libya, having regard to the  generally  hostile  attitude  of
    society to the former  regime.   So  according  to  AT  case  law,  his
    position of volunteering for five months as a clerk did not put him  at
    risk because he was not closely linked with  the  Gaddafi  regime.   In
    addition to this, even if it was accepted he was at  risk  in  Tripoli,
    which it was not, there  was  an  area  of  Libya  to  which  he  could
    reasonably locate where he would not face a real risk of harm.

 8. Paragraph 399O of the Immigration Rules provided that a grant of asylum
    would not be made if there was a part of the country  of  origin  where
    the person would not have a well-founded fear of being persecuted,  and
    that person could reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of  the
    country.  According to Q & A 12, the only part of Libya that he  feared
    returning to was Tripoli.  Libya had a landmass of 1.77 million  square
    kilometres, and a population of 6.4 million people.  He stated it would
    not be safe to travel to Rajban, but it was reasonable to expect him to
    relocate there having regard to the guidance given in  AT  on  internal
    relocation:

         "(19)    For persons who have established a real risk of proscribed
                ill-treatment in their home area for a reason other than  by
                reference to one  of  the  categories  set  out  above,  for
                example because of a family or tribal feud,  or  because  of
                hostility from a particular militia, it is  possible  to  be
                able to safely travel from one part  of  Libya  to  another,
                depending on whether the reason for the  risk  is  one  that
                would give rise to a further risk for that same  reason,  on
                encountering a checkpoint.


         (20) A male seeking to avoid a local risk of harm such as described
                in (19) above, would be able in practical terms to  relocate
                to another area of Libya,  be  it  for  example  Tripoli  or
                Benghazi, particularly if the person has  tribal  or  family
                connections there.  The absence of  such  connections  would
                not prevent the person from  establishing  himself,  in  the
                sense of being able to live in the new  community  and  find
                accommodation.  It would not be  unduly  harsh  for  such  a
                person to relocate internally.


         (21) However, such a person may not be able to avoid a risk of harm
                in a new area where the person has no connections  in  terms
                of tribal or family links, but the person or group  that  is
                feared does have such links.   A  fact-specific  enquiry  is
                essential.  An appellant's assertion that the individual  or
                group that is feared has links to say, Tripoli or  Benghazi,
                or another prospective place of relocation, will need to  be
                assessed in the light of the findings in relation to overall
                credibility."


 9. So according to case law it was possible  to  travel  safely  to  other
    areas within Libya for the purposes  of  relocation.   Furthermore,  he
    stated his family  had  already  relocated  to  Rajban,  which  further
    indicated it was possible for him to do so as well.





The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. At the hearing before Judge Hudson, the appellant gave  oral  evidence.
    He adopted as his evidence-in-chief his witness statement in  which  he
    continued to insist that it was too dangerous  for  him  to  return  to
    Libya.  He believed the militias were now in  control  and  they  would
    identify him as a member of the Rajban tribe and they  would  be  aware
    that he had volunteered for his battalion. This would put him  at  risk
    of serious harm.  There were two governments now.  The  one  in  Tobruk
    had control over the army, and the one in Tripoli had control over  the
    militias.  Both sides were targeting civilians in the conflict.  It was
    not safe for him to return to Libya due to the ongoing armed  conflict.
    Any travel around Libya was not safe.  The only point of entry to Libya
    was Tripoli.  It was no longer safe to cross the border  from  Tunisia.
    If he flew into Tripoli, he would be immediately at risk.  But  in  any
    event he would need to find a way to travel to  Rajban.   Although  his
    family had not had any problems yet, there was fighting  going  on  all
    around Rajban, which was very close to Zintan, a city  which  was  also
    actively supporting the army.  The cities of  Rajban  and  Zintan  were
    fighting neighbouring towns which supported Libya Dawn, "and this could
    erupt at any time".  The situation was not stable.  The only reason his
    family were still in Rajban was because they had nowhere else to go and
    it would be too dangerous to move.

11. The appellant's bundle contained  an  interim  operational  instruction
    issued by the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  advising  against  all
    travel to Libya due to the ongoing  fighting  and  greater  instability
    throughout the country.  All escorted returns to Libya should therefore
    be deferred at the present time.  The  Foreign  Office  explained  that
    fighting had commenced in Tripoli in July 2014 and had since spread  to
    other areas of Libya.  As a result Tripoli Airport closed in July  2014
    and remained closed.  Baida, Tobruk, Misrata and Benghazi airports were
    open.  They were unable to conduct escorted returns to these  airports,
    but individuals might return to them voluntarily.

12. A more recent interim operational instruction dated  11  February  2015
    was handed up.  This instruction replaced the earlier one.  The Foreign
    and Commonwealth Office continued  to  advise  against  all  travel  to
    Libya.  However, individuals that wished to return to Libya voluntarily
    might still do so.  A small number of airports in Libya remained  open.
    Although there were no direct flights in the  UK,  there  were  transit
    flight options via Tunisia.  Individuals  might  also  travel  overland
    from Tunisia.

13. The appellant's bundle was mainly taken up with an extensive number  of
    reports about the deteriorating situation in Libya.  These reports were
    generated between November 2014 and the beginning of July 2015.

14. In an overview dated 30 March 2015  issued  by  the  Norwegian  Refugee
    Council ("NRC"), they characterised 2014 as being a year in which there
    had been a  failed  transition  and  a  splintering  of  Libya.   While
    generally portrayed as a confrontation between Islamists  (Libya  Dawn)
    and anti-Islamists (Operation Dignity), fighting involved a complex set
    of motives, including tribal and ethnic identities, power and security.
     Internal fighting erupted against the backdrop of an  inherently  weak
    state in an emerging security  vacuum.   There  were  serious  regional
    repercussions as Libya has become a base for radical groups such as  Al
    Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb and the Islamic State.  In the  summer  of
    2014, fighting in Tripoli and other areas of the country, characterised
    by the indiscriminate use of heavy weaponry in densely populated  areas
    by all protagonists, led to the displacement of hundreds  of  thousands
    of people within and around the capital,  as  well  as  Benghazi.   For
    instance, militias from Misrata and  Zintan  fought  over  the  Tripoli
    airport in July and  August  2014.   Most  of  those  affected  by  the
    conflict were in the  west,  but  6,000  civilians  were  displaced  in
    Benghazi in the east.  Following the takeover of Tripoli by Libya Dawn,
    the Government left Tripoli and moved to the town of Al-Baida.

15. In a section on Displacement Figures,  the NRC said that since  mid-May
    2014, at least 269,000 have been displaced in the west, and  90,000  in
    the east, by fighting between various  armed  groups  that  started  in
    Benghazi in mid-May and in Tripoli in mid-July 2014 before extending to
    the whole country.

16. On the topic of Patterns of Displacement, the NRC reported that 269,000
    IDPs had sought refuge in the country's western  region,  according  to
    the UNHCR.  Most of the IDPs who fled fighting in  Tripoli  principally
    sought refuge in the towns of al-Zawiya,  Ajaylat  and  Yafran  in  the
    west.

17. In an address to the International Criminal Court on 12 May  2015,  the
    speaker said that his office continued to be  concerned  about  alleged
    indiscriminate attacks in heavily populated areas by  both  Libya  Dawn
    and Operation Dignity forces,  resulting  in  civilian  casualties,  in
    particular  in  Benghazi,  Tripoli,  Warshefana,  and  in  the   Nafusa
    Mountains.

18. In her subsequent decision, the judge set out her findings at paragraph
    [12] onwards.  At paragraph  [19],  the  judge  reached  the  following
    conclusion on the appellant's asylum claim:

         "In the light of the vague and unsubstantiated assertions proffered
         by [FM] through Mohammed in Libya, I  am  not  satisfied  that  any
         militia has a list with [FM's] name on it.  I am not satisfied that
         two colleagues described disappeared,  nor  that  they  disappeared
         through any connection to the Ar-Rajban military council.   I  find
         that no militia or other military group is looking for [FM] or  his
         family."

19. The judge turned to  consider  the  general  situation  in  Libya.   At
    paragraph [22] she held that, given her finding that FM  did  not  fall
    into any specific risk  category,  there  was  nothing  preventing  his
    return to Libya.  She referred to the country guidance in AT which said
    that notwithstanding the prevalence of checkpoints manned by  militias,
    it was possible to  travel  overland  from  Tripoli  Airport  to  other
    destinations without a  real  risk  of  persecution,  serious  harm  or
    Article 3 ill-treatment.  The evidence did not reveal such a  level  of
    arbitrary or irrational conduct on the part of militias at  checkpoints
    such as to put the ordinary traveller at real risk.   She  referred  to
    the guidance given in paragraphs 19 and 20 of the headnote, and to  the
    interim operational instruction of 11  February  2015  confirming  that
    other airports apart from Tripoli remained open,  and  were  accessible
    via Tunisia.  At paragraph [26], she directed herself that the  country
    guidance case was authoritative in any subsequent  appeal,  insofar  as
    that appeal (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question,  and
    (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.  The judge continued:

         "28. I accept that the human rights situation in Libya deteriorated
             from mid-2014 and acknowledge that AT was  heard  in  November
             2013.   However,  the  Upper  Tribunal  were  mindful  of  the
             potential for events in Libya  post-hearing  to  affect  their
             assessment of the issues and indicated that  the  parties  may
             invite the Tribunal to reconvene if relevant events needed  to
             be brought to their attention.  None of the parties  contacted
             the Tribunal or sought to draw their attention to any specific
             events (paragraph 5 AT).

         29.  I further accept  that  the  ongoing  conflict  between  armed
             groups continues to severely impact the  civilian  population,
             many of whom have been targeted or displaced due to political,
             tribal and regional divides.  However I am not satisfied  that
             there is credible fresh  evidence  relevant  to  the  specific
             issues in this  case.   Nothing  in  the  country  information
             provided to me gives credible  evidence  that  [FM]  would  be
             particularly at risk due  to  a  brief  period  of  low  level
             voluntary work in 2012, or that he would  be  particularly  at
             risk in travelling overland or relocating.

         30.  I find that [FM] would be at no  risk  of  persecution  within
             Tripoli, but in any event could relocate to  Ar  Rajban.   His
             family reside there and have not had  any  problems  resulting
             from  his  perceived  support  of  any  particular   political
             opinion.  Given the country guidance in relation  to  internal
             travel, there would be no risk to [FM]  in  travelling  to  Ar
             Rajban once within Libya."

20. Ms Khan settled an application for permission to appeal  on  behalf  of
    the appellant.  Ground 1 was that Judge Hudson had failed to assess the
    risk to the appellant as a result of his political affiliation.  Ground
    2 was that the judge had erred in law in the way she had  assessed  the
    appellant's claim under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

The Initial Refusal of Permission

21. On 3 September 2015 Judge Mailer refused permission to appeal  for  the
    following reasons:

         "2.  The grounds assert that the Judge failed to assess his risk on
             return to  Tripoli  because  of  his  political  affiliations.
             Further, she failed to engage with the  appellant's  arguments
             and  the  background  information  that  the   situation   has
             deteriorated  since  AT.   Her  finding  that  there  was  not
             anything in his background to give rise to a  particular  risk
             was flawed as she failed to have regard  to  the  considerable
             background evidence showing a  risk  to  the  appellant  as  a
             result of high levels of indiscriminate  violence.   She  also
             failed to  have  regard  to  an  appeal  'where  the  argument
             succeeded'.

         3.   However, the judge noted at the outset that she had considered
             all the evidence  including  the  'various  country  evidence'
             [9(c)].  She also accepted that the human rights situation  in
             Libya deteriorated from mid-2014 [28].  None  of  the  parties
             had invited the Upper Tribunal to reconvene or sought to  draw
             their attention to any specific events -  [AT  [5].   She  had
             express regard to the current country information provided but
             concluded that there was no credible  fresh  evidence  showing
             that he would be at risk of returned [29] [30].

         4.   The Judge has given a detailed assessment of the evidence as a
             whole and has given cogent  and  sustainable  reasons  on  the
             available evidence for concluding that he would not be at risk
             of  persecution  on  return.   The   grounds   amount   to   a
             disagreement with the findings which are sustainable."

The Eventual Grant of Permission

22. Upon a renewed application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds granted permission to appeal on 14
    October 2015 for the following reasons:

              "It is arguable that the judge  erred  in  the  assessment  of
             Article 15(c) by only considering the particular circumstances
             of the Appellant when  there  was  evidence  in  the  form  of
             country materials of  a  recent  origin  relied  upon  by  the
             applicant  to  demonstrate  that  there  was  a  risk  to  the
             Appellant as a result of  the  high  level  of  indiscriminate
             violence.  Whilst the judge made  reference  at  [28]  to  the
             situation in Libya deteriorating,  it  was  incumbent  on  the
             judge to consider  and  make  an  assessment  of  the  country
             material postdating the country  guidance  decision  and  that
             produced by the parties to make an assessment of  the  Article
             15(c) issue.  I grant permission on all grounds."

The Rule 24 Response

23. On 3 November 2015 Mr Tufan of the Specialist Appeals Team settled  the
    Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  In summary,  he  submitted  that
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  directed  herself  appropriately.
    She had followed the Practice  Directions  with  reference  to  country
    guidance cases.  It was clear from her decision that Judge  Hudson  had
    considered the evidence adduced by the appellant, and had clearly found
    that the fresh evidence did not demonstrate that the appellant would be
    at risk on return.  She would have erred in law if she had not followed
    the country guidance case, and there were no material errors of law  in
    the decision.

The Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

24. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Khan referred me to a decision of Judge Cruthers sitting in the
    First-tier Tribunal at Manchester on 13 May 2015 in which he held  that
    in his assessment the country evidence clearly established the state of
    internal armed conflict in Libya, and also established  that  currently
    the test for an appellant to succeed by reference to Article 15(c)  was
    met.  He did not think it realistic to  single  out  Tobruk  (the  only
    point of return argued for by the Presenting Officer) as a place  where
    the risk did not reach the level  required  for  a  claim  pursuant  to
    Article 15(c) to succeed.  He went on to give extensive citations  from
    what Ms Khan assured me was precisely the same compilation  of  reports
    which had been relied on in this appeal (although  on  reflection  this
    cannot be entirely correct, as the reports in this appeal run up  until
    2 July 2015, whereas the hearing before Judge Cruthers took place on 13
    May 2015).

25. Ms Khan relied on the decision of Judge Cruthers  as  highlighting  the
    inadequacy of Judge Hudson's assessment  of  the  background  evidence.
    She proceeded to draw my attention to various passages in the  reports,
    which she submitted showed that the appellant should have succeeded  in
    his claim under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, or  which
    at least showed that the judge  had  not  given  adequate  reasons  for
    finding to the contrary.  She also submitted there was a clear error of
    law in the judge's finding that  the  appellant  did  not  qualify  for
    recognition as a refugee.  In reply, Mr Harrison adhered to the Rule 24
    response which had been settled by his colleague, Mr Tufan.

Discussion

26. Ground 1 is that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for  finding
    that the appellant would not be at risk of persecution  within  Tripoli
    given the acceptance that he is a member of the Rajban  tribe  and  the
    fact that his family relocated from Tripoli  to  Rajban  following  the
    ousting of the government in Tripoli which their tribe supported.

27. The appellant's core claim was that the militia which  had  taken  over
    Tripoli had identified him as someone who had worked for the Ar  Rajban
    military council, albeit briefly and in a civilian capacity,  and  that
    he faced persecution from such militia if he was picked up by  them  in
    Tripoli.

28. I consider that the judge gave adequate reasons for finding he was  not
    credible in his account of having come to the attention of the  militia
    as a former participant in the Rajban military council, and hence  that
    he would not be perceived by the militia as having an adverse political
    profile.  It was not part of the appellant's case that his  family  had
    been at risk in Tripoli merely because they were members of the  Rajban
    tribe which had supported the former government in Tripoli.  There  was
    also no indication from the background evidence  which  was  relied  on
    before the First-tier Tribunal that such persecution had  taken  place.
    The relocation of the appellant's family from  Tripoli  to  their  home
    area of Rajban  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  family  fleeing  a
    situation of internal armed conflict which had erupted in Tripoli.   It
    does not mean that family members of the appellant had  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Tripoli, anymore than did the appellant himself.



29. The other way in which Ms Khan put her case under ground 1 was that the
    judge had not taken into account the risk that the appellant would face
    if he encountered a checkpoint on  his  journey  to  Rajban  which  was
    manned by militia who were hostile to the Rajban tribe.

30. I consider that the judge gave adequate reasons for finding that  there
    was not a real risk of the appellant  suffering  persecution,  or  ill-
    treatment of such severity as to cross the threshold of Article 3 ECHR,
    when making his way to Rajban.  If the Libya Dawn  militia  in  Tripoli
    were not going to target the appellant on account of his  political  or
    tribal profile, there was no reason to suppose that the appellant would
    be targeted on this account by Libya Dawn militia  if  he  happened  to
    encounter such militia at a checkpoint en  route  to  his  tribal  home
    area.  It was open to the judge to adhere to the country guidance given
    in AT about the relative ease for single adult males of relocating from
    one area in Libya to another, despite the general deterioration in  the
    security situation which is  highlighted  in  the  background  evidence
    relied on before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Libya  Dawn  had  seized
    complete control of Tripoli on 24 August 2014. In  September  2014  the
    appellant's family safely made their way out of Tripoli, and  travelled
    to Rajban. They did so despite having to pass through  and  out  of  an
    area controlled by Libya Dawn.

31. Turning to ground 2, Ms Khan and Mr Harrison agreed with my proposition
    that  the  same  principle  which  underlies  paragraph  339O  of   the
    Immigration Rules also applies to Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  The background evidence relied  on  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal clearly establishes that in the one year period leading up  to
    the date of the hearing there had been, and probably continued  to  be,
    certain areas within Libya  where  there  was  such  a  high  level  of
    indiscriminate violence that substantial grounds existed for  believing
    that an individual would, solely by being present there,  face  a  real
    risk which threatened  his  or  her  life  or  person.   The  appellant
    accepted this was not true of Rajban, where other members of his family
    had relocated, so the issue which the judge had to resolve was whether,
    absent a risk of persecution or Article 3(c) harm,  the  appellant  was
    nonetheless eligible for protection under Article 15(c).

32. I consider it was open to the judge to find that he  was  not  eligible
    for such protection, and I do not consider that  the  judge  materially
    erred in law in not engaging in detail with the background evidence  in
    order to support her conclusion.  The burden rested with the  appellant
    to show that he could not relocate to the safe haven of Rajban from his
    hypothetical point of entry to the country (hypothetical because he was
    not, and is not, facing an enforced return).  The burden was on him  to
    show that whatever hypothetical point of entry might  be  available  to
    him he could not reach the safe haven of Rajban without passing through
    one or more areas where the level of  indiscriminate  violence  was  so
    high that he would be at risk merely by being present in such a  region
    as he passed through it.  The appellant did not identify any background
    evidence which supported his claim that there was fighting  all  around
    Rajban, and generally no attempt was made to demonstrate  by  reference
    to a map of Libya that there was no safe  corridor  through  which  the
    appellant could travel overland to Rajban from a suitable entry  point.



33. But even if the  judge  erred  in  not  engaging  in  detail  with  the
    background evidence, I find that the error is not material for a reason
    which relates back to paragraph 339O.  On any view there are  and  were
    other places of relative safety in Libya to which the  appellant  could
    relocate without having to travel overland. Given his  tribe's  loyalty
    to  the  Government  which  relocated  to  al-Baida,  it  was   neither
    unreasonable nor unduly harsh for him to relocate by means of a  direct
    flight from Tunisia to a town or city loyal  to  the  Government  where
    there was not any fighting, such as al-Baida or Tobruk.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

