
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07393/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 April 2017                              |On 7 November 2017            |
|& 13th October 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                    [k g]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams (instructed by Brent Community Law Centre)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
                    on 27th April                       2017 and Ms J
                    Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer) on
                    13th October 2017


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to  a
    Decision and reasons of Judge Swinnerton promulgated on  29th  November
    2016 following a hearing in September 2016 at Hatton Cross.

 2. The matter first came before me on 27 April 2017 and on that occasion I
    found as follows:-

      a) "The Appellant in this  case  is  a  national  of  Afghanistan  who
         apparently now has a date of birth of 1985.  He has a huge  history
         before the Tribunal of making asylum applications, I think this was
         his third application, the more recent one prior to that led  to  a
         Tribunal Judge dismissing  his  appeal  in  2012,  that  was  Judge
         Kebede.  It has been a feature of his previous  Decisions  that  he
         has been inconsistent with regard to his  claims  about  what  took
         place in Afghanistan prior to his leaving.

      b) The Judge in the extant appeal, as previous Judges,  did  not  have
         the benefit of seeing or hearing from the Appellant it being deemed
         that he had mental health difficulties and was  not  able  to  give
         evidence.  The case therefore proceeded before Judge Swinnerton  on
         the basis  of  submissions  and  the  written  evidence;  the  main
         evidence was medical evidence.

      c) The Judge had evidence from a Dr Arnold in relation to scars,  some
         of which related to self-harm and some of which were  said  related
         to torture, although the age  of  them  was  not  now  possible  to
         ascertain.  There was also a Consultant Psychiatrist's report dated
         July 2012 which was before a previous Tribunal and that report  did
         not assist the Appellant because it said  that  whilst  removal  to
         Afghanistan might be distressing and may increase his suicide  risk
         it was not attributable to any significant mental illness.

      d) However, for the first time Judge Swinnerton had also a report from
         a Mr Selcuk Berilgen,  a  Psychological  Therapist,  and  his  most
         recent report was dated September 2016.  His report  followed  some
         79 sessions with the Appellant and he was part of the  organisation
         "The Medical Foundation for Victims of Torture".  The Appellant had
         apparently been assessed as a priority case such that he  had  that
         level of involvement and Mr Berilgen had done a  quite  substantial
         report outlining what his findings were and he had serious concerns
         about suicide risk.

      e) Judge Swinnerton did not consider that report in any great  detail.
         The entire determination only runs to ten pages.  She decided  that
         that report, not being the report of a Consultant Psychiatrist, did
         not carry great weight and preferred the opinion of the  Consultant
         Psychiatrist.  My concerns about that are it is well-known that the
         Medical Foundation is a highly  respected  charitable  organisation
         whose  opinion  should  be  afforded  considerable   respect.    Mr
         Berilgen's  report  was  four  years  more  up-to-date   than   the
         Consultant Psychiatrist's report and the Judge,  I  find,  did  not
         adequately deal with  the  content  of  that  report  and  did  not
         adequately give justification for rejecting  its  conclusions.  For
         that reason I find the determination cannot stand being tainted  by
         an error of law.

      f) The history of this case is such  that  there  have  been  previous
         proceedings and it would therefore be  inappropriate  to  remit  it
         once again to the First-tier Tribunal. I therefore  set  aside  the
         judgment and it will be re-heard in the Upper Tribunal.

    DIRECTIONS

      g) I direct that the Appellant's representatives must  file,  fourteen
         days prior to the resumed hearing,  a  detailed  skeleton  argument
         outlining in particular the basis upon which they put their case  -
         specifically  whether  they  are  arguing  in  terms  of  what  the
         Appellant claims happened  to  him  previously  in  Afghanistan  or
         whether they are relying  more  upon  his  vulnerabilities  due  to
         mental health issues.

      h) I also direct that by the same date, fourteen  days  prior  to  the
         hearing, any up-to-date medical evidence must be filed  and  served
         on the Secretary of State.

      i) I also direct the Appellant's representative  to  file  a  complete
         consolidated bundle containing only the evidence  upon  which  they
         rely and it should not be assumed that any of the former  documents
         will be before the Upper Tribunal.  The judge will  only  refer  to
         that new bundle.

      j) The estimated length of the hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  is
         three hours".

 3. The matter next came before Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on  17  July
    2017. However, the parties not having complied with the directions  the
    matter did not proceed on that  day  and  was  adjourned  with  further
    directions.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 13 October 2017.

 5. Filed on the Appellant's behalf was a bundle of documents of 493 pages,
    a supplementary bundle of documents running to 39  pages,  an  Internet
    document entitled  "Right  to  Remain",  a  World  Health  Organisation
    document  concerning  the  provision  of  mental  health  services   in
    Afghanistan dated 2011, a document entitled "No Protection, No  Respect
    Health Workers and Health Facilities Under Attack 2015 and early 2016",
    the Home Office Country Policy and Information note on Security and the
    Humanitarian Situation dated August 2017 and the  Home  Office  Country
    Policy Information note  on  Fear  of  Anti-Government  Elements  dated
    December 2016.  Additionally  Mr  Lams  provided  me  with  a  skeleton
    argument.

 6. I had the Respondent's bundle and Ms Isherwood additionally provided  a
    copy of the statement of evidence that the Appellant had relied upon at
    an earlier appeal and dated May 2011. I was additionally provided  with
    KH (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 1354.

 7. As when the appeal was before the First-tier Tribunal, I did  not  hear
    oral evidence from the Appellant, there being medical evidence that  he
    was not fit to give evidence due  to  his  mental  state.  The  reports
    indicate he suffers from severe Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).

 8. Mr Lam made oral submissions in addition to relying  upon  his  amended
    skeleton argument.

 9. At the outset it was accepted that the Appellant's date of birth is now
    taken to be 1985.

10. In his skeleton argument it is claimed the Appellant would be  at  real
    risk of serious harm on return to Afghanistan  from  the  Taliban  such
    that he is entitled to refugee status.

11. It is also argued that he  is  at  risk  as  a  result  of  his  Hazara
    ethnicity and further or alternatively at risk because Article  15C  of
    the  Qualification  Directive  is  engaged   due   to   the   risk   of
    indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan and due to the  Appellant's  own
    particular circumstances. It is further argued that removal would be  a
    breach of the Appellant's rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR  on
    the basis of his diagnosis of PTSD, depression and the associated  risk
    of suicide.

12. The basis of the Appellant's claim  as  set  out  in  his  most  recent
    statement dated 14 September 2015 is as follows

13. He was born in Urozgan province in Afghanistan. He was not educated  in
    Afghanistan. In Afghanistan his father, senior in the  Communist  Party
    was murdered by the Taliban. His sister was burned  alive.  His  mother
    died shortly thereafter, the Appellant says, of grief. He says that  he
    was detained by the Taliban who said that he was Shia but there was  no
    evidence that he had undergone self-flagellation and they would rectify
    that and give him scars. He was burned on the back with  hot  rods  and
    beaten and punched causing him to lose his two front teeth.

14. It is fair to say  that  the  remainder  of  his  claim  as  to  dates,
    chronology and precisely who did what  and  when  has  been  hopelessly
    inconsistent throughout the history of this case which is  significant.
    His appeal has been heard twice before in the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    once before in the Upper Tribunal. On each occasion he has lost.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kebede noted that despite the issues  he  has  with  his
    mental health he has given detailed claims albeit not consistently  the
    same claim.

15.  I  heard  lengthy  submissions  from  both  representatives.  Mr  Lams
    concentrated most of his submissions on what is clearly  the  strongest
    aspect to this claim, namely the risk of suicide and  deterioration  in
    his mental health should he be  returned.  Ms  Isherwood  stressed  the
    numerous inconsistencies which pointed to his lack of  credibility  and
    also and perhaps most importantly the fact that his claim to have  been
    detained and tortured has only been made very recently. It  was  not  a
    feature in any of his earlier appeal hearings.

16. It is appropriate at this stage to look at the medical evidence.

17. There had been a psychiatric report prepared by Dr  R  J  Bowskill  and
    dated  16  July  2012.  He  is  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist  at  Sussex
    Partnership NHS Foundation Trust and the Priory Hospital  Brighton  and
    Hove where he is Medical Director. His report follows an interview with
    the Appellant over two hours with the use of an  interpreter.  He  also
    had sight of the Appellant's witness statements of  2011  and  2012,  a
    copy  of  the  substantive  asylum  interview  record  and  the   Upper
    Tribunal's determination from February 2012. He also had a  copy  of  a
    Psychologist's report  by  Robert  Selwood  and  other  documents.  His
    opinion at 6.1.1 of his report states the Appellant reported  low  mood
    and some suicidal thoughts. He previously self harmed with  superficial
    lacerations to the back of his forearms which are now healed.  He  said
    that there was no evidence  of  major  deliberate  self-harm  or  major
    suicide  attempts.  He  opined  that  the  Appellant  had  a   moderate
    depressive episode  and  would  probably  benefit  from  antidepressant
    medication such as Sertraline.

18. He also noted the Appellant chose not take the medication prescribed by
    another Dr but was unsure what this was.

19. Dr Bowskill noted that the Appellant misused cannabis but was not  able
    to say whether he was dependent. He noted  that  the  Appellant  denied
    other drug use but that there  were  inconsistencies  about  that  with
    other accounts he had previously given.

20. He noted that the Appellant described some  flashbacks  and  nightmares
    about his sister's death and that if his account was accurate  that  he
    witnessed his sister's death then he may be experiencing some  symptoms
    of PTSD.   However  he  noted  the  Appellant  did  not  become  easily
    distressed when discussing his sister and  there  was  no  evidence  of
    hyper arousal that would have been consistent with PTSD.

21. He noted that an Educational Psychologist had assessed the Appellant as
    having severe to moderate learning difficulties although he was of  the
    opinion that severe learning difficulties would  be  inconsistent  with
    the account that the Appellant was able to give at interview.  He  also
    noted that the speed with which the Appellant  answered  the  questions
    indicated he had no difficulties with  information-processing  and  the
    interpreter seemed to easily understand  his  responses  to  questions.
    This he found to be inconsistent with  someone  suffering  from  severe
    learning difficulties.

22. He also noted that  the  Appellant's  appearance,  self-care  and  self
    hygiene indicated that he was functioning reasonably well on a  day-to-
    day basis.  He was staying with friends but despite the lack of  stable
    accommodation seemed to be functioning well.

23. He also noted that the level of depression described by  the  Appellant
    would be likely to cause him distress and some degree of impairment  in
    functioning but not to the  extent  that  it  would  affect  day-to-day
    activities.

24. With regard to suicidal issues the Dr noted that the Appellant reported
    previous deliberate self-harm by inflicting his  forearms.  The  doctor
    examined his forearms and found no evidence of recent  lacerations  and
    most of the scars were old and healed and had not required suturing. He
    also noted that  the  Appellant  denied  recent  overdoses  or  suicide
    attempts and there were no psychotic features  that  would  indicate  a
    high risk of suicide. It was his opinion that the Appellant was at  low
    risk of suicide and he also found that as the Appellant did not wish to
    return to Afghanistan his risk of suicide may increase if returned  but
    that  increased  risk  would  not  be  directly  attributable  to   any
    significant mental illness.

25. It was that opinion that weighed  heavily  on  the  minds  of  previous
    Judges and particularly Judge Swinnerton in November 2016.

26. There is also a Rule 35 report dated 15 March 2013 prepared at  a  time
    when the Appellant was in immigration detention. The report's author is
    Dr Schaif. The Dr describes that the Appellant "claims torture in  2004
    by the Taliban and has multiple healed cuts/scars to his back which  he
    claims were sustained secondary to being tortured and beaten up at  the
    time. His also lost his upper front two teeth by being punched  at  the
    time by hard object/weapon. Currently he's been  experiencing  frequent
    nightmares and suffers from PTSD awaiting  counselling".  The  Dr  then
    expressed his concerns that the Appellant may have been the  victim  of
    torture.

27. Since then matters have moved on and in particular there is  a  lengthy
    report from Mr Selcuk Berilgen, a Psychological Therapist with  Freedom
    From Torture. There was a letter dated 25 August 2015 and a more recent
    detailed report  dated  2  September  2016.  That  report  followed  Mr
    Berilgen having seen the Appellant on 79 occasions since  11  September
    2014. He had had sight  of  his  screening  interview,  the  Letter  of
    Refusal and Upper Tribunal decision from September 2011.  He  had  also
    seen the reports of Psychologist Robert Sellwood  and  Psychiatrist  Dr
    Bowskill.

28. In my view Mr Berilgen's report is the most telling  report  as  it  is
    prepared by someone with a very significant knowledge of the Appellant.
    I also find it significant that  the  Appellant  was  referred  to  the
    organisation, the Medical Foundation for the care of Victims of Torture
    by the MAP West Community Mental Health Team. He  was  referred  on  20
    January  2014  and  his  needs  carefully  considered  by  the  Medical
    Foundation panel who decided that he met their  priority  criteria  and
    should be assessed rapidly by  one  of  their  clinicians.  The  report
    details at length  the  way  in  which  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and Mr Berilgen progressed. He describes that  initially  the
    Appellant was agitated did not make eye contact  and  appeared  not  to
    trust him. However that improved over time. At paragraph 38 Mr Berilgen
    states that "it is clear that the Appellant genuinely believes that his
    safety and life would be in danger if he returned to Afghanistan. He is
    convinced that due to his profile,  family  history  and  ethnicity  he
    would be extremely unsafe". The Appellant, he said,  is  understandably
    very stressed and overwhelmed about his current situation. He said that
    he would have serious concerns regarding the Appellant's  suicide  risk
    if he were to be removed and what his sense of danger would activate in
    him.  He  said  that  he  believes  the  Appellant  requires  long-term
    psychological  treatment  in  which  he  is  engaging   currently   and
    continuing support from a few friends that he has here in the UK. It is
    also his view that the Appellant would require specialist therapy  over
    several years to help him recover sufficiently from the deep trauma  he
    was left with growing up and later in life. Appended to that report  is
    the ICD 10 criteria for diagnosing PTSD.

29. A Psychologist is qualified to diagnose PTSD.

30. There is also a letter from Dr Juliet Cohen of the  Medical  Foundation
    dated 13 December  2016.  In  that  letter  she  points  out  that  the
    Appellant has a clinical history of significant  suicide  attempts  and
    self harming behaviour and that even  seemingly  superficial  self-harm
    injuries are associated  with  a  raised  risk  of  suicide.  She  also
    indicates that the organisation is a charity with scarce resources  and
    it can only devote such lengthy therapeutic contact to clients assessed
    to be both in remit and in  priority  need.  She  points  out  that  Mr
    Berilgen's report follows far  more  detailed  assessment  over  a  far
    longer period of time than that of Dr Bowskill.  She  also  points  out
    that the Therapist's opinion is not based solely on the history related
    to him but on his own  objective  findings  based  on  observation  and
    examination of his mental state. She says  all  clinicians  at  Freedom
    from Torture are mindful  of  both  the  requirement  to  consider  the
    possibility of fabrication and their scarce resources as a charity.

31. I am therefore faced with differing expert views as to the severity  of
    the Appellant's mental illness. I prefer the evidence of Mr Berilgen as
    supported by Dr Cohen due both  to  their  expertise  in  dealing  with
    individuals such as this Appellant and also the very  sustained  period
    of assessment and counselling that Mr Berilgen went  through  with  the
    Appellant.

32. I am also aware that since Dr Bowskill reported the Appellant had to be
    admitted to hospital for sutures after cutting his throat.

33. I find that someone who is suffering from PTSD and depression may  very
    well find themselves unable to give a  coherent  chronological  account
    over a period  of  time  and  indeed  may  recall  other  incidents  at
    different times. I therefore do not make  an  adverse  finding  on  the
    basis of the  Appellant's  recent  claim  to  have  been  detained  and
    tortured. In fact,  he  claimed  that  when  he  was  in  detention  as
    evidenced by the Rule 35 report. He said  it  to  those  detaining  him
    albeit not to his representatives.

34. I therefore reject Miss Isherwood's submissions that his account should
    be  rejected  in  its  entirety  because  of   the   very   significant
    inconsistencies. It is of course the  case  that  they  are  there  and
    indeed are not denied by  the  Appellant.  Furthermore,  the  Appellant
    acknowledges that he has made claims under different names and dates of
    birth in the past.

35. However, what has remained at the core of his claim throughout are  the
    deaths of his father, his sister and his mother shortly thereafter.  It
    is clear from Mr Berilgen's report that the  death  of  his  sister  by
    burning was clearly a very significant traumatic event for him.

36. I then turn to the report of Dr Arnold which deals with the Appellant's
    scars. That report is dated 17 June 2016 and contains the usual diagram
    of the scars. He says that on the Appellant's back there are  at  least
    17 scars. Some are overlapping making exact enumeration  difficult  but
    are obviously similar. All are of similar width. He describes 12  scars
    on the Appellant's chest and abdominal wall but  unlike  those  on  his
    back they are narrower and vary in length and are red brown in colour.

37. Dr Arnold describes slightly oblique transverse narrow linear scars  on
    both arms, six on the right and seven on the left and also on the front
    of his neck six transverse linear scars each some 3 mm x 1 cm to  7  cm
    and suture marks are visible adjacent to  the  longer  scars.  He  then
    describes various other scars and also  notes  that  both  upper  first
    incisor teeth are absent.

38. With regard to the scars on the Appellants back Dr  Arnold  says  these
    are typical of deliberately inflicted burns as described. They have the
    appearance of fully healed partial thickness burns as would be expected
    after forceful contact with a hot object  such  as  a  heated  wire  or
    skewer. He says that the locations are not consistent  with  accidental
    injury. He also notes that the number, orientation and distribution  of
    the scars suggest they have not been self-inflicted.

39. As to the age of the scars Dr Arnold notes that it is clear  they  were
    present at the time of the Rule 35 report in 2013. He is unable to  say
    how long before that they occurred.

40. He then talks about the scars on the Appellant's chest and abdomen  and
    suggests that these are far more recent; still in the maturing stage of
    healing and suggest these are likely  to  be  self-inflicted.  He  also
    notes the scars to the arms have the appearance  of  self-harm  with  a
    narrow blade and the scar to his neck consistent with self-harm with  a
    sharp object. He also opines that the loss of the teeth  is  consistent
    with a blow or blows from a hard instrument to the mouth.  In  the  his
    final paragraph Dr Arnold says that it would be unusual for  a  man  to
    show the extent and types of pathology seen in this case if he had  not
    survived  severely  traumatic  experiences  and  torture.  The  medical
    evidence makes it much more likely than not that  he  has  indeed  been
    harmed in the ways he described and severe physical  and  psychological
    damage as a result.

41. Miss Isherwood submitted  that  Dr  Arnold  had  not  ruled  out  self-
    infliction by proxy. It is right that self infliction by proxy ought to
    have been considered. However, the history of the Appellant's  appeals,
    detention, counselling treatment and mental ill-health all suggest that
    that could not have happened in this the case and he  would  appear  to
    lack the capacity to have organised this. Also it is  significant  that
    despite having mentioned the scars as far  back  as  2013  he  has  not
    sought to mention it since. If these had been arranged for the  purpose
    of assisting his asylum claim than he is unlikely  to  have  failed  to
    mention it earlier.

42. Miss Isherwood then submitted that the injuries could have been  caused
    accidentally.  I  am  afraid  I  find  that  to  be   rather   fanciful
    particularly in relation to the burn scars on his back. She  then  said
    that they could have been caused when he broke  up  a  knife  fight  in
    Sweden which is referred to in his interview. However, when looking  at
    what he actually said, there is  no  suggestion  by  him  that  he  was
    injured in any way in that incident and again it is fanciful to suggest
    that the burn marks on his back were caused in that way.

43.  I am therefore satisfied, to the lower  standard  of  proof  that  the
    Appellant has in fact been tortured. When and  by  whom  and  for  what
    reason I cannot say because of the differing and inconsistent reports.

44. Miss Isherwood accepted the Appellant's home area is under the  control
    of the Taliban but submitted that the Appellant could  relocate  safely
    to Kabul.

45. I do not accept that he would be at risk for  a  Convention  reason  in
    Kabul. If it was the Taliban who targeted him previously, that was over
    10 years ago and it is not credible that he would be a person that they
    would seek to target today. However, given that his home area is in the
    control of the Taliban he clearly could not return there.

46. Kabul itself is not in such a state of internal armed  conflict  as  to
    enable the Appellant to succeed in terms  of  Humanitarian  Protection.
    Indeed Mr Lam accepted there  were  difficulties  with  his  protection
    claim and he relied most heavily upon Articles 3 and 8 of the  ECHR  in
    terms of his mental  health.  There  is  no  doubt  that  that  is  the
    strongest aspect to this claim.

47. In terms of Article 3 In Pretty v UK 2002 35 EHRR 1 it  was  said  that
    suicide is self evidently a type of serious harm and, if  the  evidence
    established that removal would expose  a  person  to  a  real  risk  of
    committing suicide on return, then a decision requiring him  to  return
    could give rise to a violation of Article 3.  In N (Kenya) [2004] UKIAT
    00053 too, the Tribunal acknowledged that there was some  authority  in
    Strasbourg jurisprudence for the proposition that  prospective  suicide
    by reason of removal is capable of engaging both Articles 3 and 8,  but
    concluded that there would need to be the clearest possible evidence of
    a real risk  that  this  would  occur  which  would  not  otherwise  be
    preventable by appropriate medical supervision both on the part of  the
    removing country and having regard to facilities which might reasonably
    be expected to exist in the country of destination.

48. There is no doubt that there is a high hurdle to cross to succeed under
    Article 3 in relation to the risk of suicide. On the basis of the  very
    detailed and thorough knowledge of  the  Appellant  by  Mr  Beringel  I
    accept that returning him to  Afghanistan  would  likely  result  in  a
    serious suicide attempt. Balanced against that however I have to assess
    the available facilities which might provide protection for him against
    suicide upon return. I had been  provided  with  various  documents  as
    listed above in relation to the facilities for mental  health  care  in
    Afghanistan. In particular the World Health  Organisation  document  of
    2011 provides figures for the availability of treatment both in and out
    of hospital and the  availability  is  so  low  as  to  represent  zero
    availability. For example mental-health outpatient facilities represent
    0.072 per 100,000 of the population  and  psychiatric  beds  represents
    0.84 per 100,000 of the population. Beds in mental hospitals  represent
    0.34 per 100,000 of the population.  I appreciate that the  information
    is not very up-to-date but given events in Afghanistan  find  that  the
    situation has not changed significantly since 2011. The availability of
    support for the Appellant to prevent his suicide is so negligible as to
    be non-existent and I therefore find in this case, given his particular
    vulnerabilities evidenced by his inability to take part in  the  appeal
    process, his PTSD, self harming to the extent  of  cutting  his  throat
    requiring stitches and the opinion of Dr Berilgen I am  satisfied  that
    this is one of those rare cases where returning him  would  lead  to  a
    real risk that he would commit suicide and that his return would  be  a
    breach of Article 3.

49. While I am not satisfied that he would be at risk of persecution for  a
    Convention reason or that he is entitled to humanitarian protection  in
    Kabul I am satisfied that he succeeds under both Article 3 and  Article
    8 of the ECHR and for those reasons I allow his appeal.

Decision

The appeal is allowed under Article 3 and Article 8 of the ECHR





Signed                              Date 6th November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
































