
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07851/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke             |Determination Promulgated|
|On 27th November 2014                     |On 22nd December 2014    |
|                                          |                         |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                            SHAH MOHAMMED RAHMATI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion, I shall continue to refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. On 20th March 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cruthers  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett who allowed the appeal of the
    appellant, a male citizen of Afghanistan, against the decision  of  the
    respondent taken on 2nd August 2013 to refuse asylum, humanitarian  and
    human rights protection and to issue removal directions.

 3. In granting permission Judge Cruthers  thought  it  arguable  that  the
    judge had not dealt with two aspects of credibility arguments raised by
    the respondent in the grounds of application.  First,  that  the  judge
    should have taken into account that the appellant had  not  called  his
    brother who was said to have failed to secure asylum on  the  basis  of
    similar claimed facts.  Second, the judge should not have  relied  upon
    letters from the Taliban without further consideration of  an  expert's
    view that he had never seen such letters on headed stamped paper.

 4. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal before me I heard submissions from
    both representatives which I summarise, below.

 5. Mr McVeety confirmed that the respondent relied  upon  the  grounds  of
    application although he acknowledged that the second ground to which  I
    have referred in the paragraph 3, concerning the  Taliban  letters,  is
    not particularly strong.  However, he thought  that  the  judge  should
    have considered the rejection of the appellant's brother's asylum claim
    although he acknowledged that the brother's  appeal  determination  was
    not in front of the judge.  The Presenting  Officer  had,  however,  in
    submissions  and  cross-examination  commented  that  the   appellant's
    brother was present at the hearing but had  not  given  evidence.   The
    judge was asked and should have made findings on this issue.

 6. Mr Bandegani relied upon the detailed seven page response submitted  by
    the appellant under Rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.

 7. In relation to the ground concerning the Taliban letters it  is  argued
    that the judge gave  a  number  of  reasons  in  paragraph  11  of  the
    determination to reject the respondent's submission that  such  letters
    were not sent.  Reference was also made to paragraph 12.14 of  a  Human
    Rights Watch Report indicating the use of such letters as  a  means  of
    intimidation by the Taliban, and that such  threats  sometimes  bear  a
    Taliban stamp.  The country expert had also referred to this.

 8. As to the ground concerning the  appellant's  brother's  failed  asylum
    claim the response argues that the judge had to determine the appeal on
    the evidence before her.  Neither the appellant  nor  his  brother  had
    been witnesses in each other's appeal and each had been entitled to  an
    individual  assessment  of  their  claims.   The  respondent  had   not
    explained how the absence of evidence from the brother  undermined  the
    credibility of the appellant, it simply did not materially bear on  the
    outcome.  The judge  had  made  unimpeachable  findings  based  on  the
    evidence put before her.  Additionally, at the adjourned hearing of the
    appellant's appeal (which the Tribunal records as taking place on  12th
    December 2013), directions were  given  for  the  respondent  to  serve
    further information relating to the brother's asylum claim but did not.
     If the respondent wished to rely upon that information then she should
    have filed and served it.

 9. Additionally  Mr  Bandegani  pointed  out  that  paragraph  13  of  the
    determination showed that the judge had  considered  information  about
    the appellant's abduction by the Taliban with a view to forcing him  to
    fight for them and that occurred after the appellant's brother had left
    Afghanistan.

10. Mr McVeety made no further submissions.

11. After hearing submissions and considering the matter for a few moments,
    I announced that I was satisfied that the decision  of  Judge  Grimmett
    showed no material error on a  point  of  law  and  should  stand.   My
    reasons for that conclusion follow.

12. The decision is comprehensive and well reasoned.  The findings  run  to
    over two pages.  It is evident that  the  judge  fully  considered  the
    evidence of the appellant's expert, Mr Marsden, who was known  to  have
    considerable experience working  with  agencies  in  Afghanistan.   The
    expert had indicated that the documents produced were  consistent  with
    the standard letter issued by the Taliban  examples  of  which  he  had
    already seen.  Although the expert indicated that those he had seen had
    not been stamped the judge correctly refers to other objective material
    which showed that such letters were stamped.

13. The judge acknowledged that the respondent challenged the  authenticity
    of the letters which, it was claimed, had  not  been  accepted  in  the
    appellant's brother's asylum claim, but she points to the fact that the
    respondent did not  file  any  additional  documents  relating  to  the
    brother's claim despite having been directed to do so on 12th  December
    2013.  The judge was therefore entitled to reach  the  conclusion,  for
    the reasons given, that the claimed threatening letters had  been  sent
    to the appellant's family.  The  decision  does  not  reveal  that  the
    Secretary of State's representative requested any adjournment in  order
    to have additional time to comply with the direction given almost three
    months before nor would the judge have been obligated to grant  it,  in
    any event.  The judge was not in error in proceeding to  determine  the
    appeal on the evidence which had been put before her.

14. Similar arguments apply in relation to the second ground regarding  the
    rejection of the appellant's brother's asylum claim said to  have  been
    made on similar  grounds.   In  paragraph  12  the  judge  had  already
    commented on the respondent's failure to produce information about  the
    brother's claim.  Further, and most significantly, the judge takes into
    consideration, in paragraph 13, the kidnapping incident which, for  the
    copious reasons given, the judge was entitled to conclude had occurred.
     This incident happened after the  appellant's  brother  had  left  the
    country and was clearly significant in the judge's consideration of the
    credibility of the appellant's claim to fear serious harm  if  returned
    to Afghanistan.  It also serves to distinguish  the  appellant's  claim
    from that of his brother  who  was  not  present  when  the  kidnapping
    occurred.  It should also be  borne  in  mind  that,  as  indicated  in
    paragraph 19 of the  determination,  the  judge  also  found  that  the
    appellant  suffers  from  a  medical  condition  making  him  a   "very
    vulnerable young man" who would additionally be at risk  on  return  to
    Afghanistan on this account.  The determination is, therefore, able  to
    stand on its own despite the adverse findings in relation to the asylum
    claim made by the appellant's brother the details of which had not been
    put before the Tribunal by the respondent.


DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  nor  do  I
consider one  appropriate  for  the  purpose  of  the  Upper  Tier  Tribunal
proceedings.



Signed        Date 19th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

