
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07672/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 7 January 2014                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                   LIUY WEI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

(No anonymity order requested or made.)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant appeals against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Clough, promulgated  on  1  October  2012,  dismissing  her  appeal
   against refusal of recognition as a refugee.


2) On 11 December 2012 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Allen  granted  permission  to
   appeal, observing:

    Given that it is accepted that the appellant is a Mormon, that  Mormons
    are not legally allowed to worship in China, and that it is  said  that
    the Mormon congregation President makes it clear that proselytising  is
    forbidden, it was arguably incumbent on the judge to  consider  if  the
    situation was such as to give rise to risk on the  basis  of  what  was
    said by the Supreme Court in HJ and HT [2010] UKSC 31.


3) In a written note of argument Mr  Bryce  advanced  the  case  also  under
   reference to RT [2013] 1AC 152.

4) Mr Matthews accepted that the judge erred  in  her  legal  approach.   He
   submitted that the respondent's concession that the appellant is a Mormon
   (which had not been withdrawn, although the judge expressed  some  doubt)
   was not the end of the case.  It was significant that there had  been  no
   evidence in the First-tier Tribunal from the Mormon Church.  It  did  not
   follow from being a Mormon that there was a requirement to proselytise in
   China, indeed the evidence was to the contrary.  The judge  rejected  the
   appellant's account that she did return to China and proselytise.   There
   was a spectrum of affiliation to any religion.  Findings were  needed  on
   what the appellant  might  or  might  not  do  in  China,  and  what  the
   consequences might be.

5) Representatives agreed that the determination should  be  set  aside  and
   that a further decision should be  reached  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   following a hearing which was likely to include further evidence from and
   cross-examination of the appellant.

6) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.   Under  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2,  the  nature  and
   extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to  be  remade
   is such that it is appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to  reconsider
   the case are not to include Judge Clough.





                               [pic]
                                9 January 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
