
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07465/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 23 March 2016                     |On 14 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                    [M S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel counsel instructed by Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Davies promulgated on 16 March  2015  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a decision to remove him from the UK and
    the refusal of asylum on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1977 and is a national of Iran.

 4. On 22 November 2013 the Appellant applied for asylum on the basis  that
    he was at risk on return from the revolutionary guards as he was  asked
    to falsify documents as part of a building project and both his and his
    wife's business  licences  had  been  withdrawn  and  not  renewed.  He
    believed he would be imprisoned or hanged.

 5. On 11 September 2014 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  M  Davies  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against   the
    Respondent's decision.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that :

      a) The  Judges  findings  on  credibility  were  inadequate  and  were
         contained within only two paragraphs 51 and 52.

      b) The findings in paragraph 51 do not  relate  to  the  core  of  his
         claim.

      c) The findings at 52 are inadequate.

      d) The Judge finds there is no documentary support for his claim  when
         this is not a requirement but ignoring the  building  contracts  he
         produced.

      e) The failure to grant an adjournment to translate the document  from
         a former President of Iran was an error of law as the document went
         to the Appellants credibility.

 8. On 2 February 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher refused  permission
    and the application was renewed. On 19 May 2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    King gave permission to appeal.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Ms  Patel  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that

    (a)    The findings at paragraph 51  were  wholly  inadequate  and  the
         Judge did not explain why the explanation he gave  in  his  witness
         statement as to why he agreed to take part in the building  project
         were not considered.

    (b)    The Judge failed to consider the explanation he gave for why  he
         could not expect help from his father in law again.

    (c)    She suggested that the  Judge  failed  to  make  findings  about
         whether the Appellant had exited illegally although I  pointed  out
         to her that this was not one of the grounds of appeal.  She  argued
         that it was part of the claim that the Judge  had  not  dealt  with
         things properly.

    (d)    The Judge in stating that there was no documentary evidence made
         no reference to the fact that in the bundle at page 5-8 was a Court
         Judgement from a court in Iran which corroborated both his  account
         of events prior to his flight to Germany but  in  relation  to  the
         building contract. This would clearly put him in one  of  the  risk
         categories in SB Iran.

    (e)    The findings at paragraph 51 did not relate to the core  of  his
         claim and the Judge ignored the explanation that he  had  given  at
         paragraph 9 of his witness statement.

    (f)    The Judge was not entitled to conclude that he could  deal  with
         the appeal justly without  an  adjournment  to  have  the  document
         translated from French.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Ms Johnstone submitted that:

      a) She objected to the new ground being raised in relation to  illegal
         exit: it was not argued before the first tier nor  was  it  in  the
         grounds.

      b) The Judge gave valid reasons why he  refused  the  adjournment  and
         there was no indication of how the document could  be  material  to
         the outcome of the decision.

      c) The Judge gave clear reasons for not finding the Appellant to be  a
         credible witness



Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

12. The challenge to the Judge's refusal of an adjournment  application  is
    without merit. I am satisfied that the Judge gave adequate reasons  for
    refusing the adjournment given that there is of  course,  no  automatic
    entitlement to have a case adjourned. The Judge took into account  that
    the Appellant had claimed asylum a year prior to the date of hearing so
    was entitled to conclude that he had had ample time to prepare his case
    and produce evidence he asserted was supportive of his claim. While  he
    does not specifically refer to the Case Management Review he would also
    have been entitled to note that only two weeks prior to the date of the
    substantive  hearing  but  there  was  no  suggestion  that  there  was
    documentary evidence outstanding that  might  need  translating.  Given
    that the letter in issue refers to correspondence  going  back  to  May
    2014 it might be argued that the  Appellants  Representatives  did  not
    alert the court of the possibility of an adjournment request before the
    date of hearing. Moreover even had the Judge been wrong in  this  I  am
    satisfied that it would have made no material difference to the outcome
    of the case. The letter and its translation was provided to me. It is a
    letter dated 24 October 2014 from former President Bani Sadr  of  Iran.
    It is plain that Mr Bani Sadr does not know the  Appellant  personally.
    What he knows of him comes  from  a  third  party  [AM]  who  lives  in
    Switzerland and there is no information about  whether  [AM]  knew  the
    Appellant personally or had also received his information second  hand.
    I am satisfied that no Judge would have given any weight to this letter
    in  the  light  of  the  lack  of  clarity  about  the  source  of  the
    information.

13. The  Judges  credibility  findings  are  challenged.  I  note  that  at
    paragraph 54 the Judge made unchallenged findings about the  manner  in
    which the Appellant gave evidence: prevaricating, not answering  simple
    questions. In relation to the  credibility  findings  at  paragraph  51
    there is no suggestion in the decision that the  Judge  views  this  as
    central to the Appellants claim in fact he identifies the core claim at
    paragraphs 21-22. Nevertheless the general credibility of the Appellant
    was a matter the Judge was entitled to consider in determining  whether
    the core claim was credible. The Appellant claimed to  have  fled  from
    Iran on two occasions both because he  claimed  to  have  come  to  the
    adverse attention of the Iranian authorities. On the first occasion  he
    claimed he fled because he was  a  financial  supporter  of  the  Green
    Movement and had attended two demonstrations he was notified  that  the
    authorities had raided his home while he was on holiday in Thailand. It
    was  open  to  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  against  the  background
    information  about  the  attitude  of  the  authorities  to  those  who
    supported the Green movement and as someone who claimed  his  home  had
    been raided, as a mature successful businessman the Appellant  had  the
    financial resources and therefore could have sought advice in  Thailand
    about seeking international protection or indeed claim in Sweden  where
    he was explicitly given the opportunity to do so  in  the  12  days  he
    spent there. There was  apparently  no  explanation  for  this  failure
    either in oral evidence or in  his  witness  statement  other  than  an
    implicit suggestion that he followed the Agents advice  and  the  Judge
    was entitled to reject this.

14. Similarly it was open to the Judge to find that the Appellant  gave  no
    explanation as to why having failed to claim asylum in either  Thailand
    or Sweden he chose to do so in Germany and this was  not  explained  in
    either the witness statement or oral evidence. It was also open to  the
    Judge to make an adverse credibility finding that having claimed asylum
    in Germany it was not credible for the Appellant to  go  back  to  Iran
    where he claimed that his life was at risk. The Judge took into account
    the claim made about the influence of his father in law in securing his
    safe return at paragraph 52 so it could not be said  he  did  not  take
    this information into account he simply did not accept it  because  the
    Appellant relied on it inconsistently: it secured his safe return  from
    Germany but could not assist him now.

15. I accept however that the  Judge  appears  to  have  misunderstood  the
    contents  of  the  court  document  relied  on  by  the  Appellant  the
    translation of which is at pages 6-7 of the Appellants bundle.  This  I
    accept was potentially an important document capable of supporting  his
    whole account and putting  him  at  risk  on  return  if  found  to  be
    reliable.

16. I note that the HOPO unhelpfully summarised it as relating to the  time
    when the Appellant went to Germany and not his  claimed  current  fears
    arising out of the building contract and this was the reason why it was
    rejected by the Judge at paragraph 55. In fact the document relates  to
    both the events that led  to  his  flight  to  Germany,  the  financial
    support for Moussavi, but on the second page relates to his involvement
    in the building project where he states he was forced to produce  false
    invoices which underpins his present claim. The court  judgement  finds
    both events proved and sets out the punishment he faces. The failure of
    the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine whether this  document
    was reliable on the correct factual basis of its contents constitutes a
    clear error of law. This error I consider to be material since had  the
    Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could have been  different
    as this could have impacted on all of the credibility  findings  as  it
    would not have been open to the Judge to say that he did not  find  the
    Appellant credible  and  therefore  rejected  the  court  documents  as
    unreliable. Therefore all credibility findings are potentially tainted.
    That in my view is the correct test to apply.

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    the Appellant did not have  a  fair  hearing  due  to  the  failure  to
    properly consider a document which on  its  face  supported  his  whole
    account. In this case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the
    matter will be a complete re hearing.

19. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.


Signed      Date 7.4.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

