
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07176/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th March 2015                           |On 01st April 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr yosuf khorrami
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Kadic, instructed by A. de Ruano, Solicitors
London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Khorrami is a citizen of Afghanistan whose date of birth is recorded
    as 18th March 1996.  On 18th September 2013  he  made  application  for
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom,  claiming  international
    protection as a refugee.  On 8th September 2014 a decision was made  to
    refuse the  application  resulting  in  an  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which appeal was heard on 14th November 2014 by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Clapham.

 2. Judge Clapham made positive findings in respect of the  specific  claim
    based on fear of the Taliban  and  generally  but  found  there  to  be
    insufficient evidence in respect of the issue of  internal  relocation,
    in other words the judge found that it had not been established that it
    would not be unduly harsh. The appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds.

 3. Judge Clapham, however went on to allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds: Article 8 ECHR.  Mr  Khorrami  has  a  sister  in  the  United
    Kingdom who is married and who has two children.  Although there is  no
    specific reference in the Statement of Reasons to the guidance  in  the
    case of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 it is  clear  that  the  Judge  was
    invited by the Presenting Officer at the hearing to consider that  case
    given what appears at paragraph 33 of the statement of reasons.

 4. At paragraph 47 the judge said:

         "I can accept [Mr Khorrami's] position that  he  is  close  to  his
         sister, the sister's husband and  also  the  two  nieces.  Standing
         [sic] the circumstances of this [Respondent] who had  become  aware
         of the disappearance of his father and  his  brother  and  standing
         also [sic] [Mr  Khorrami's]  separation  from  his  mother,  it  is
         perhaps not surprising that [he] should be close to his sister  and
         her family and it seems to me that in this case there are more than
         the usual emotional ties."

 5. Not content with the Decision, by Notice dated 19th December  2014  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  It was suggested in the grounds that  there  had  been
    insufficient, if any, reference to section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as was required  by  Section  117A  and
    that there was insufficient basis for the findings given  the  guidance
    in Kugathas.  On 6th January 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cruthers granted permission.  Thus the matter comes before me.

 6. At the commencement of the  hearing  Ms  Kadic  invited  me  to  accept
    further evidence in relation to the asylum aspect of the  appeal.   She
    relied on Rule 15 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  She put  before  me  an  article  headed  "Afghan  Minister  for
    Refugees and Repatriation warns against force [sic] returns".  She also
    relies on an injunction against removals to Kabul in respect of certain
    categories of individual.  Given  the  nature  of  the  appeal,  I  was
    content to allow further evidence.  However it would be unfair  to  the
    Secretary of State to allow that further evidence without the Secretary
    of State having the opportunity to meet it.  I indicated therefore that
    were I to find that there was an error of law in relation to the  human
    rights point then the best course would be to remit this appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal in order that findings can be made on human  rights
    whilst at the same time reopening the  asylum  appeal  limited  to  the
    issue of internal relocation.

Was there an error of law?

 7. It is trite law that a party who has been unsuccessful in an appeal  is
    entitled to know the basis upon which they have been unsuccessful.   It
    follows that there must be sufficient or adequate reasons given  rather
    than simply a bald assertion.  My concern is that on  one  reading  the
    Judge found that Mr Khorrammi's sister had become a surrogate  for  his
    mother. Whether that was sufficient to allow the appeal, having  regard
    to Kugathas, does not mean that there are, without more, more than  the
    usual emotional ties within the context of the guidance of  that  case.
    I observe that the Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, Mr  Khorrami's
    brother-in-law gave evidence and his evidence was not challenged though
    having had the opportunity to look  through  that  statement  there  is
    little in it that one would expect to have been challenged.

 8. The further grounds relates to Section 117B.  It does seem to  me  that
    the  judge  has  not  ignored  that  provision.   There   are   clearly
    observations consistent with consideration of it such as the ability to
    speak English and not being a burden on the state. Again  it  is  trite
    law that it is not necessary to set out each and every  aspect  of  the
    case.

 9. Despite Ms Kadic's best efforts to persuade me otherwise, it does  seem
    to me that the Article 8 finding appears to be largely informed by  the
    assessment by the judge that there were  more  than  the  usual  family
    ties.  That is inadequately reasoned.  Whether on  remittal  the  judge
    who hears the matter will find that there are  more  than  those  usual
    ties is yet to be determined but in my view there is a  material  error
    of law in this appeal and it cannot stand.

10. The issue then is whether I should re-make the case or remit it to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  As there are inadequate findings and  as  it  may
    well be that evidence will be called, the better course, as I indicated
    to the parties, is to remit this matter, as  I  do,  having  regard  to
    paragraph  7(2)  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement   25
    September 2012, with the following directions:

Directions

          a) Remitted to Hatton Cross (given the listing delays  at  Taylor
             House) to be listed before a Judge, other than Clapham, at the
             Direction of the Resident or a Designated Judge.

          b) The discrete issue in relation to Article 8 ECHR  arising  out
             of the family life contended for in the United  Kingdom  shall
             be determined afresh.

          c) The credibility findings in respect of the asylum  claim  will
             be preserved so that the only issue remitted to the First-tier
             Tribunal is the issue of internal relocation i.e.  whether  or
             not it would be unduly harsh for  Mr  Khorrami  to  return  to
             Kabul where it is proposed by the Secretary of State  that  he
             could safely return.

          d) Time estimate of 3 hours.

          e) Dari interpreter required

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed and remitted to the  First  tier
Tribunal in accordance with the Directions set out herein

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 31st March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker


