
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07464/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast     |Decision promulgated     |
|On 11 November 2016                               |On 15 November 2016      |
|                                                  |                         |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                    [N H]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:     Mr  T  Jebb,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Nelson  Singleton
Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

 1. The origins of this appeal lie in a decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 08 September 2014, whereby the  application  for  asylum  of  the
    Appellant, an Arab national of Sudan aged 34 years, was  refused.   The
    FtT was, simultaneously, seized of a similar appeal on the part of  the
    Appellant's spouse.  The appeal of the Appellant was dismissed, whereas
    that of her spouse was allowed.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "Given that the Judge had decided to allow the asylum appeal of the
         Appellant's husband on the basis of his membership of the  non-Arab
         Darfuri Tunjur  tribe,  it  is  arguable  that  [the]  reasons  for
         dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum  grounds  were  inadequate  in
         failing to consider that although herself an  Arab,  the  Appellant
         might or would be perceived on return as the member of  a  non-Arab
         Darfuri family through marriage."

    It is undeniably correct that the decision of the FtT does not  address
    this issue. The question is  whether  the  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
    failing to do so.

 3. I consider that the answer to this question is to be  found  mainly  in
    the grounds of appeal to the FtT.  These include the following passage:



         "Irrespective of where I  live  in  Sudan  I  will  be  subject  to
         persecution because I married a man of African ethnicity and  I  am
         an Arab - this type of union is anathema to both  Africans  and  to
         Arabs."

    It is common case that this issue was  also  canvased  at  the  hearing
    before the FtT.

 4. I consider that it was incumbent upon  the  FtT  to  engage  with  this
    discrete issue and make findings accordingly.  In an otherwise thorough
    and well-reasoned decision, the FtT did not do so. I conclude that  its
    decision is unsustainable in law in consequence.



ORDER

 5. The decision of the FtT is hereby set aside.  I remit the appeal  to  a
    differently constituted FtT for rehearing and fresh decision.





                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date:  11 November 2016
