
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07016/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th February 2014                           |On 19th February 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                            MR PARTHEEPAN RATNAM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah (instructed by Aston Bond Law Firm)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Napthine) by which, in a determination dated
    28th November 2013, he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse his asylum claim and to  return
    him to Sri Lanka.

 2. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted are lengthy but
    in essence argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  gave  insufficient
    reasons for his findings and failed  to  engage  with  the  Appellant's
    evidence.

 3. The determination, which Mr Jack sought to argue was sustainable, makes
    several adverse findings against the Appellant. However,  I  find  that
    there are numerous errors in the determination.

 4. At paragraph 33 the Judge stated that the Appellant had failed to claim
    asylum  upon  his  return  to  the  UK  and  had  given  no  reasonable
    explanation  for  that  failure  which  the  Judge  said  affected  the
    credibility of his core claim. In so finding the  Judge  has  given  no
    consideration to the explanation given by the Appellant. It would  have
    been open to the Judge to legitimately reject that explanation  but  he
    did need to deal with it and he did not.

 5. The Judge then goes on  from  paragraph  34  to  45  to  make  numerous
    observations about the Appellant's claim as to what took  place in  Sri
    Lanka and then at paragraph 46 found that  the Appellant's  account  of
    his arrest and mistreatment was incredible. Having so found  the  Judge
    went on at paragraph 49 to say that the Appellant was a person  without
    a profile who would be of no  interest  to  anyone.  Only  after  those
    findings did the Judge, at paragraph 53, start to consider the  medical
    evidence before him. The Judge was provided with a report by  Professor
    Lingam and  he  was  also  provided  with  a  report  by  a  consultant
    psychiatrist with regard to the Appellant's mental state. In making the
    adverse credibility findings prior to giving any consideration  to  the
    medical evidence the Judge erred. It is trite law that it is a  Judge's
    duty to look at all  of  the  evidence  together  before  reaching  any
    findings.

 6. Furthermore, the Judge at paragraph 57 notes that Professor Lingam  did
    not address the question of whether the scars may have  been  inflicted
    since the Appellant's arrival  in  the  UK.  However,  this  was  never
    suggested by the Secretary of State nor raised as an issue.  There  was
    no evidence to support such a conclusion and no reason for the  experts
    to have dealt with it. In speculating that this may have been the cause
    of the scars the Judge erred.

 7. I find the  way  in  which  the  Judge  approached  the  assessment  of
    credibility in this determination to be flawed and indeed so flawed  as
    to render all of the credibility findings unsafe. I therefore set aside
    the determination in its entirety.  The appeal will need to be reheard.
    I preserve no findings whatsoever.

 8. Given the nature of the rehearing I  agree  with  both  representatives
    that it is, unusually, an appropriate case to be remitted for rehearing
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Napthine.

 9. Accordingly the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent
    that the determination is set aside. The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing on all matters.

Signed                              Date 18th February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

