
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07495/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 14th April 2014                              |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     A W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Singarajah Counsel instructed by Palis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Somalia (although she  arrived  in
    the UK from Kenya)  born  on  1st  April  1990.   She  entered  the  UK
    illegally some time in 2005, and subsequently applied for asylum.  That
    application was refused, but the Appellant  was  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain until 31st March 2008 as an unaccompanied minor  asylum
    seeker.  On 12th March 2008 the Appellant applied for leave  to  remain
    as a refugee.  That application was refused for the  reasons  given  in
    the Respondent's letter of 1st August  2012.   The  Appellant  appealed
    that decision, and ultimately her appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Glossop sitting at Taylor House  on  19th  November
    2013.  He  decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection, and human rights grounds.  The Appellant  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on  2nd  January  2014  such  permission  was
    granted.

 2. The appeal first came before me on 14th February 2014 when I  found  an
    error of law in respect of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  but
    only  in  respect  of  that  part  of  the  decision  relating  to  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights and the  lawfulness  of  the  Respondent's
    decision as regards the exercise of her own  policy.   The  appeal  was
    then adjourned until today for those parts of the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision to be re-made.

Evidence

 3. The background to this appeal, given by the Appellant in support of her
    asylum claim, is that she was born in Somalia on 1st April  1990  to  a
    Somali Muslim father and a Kenyan Christian  mother.   Her  father  was
    killed in 1992, and her mother in 1993 after which  the  Appellant  and
    her elder brother lived on the streets  of  first  Mogadishu  and  then
    Nairobi.  The Appellant's brother was killed in 2003,  and  during  her
    time in Nairobi,  the  Appellant  was  regularly  raped  and  otherwise
    sexually abused as a Somali street  child.   She  came  to  the  UK  in
    January 2005 when she was only 15 years of age using a  false  passport
    which stated her age to be 24.  The Appellant worked  as  a  carer  but
    after she was hospitalised with TB she was apprehended by UKBA  who  in
    March 2006 placed her with foster carers.

 4. More recently, the Appellant has made statements  dated  3rd  September
    2012, 14th January 2013, and 11th November 2013.  She  also  gave  oral
    evidence at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  To summarise  that
    evidence, the Appellant said that she  had  no  family  or  friends  in
    Kenya.  Since her arrival in the UK, she has been educated and achieved
    passes at GCSE and A level.  Further, the Appellant achieved a BA(Hons)
    degree  in  business  law  and   international   business   at   London
    Metropolitan University.  At various times the Appellant has worked  as
    a student ambassador, a tutor, in hospitality, in a care home,  and  in
    administration.  She has applied to the University of  Oxford  graduate
    programme to attempt a masters degree.  She has  integrated  well  into
    British society and has many friends.  She considered the UK to be  her
    home.  The Appellant was a member of the Kingdom  Faith  Community  and
    Church situated in Bond Street, London.  She led  prayer  groups  every
    week, and was active in mentoring new members of the church, and  in  a
    children's club.  She was undergoing leadership training.

 5. At the hearing before me, the Appellant gave further oral  evidence  in
    which she confirmed that the contents of her previous  statements  were
    true.  When cross-examined, she said that she spoke  various  languages
    including Kikuyu and Swahili.  She was still involved with  the  church
    in Bond Street the members of which were not restricted to  the  Kenyan
    community.  Indeed, the  Appellant  was  not  much  engaged  with  that
    community.  The Appellant added that she  could  not  reintegrate  into
    Kenyan life.  Her friends in the UK were her family, and she would  not
    feel secure in returning  to  Kenya.   She  had  only  attended  school
    irregularly in Kenya and she had no sense of identity  there.  She  had
    been bullied and ostracised as a Somali at school She had last been  in
    contact with anybody in Kenya a few months ago when she had spoken to a
    friend who was now resident in Dubai.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.   Mr
    Wilding addressed me first when  to  begin  with  he  argued  that  the
    decision of the  Respondent  was  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    decision of the Respondent had been made in accordance with chapter  53
    of the  Enforcement  Instructions  and  Guidance.   According  to  that
    chapter, there were three circumstances which  were  to  be  considered
    exceptional and ought to be  taken  into  account  on  a  mandatory  or
    discretionary basis.  The first two such circumstances as  set  out  on
    page 2 of the Guidance did not apply as further submissions  on  behalf
    of the Appellant had been made and considered.  As  regards  the  third
    such circumstance, the Respondent  had  considered  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 353 of HC 395 as recorded at paragraphs 32  and  211  of  the
    Refusal Letter dated 1st August 2012.   The  Respondent  had  acted  in
    accordance with the decision in  Khanum  and  Others  (Paragraph  353B)
    [2013] UKUT 003111 (IAC) and Ukus (Discretion: when reviewable)  [2012]
    UKUT 00307 (IAC).  Further, the Respondent's decision was in accordance
    with the law because in the Appellant's  circumstances,  there  was  no
    requirement for the Respondent  to  consider  her  Discretionary  Leave
    Policy.   This  was  because  the  Appellant  did   not   qualify   for
    discretionary leave from the time when she became 18 years  of  age  in
    2008 and therefore no part of the Policy, and  particularly  that  part
    set out at paragraph 4 thereof,  applied  to  the  Appellant  when  the
    Respondent made her decision.

 7. As regards Article 8, Mr Wilding first pointed out that  the  Appellant
    did not come within the provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   That
    being the case, the decision in  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -
    correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC)  made  it  unnecessary  to
    consider the proportionality of the Respondent's  decision.   This  was
    because there were arguably no  good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules as in  this  case  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under those Rules.
     The Appellant retained linguistic and cultural ties with Kenya, and it
    was safe for her to return there.  The Appellant's  circumstances  were
    now completely different from those when she had  previously  lived  in
    Kenya.  There had been some delay by the Respondent in dealing with the
    Appellant's case, but this  had  not  been  to  the  detriment  of  the
    Appellant as the delay had served only to  strengthen  the  Appellant's
    private life in the UK.  In any event, the  Respondent's  decision  was
    proportionate as the public interest in the maintenance of  immigration
    control attracted the greatest weight.

 8. In response, Mr Singarajah  first  argued  that  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent was not in accordance with the law.  This  was  because  the
    Respondent had failed to comply with her own Discretionary Leave Policy
    in not granting to the Appellant subsequent  periods  of  discretionary
    leave in accordance with paragraph 4 thereof.  The Policy required  the
    Respondent to keep under active review the Appellant's circumstances as
    she had been granted discretionary leave prior to 9th July 2012 and had
    applied for it to be renewed.  The Appellant should have  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in accordance  with  paragraph  4.2  of  the
    Policy.  The Respondent had delayed for four years in dealing with  the
    Appellant's application for leave to remain and during that period  her
    discretionary leave had continued in accordance with Section 3C of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 9. Further, Mr Singarajah argued that the Respondent's decision was not in
    accordance with the law as she had failed  to  take  into  account  the
    factors mentioned in paragraph  353B  of  HC  395  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 53.1 of the Enforcement Instructions and Guidance  which  was
    unlawful.  The delay in dealing with the  Appellant's  application  was
    significant.

10. As regards Article 8, Mr Singarajah then argued that the Appellant came
    within the provisions of paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.  The Appellant now
    had no ties with Kenya.  As explained in  Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new
    Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC), linguistic ties alone were  not
    sufficient.  The Appellant had spent her formative years in the UK. The
    Appellant had no family in Kenya.

11.  Otherwise,  and  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  Mr  Singarajah
    submitted that the Appellant's  return  to  Kenya  would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate  breach  of  her  Article  8  rights.   It  would   be
    unjustifiably harsh to expect the Appellant  to  return  to  a  country
    where she had been significantly abused in  the  past.   The  Appellant
    wished  to  continue  her  education  in  the  UK.    The   Appellant's
    immigration history carried little weight as she  had  entered  the  UK
    illegally but only as a child.

Findings and Reasons

12. The Appellant's case is that she should be granted leave to  remain  as
    her return to Kenya would amount to a breach of her Article  8  rights,
    or alternatively that the  Respondent  should  reconsider  whether  the
    Appellant should be granted leave to remain on that basis.  The correct
    approach therefore is for me  first  to  consider  any  breach  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8  rights  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is
    accepted that the Appellant has no family life in the UK, and therefore
    the Appellant relies upon paragraph 276ADE(vi) of HC 395  which  states
    as follows:

    (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the  UK  for
         less than twenty years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
         has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country
         to which she would have to go if required to leave the UK.

13. The issue therefore is whether the Appellant has any ties  with  Kenya.
    I will decide that issue in  accordance  with  the  guidance  given  in
    Ogundimu, the relevant part of which reads as follows:

      4. The natural and ordinary meaning of the word  "ties"  in  paragraph
         399A of the Immigration Rules imports a concept involving something
         more than merely  remote  or  abstract  links  to  the  country  of
         proposed  deportation  or  removal.   It  involves  there  being  a
         connection to life in that country.   Consideration  of  whether  a
         person has "no ties" to such  a  country  must  involve  a  rounded
         assessment of all of the relevant circumstances and is not  limited
         to "social, cultural and family" circumstances.

    I find that the Appellant now has no relevant ties with Kenya.  She  is
    not a citizen of that country.  She lived in Kenya from the  age  of  3
    until she was 15.  The Appellant is now 24 years of age  and  therefore
    lived longer in Kenya than she has in the UK, but she has spent all  of
    her formative years, during which she has made  considerable  progress,
    in the UK.  As Mr Singarajah explained, the Appellant's experiences  in
    Kenya were wholly negative, and it is no surprise  to  learn  that  she
    never wants to set foot  in  that  country  again.   According  to  her
    evidence, the Appellant received an irregular and rudimentary education
    in Kenya, but what I find to be more significant  is  that  during  her
    time there she was regularly and significantly sexually abused. She was
    taken advantage of because she was a Somali street child. The Appellant
    has no family nor home in Kenya.  She said that she had been in contact
    with one person who lived there, but that friend  is  now  resident  in
    Dubai.  The Appellant is not in contact with the  Kenyan  community  in
    the UK.  She considers the UK to be her home where she  wants  to  make
    her future.  It is true that the  Appellant  speaks  the  languages  of
    Kenya, but in my judgment that factor alone does not amount to a tie as
    defined in Ogundimu.  While she  lived  in  Kenya,  the  Appellant  was
    treated as an outcast. I therefore find that the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of HC 395  and  on  that  basis  I
    allow this appeal.  That being the case, there is no  need  for  me  to
    consider the other issues raised in the appeal.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision in as  much  as  it  relates  to  the  Appellant's
Article 8 rights.

I re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it  on  human  rights
grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.   I  continue  that
order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
