

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/07579/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : IAC Manchester                |  Decision Promulgated            |
|On : 3 May 2016                          |  On 16 May 2016                  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    M A A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Bednarek instructed by IAS (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Sudan born on 1 August  1987.  He  claims  to
have arrived in the UK on 19 June 2014  and  claimed  asylum  the  following
day. His claim was refused on 5 September 2014 and a decision  was  made  on
15 September 2014 to remove him from the UK.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard
before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  23  February  2015.  The  appeal  was
dismissed on asylum grounds, but  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection  and
human rights grounds.


Both parties have been granted permission to appeal against the decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal and are  thus  both  appellants.  However,  for  the
purposes of this decision, I shall refer to MAA as  the  appellant  and  the
Secretary of State as the respondent, reflecting  their  positions  as  they
were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claims to be a member of the Bergo tribe from  South  Kordofan
in Sudan. He claims to have experienced discrimination on the basis  of  his
ethnicity and to have been targeted by the Janjaweed  on  one  occasion.  He
lived with his grandmother when  he  was  a  child  in  South  Kordofan  and
attended school there. After his schooling, his father used his  connections
to get him a place at Karary military academy in Khartoum, where he  studied
computing. When he graduated he was ranked as a sergeant.  He  worked  as  a
computer engineer. At the beginning of September 2013  he  was  required  to
fight for the Sudanese government against the people of South  Kordofan  and
was taken with others to be armed at a weapon storage building.  He  refused
to take a weapon and be armed and was taken  away  for  punishment.  He  was
kicked and then locked in a cell. He was imprisoned for  refusing  to  fight
and was forced to stand in the sun each day as a form of torture. After  ten
days, on 24 September 2013, he managed to escape  during  demonstrations  in
which the police  threw  tear  gas  to  disperse  the  demonstrators,  which
affected the guards. He took a coach to South Kordofan and when there  tried
to get the residents of the  village  to  leave  as  he  knew  the  Sudanese
government was planning an attack. His family had  fled  to  a  neighbouring
village when their village was damaged by shells from an attack on a  nearby
village, but he could not find  his  father  or  brother.  He  feared  being
detained by the government and could not go to Darfur as could not  get  any
protection there and had never resided  there,  although  his  maternal  and
paternal uncles were from there. In February 2014 a friend put him in  touch
with an agent who obtained a visa for him  for  Turkey  and  he  managed  to
leave Sudan in April 2014. He travelled to Turkey on his  own  passport  but
the agent threw his documents into the sea. He travelled by boat to  Greece,
where was arrested and fingerprinted, and then  went  to  Italy  and  France
before coming to the UK.

The  respondent,  in  refusing  the   appellant's   claim,   noted   various
inconsistencies in his evidence and rejected his account of  having  studied
and worked as a member of the Sudanese military,  having  been  detained  by
the military, having escaped from detention and  having  returned  to  South
Kordofan to hide. The respondent considered that the appellant's account  of
having managed to exit Khartoum Airport was inconsistent with his  claim  to
be have been fleeing from the Sudanese  authorities.  It  was  not  accepted
that the Sudanese authorities were looking for him. On the  basis  that  his
credibility had been damaged in these respects the respondent  rejected  the
appellant's account of his  ethnicity.  The  respondent  considered  in  any
event that the appellant would not be at risk on the basis of  his  race  as
he had never claimed to have been persecuted as a result  of  being  a  non-
Arab of Darfuri origin. It was considered that he did not qualify as a  non-
Arab Darfuri for the purposes  of  the  country  guidance  in  AA  (Non-Arab
Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056.

The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  his
appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna.  Judge  Mulvenna
considered the appellant's claim based on his failure to undertake  military
service to be lacking in  credibility.  He  dismissed  his  appeal  on  that
basis,  on  asylum  grounds.  However  he  considered  it  likely  that  the
appellant was of Bergo descent and found that he would be at risk  of  being
subjected to ill-treatment in breach of Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR  as  a
failed asylum seeker and a Darfuri. He allowed the  appeal  on  humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds.


Permission to appeal was sought by the respondent on the  grounds  that  the
judge's conclusions on risk on return were not adequately reasoned and  that
the judge had failed adequately to engage with the issue of the  appellant's
ethnicity.


Permission was also sought by the appellant on the  ground  that  the  judge
had misdirected himself by failing to  consider  the  convention  ground  of
race and that, having found the appellant to be a member of the Darfuri non-
Arabic tribe Bergo and to be at risk on return on that basis,  he  ought  to
have allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.

Permission to appeal was granted on 24 March 2015 to the appellant  and  the
respondent.

Hearing and submissions

Mr Bednarek submitted that, contrary to the respondent's  assertion  in  the
grounds, the judge had used the correct standard of proof in  assessing  the
appellant's ethnicity. The judge was entitled to accept that  the  appellant
was of Bergo ethnicity given his answers to the questions put to him at  his
interview which the respondent had accepted as being  correct.  The  judge's
conclusions in regard to risk on return  and  the  conditions  of  detention
were clearly made in the context of his finding that the appellant was  from
the Bergo tribe and not intended to refer to all returning  Sudanese  asylum
seekers. The only error made by the judge was in not allowing the appeal  on
asylum grounds on the basis of the Convention reason of race.


Ms  Johnstone  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  deal  with  the
respondent's concerns about the appellant's  ethnicity  and  had  failed  to
give adequate reasons for concluding that he was from the  Bergo  tribe,  in
particular in light of his other adverse findings.  The  decision  contained
material errors of law and needed to be re-heard.

Consideration and findings

I find merit in the Secretary of State's grounds. Had it been that the  only
challenge to the judge's findings on  the  appellant's  ethnicity  was  with
regard to  the  standard  of  proof,  arising  from  his  use  of  the  word
"likelihood" at [48], I  would  not  have  been  inclined  to  consider  the
challenge properly made out. However, the grounds clearly  go  further  than
that. It is the case that the outcome of the appeal lies for the  most  part
in [48] and, as such, it would reasonably be expected that the  judge  would
give full and comprehensible reasons for making the relevant  findings  that
he did in that paragraph. However, the findings  are  not  clear,  they  are
extremely limited and they are  confused  by  the  grounds  upon  which  the
appeal was allowed at [55] and [56].

Firstly, it is not entirely clear if the judge allowed  the  appeal  because
he accepted that the appellant was of Bergo ethnicity and  was  at  risk  on
that basis, or if he allowed it on  the  basis  of  the  appellant  being  a
failed asylum seeker who was likely to be of Bergo  descent.  Mr  Bednarek's
submission was that the judge's findings at [45] to [47] were  made  in  the
context of his finding that the appellant was from the Bergo tribe and  that
it was on the basis of the appellant's ethnicity that  the  judge  therefore
allowed the appeal, ie the former. However I do not  agree.  The  fact  that
the judge did not allow the appeal on the asylum ground of race  appears  to
suggest that he allowed it on the basis of  the  appellant  being  a  failed
asylum seeker who was likely to be of Bergo  descent,  ie  the  latter.  The
distinction is material, as the relevant country  guidance  in  AA  made  it
clear that the finding in the  previous  guidance  in  HGMO  (Relocation  to
Khartoum) Sudan CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00062,  that  involuntary  returnees  and
failed asylum seekers  were  not,  as  such,  at  real  risk  on  return  to
Khartoum, was to be preserved. That appears to be  the  point  made  by  the
respondent in her grounds of challenge.

Secondly, the judge, in concluding that there  was  a  likelihood  that  the
appellant was of Bergo descent, made his  finding  on  the  basis  that  the
appellant had correctly answered relevant  questions  put  to  him  in  that
respect. That appears to have  been  the  sole  basis  for  his  conclusion.
Although acknowledging  that  the  respondent  had  reservations  about  the
appellant's ethnicity, the judge did not appear to  give  any  consideration
to the nature of those reservations, which included the appellant's  failure
to mention his ethnicity or language at his screening  interview,  the  fact
that he had not claimed to be at risk of persecution for belonging to a non-
Arab tribe and had not claimed to have  previously  experienced  persecution
on that basis, and that he had otherwise presented an unreliable account  of
his experiences in Sudan. It seems  to  me  that  those  were  material  and
relevant considerations and  by  failing  to  taken  them  into  account  he
thereby erred in law.


Accordingly I would agree with the respondent that the judge failed to  give
full and proper consideration to the question of the  appellant's  ethnicity
and failed to make clear findings in that regard and in regard to the  basis
of the risk that he believed the appellant to face on return  to  Sudan.  As
such his findings are not sustainable. The basis of the  appellant's  appeal
accordingly falls away.

Both parties agreed that if I should find the  respondent's  grounds  to  be
made out, the appropriate course would be for the case  to  be  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh. Accordingly I remit  the  appeal
to be heard de novo, with none of the credibility  findings  made  by  Judge
Mulvenna being preserved.

DECISION


The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed and  the  appellant's  appeal  is
dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The  appeal
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant
to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007
and Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Mulvenna.






                               Signed


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
