
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07417/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 February 2016                       |On 10 March 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     S N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, instructed by Prestige Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, S N, is a female citizen of Pakistan.   Her  application
    for asylum was refused and  the  decision  made  to  remove  her  on  9
    September 2014.  She appealed against that decision to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Malik) which, in a decision promulgated  on  5  January
    2015,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The first ground of appeal is without  merit.   The  appellant  claimed
    that she was at real risk on return to Pakistan, inter alia because she
    was a party to an inter-faith marriage (Shia/Sunni).  Judge  Malik  did
    not believe  that  claim.   The  appellant  criticises  the  judge  for
    rejecting  parts  of  [her]  evidence   as   "self-serving"   and,   in
    consequence, attaching "little weight" to it.  The ground asserts  that
    "valid explanations" were provided by the appellants which, the grounds
    complain, the judge rejected.  The assessment  of  credibility  of  the
    evidence is a matter for the judge and  I  can  see  no  error  in  his
    approach in this instance.  This ground of appeal  amounts  to  nothing
    more than a simple disagreement with findings which were  open  to  the
    judge.

 3. Likewise, the final ground of appeal is without merit.  The judge found
    that the appellant had lied in her asylum  claim  and,  notwithstanding
    taking all the evidence into account before reaching any findings,  her
    conclusion indicated that evidence which purported to  corroborate  the
    appellant's account was  also  not  credible.   The  ground  of  appeal
    complains that the judge should have attached greater  weight  to  this
    corroborative evidence and to have reached a different conclusion.  For
    the reason which I have given above, the judge was under no  obligation
    whatsoever to do so.  The judge has considered all the evidence in  the
    round before reaching any findings as to credibility.   Those  findings
    were plainly open to the judge on the face of the evidence and there is
    no illogicality or perversity in the judge's approach or analysis.

 4. The main ground of appeal which Mr Khan sought  to  rely  upon  at  the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal was the second ground.  Indeed, it was on
    this ground that Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins [3]  gave  permission  to
    appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal judge had before him a letter dated  6
    January 2014 which indicated that the appellant's husband (S G)  worked
    as a programme coordinator for the Masjid & Imam  Bargah  Bait-ul-Huzan
    from 2001 to 2011.  The judge concluded  that  there  was  "nothing  to
    suggest in this letter that S G, the author or  the  organisation  have
    any links to the Shia faith." The grounds assert that an Imam Bargh  is
    linked to  the  Shia  faith.   The  grounds  contain  an  extract  from
    Wikipedia which states that an "Imambargh Darbaray Hussaini" is a "Shia
    congregation hall".  Granting permission, Judge Perkins considered that
    it was "at least reasonably arguable that the judge should  have  known
    that an Imam bargh was a Shia place of worship ...".

 5. The ground of appeal concerns the proper limits of judicial  knowledge.
    This will also always depend on the specific facts in  any  given  case
    and will be a question of degree.  For example, it  would  be  entirely
    reasonable to assume that any judge sitting in this jurisdiction  would
    take judicial knowledge of the fact that a "mosque" is an Islamic place
    of worship. However, I am  not  persuaded  that  any  judge  should  be
    expected to have taken judicial knowledge of the fact that an Imambargh
    is specifically a place of  Shia  Muslim  worship.   I  agree  with  Mr
    McVeety, for the respondent, that there is an analogy to be drawn  with
    the Christian religion.  Any judge might be expected to be aware that a
    "church" is a Christian place of worship but would not  necessarily  be
    expected to be aware that, say, the Church of the Holy English  Martyrs
    is likely to be a Roman Catholic place of worship.  Furthermore, I note
    that the appellant was professionally represented before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  Had a representative wished to  stress  in  submissions  the
    appellant's husband's Shia connections it  would  have  been  a  simple
    matter for her to have explained the meaning  of  the  expression  Imam
    bargh to the judge.  To rely, after the  event,  on  this  point  as  a
    ground of appeal does not assist.

 6. Even if the judge was, as a matter of fact, incorrect in  stating  that
    the letter did not indicate any Shia connection the finding was not  in
    any way central to his rejection of the  appellant's  credibility;  the
    decision contains numerous  findings  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness, findings which stand apart from any  of  the  judge's
    observations regarding the letter.

 7. For the reasons I have given, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed so no fee order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 20 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

