
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07711/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 26 November 2013                             |On 20 January 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                             amir mohammad zarei
                       (anonymity direction not madE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Gayle
For the Respondent:    Mr. Deller

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1993.  He appealed against a
    decision of the Respondent made on 31 July 2013 to refuse to  vary  his
    leave to remain.  He was refused asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim, in summary, was that his parents were  arrested
    and detained by the  authorities  in  October  2008.   His  father  was
    accused of taking part in anti government activities.  His  mother  was
    quickly released but his father was held in  detention  in  Shiraz  for
    nine weeks.  Soon after his mother's release the Appellant  decided  to
    cooperate with school friends in  preparing  anti  government  leaflets
    which they placed  in  the  school  library.   He  was  caught  by  the
    librarian, who called  his  brother,  a  policeman  named  Hassan,  who
    questioned him about his accomplices.  He was taken to  Hassan's  house
    and there raped by him.

 3. A day or two later Hassan appeared at the school and  offered  to  help
    secure the Appellant's father's release if he agreed to have  sex  with
    him.  The Appellant felt he had no option but to agree.

 4. In December 2008 his father was released.  He refused to have sex  with
    Hassan anymore.

 5. In January 2009 he prepared a petrol bomb in a can and threw  it  at  a
    police car.  It exploded.  People saw him running away.  He did not  go
    home.  An uncle helped him leave Iran illegally through an  agent.   He
    arrived in the UK in May 2009 and claimed asylum. Since arriving in the
    UK he had heard from his family that he is wanted by the authorities.

 6. His application for asylum was refused.  However on 7  August  2009  he
    was  granted  discretionary  leave  until  10  December  2009   as   an
    unaccompanied asylum seeking child.  He submitted a further application
    for leave to remain on 2 September 2009.  It was that application which
    resulted in the decision under appeal.

 7. The  Respondent  in  refusing  the  application  did  not  believe  the
    historical account on any material matter.

 8. He appealed.  Following a hearing at Taylor House on 13 September  2013
    before Judge of the First  tier  Tribunal  Andonian  he  dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 9. He found, in summary, that it was not credible that the  Appellant  had
    no knowledge about his father's anti regime activities  (paragraph  [4]
    of the determination).  He also found not credible that he  would  know
    the date of this father's release but not why he was arrested or  where
    he was detained, nor why he did not visit his  father  in  prison  [4].
    Also once his father was released why he did not tell his parents about
    his sexual abuse by the policeman [5].  Further, although he knew  that
    bribes had been paid to allow his mother to visit his father in  prison
    it was not credible he did not know what bribes were paid  or  how  the
    officers were bribed [5].

10. In further adverse findings the judge rejected the Appellant's  account
    of the events that led him to becoming politically active.  It was  not
    credible that he would be crying at school  a  day  or  two  after  his
    mother's  release  when  he  should  have  been  'feeling  happy'   and
    'celebrating' his mother's release [7].  Nor that  he  would  have  got
    involved in producing and distributing anti regime leaflets because  of
    the risks involved [7].  Further, that it  was  not  credible  that  he
    would have known how to make a 'Molotov cocktail', nor  that  he  would
    have attacked a random police car rather than  the  policeman  who  had
    abused him [8].

11. The judge found 'numerous  discrepancies  in  the  incredible  evidence
    itself, for example he said he and others  began  to  prepare  leaflets
    secretly in the library and classroom during breaks', yet at  interview
    said a friend had written slogans and therefore there was no  need  for
    the Appellant to write slogans  [10].   The  judge  also  rejected  the
    Appellant's account of producing some of the  leaflets  in  the  school
    library [12].

12. Finally, (at [13]), the judge found there would have been no  need  for
    the Appellant's mother and  uncle  to  bribe  officials  to  visit  the
    Appellant's father in detention stating 'They would have  placed  their
    position in danger for bribing and the officers for  being  bribed  and
    there was no evidence that relatives had (sic) could not  visit  prison
    other than by a bribe'.

13. Having dismissed the appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and  in  line,  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of ECHR, in brief consideration of Article 8 he stated
    (at [15]) 'He has no family life here and all his  family  are  in  his
    country where he can go to resume it, any private life he has  here  he
    has had for very short time which he can again resume in his country'.

14. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by a  judge
    on 15 October 2013.

15. At the error of law hearing Mr. Deller agreed with Mr. Gayle  that  the
    judge had materially erred. I agreed.  His  determination,  read  as  a
    whole, showed a lack of adequate reasoning  on  material  matters.  His
    findings were not sustainable. They were not made within the context of
    the Appellant being a minor or in the context of  what  the  background
    material states can occur in Iran.

16. First, given that the Appellant was a child at the time of the  claimed
    detention of his parents the judge  failed  to  consider  that  it  was
    plausible that he was not privy  to  the  nature  of  the  anti  regime
    activity and that there was no reason for his father to confide in him.
     Also, that as a child it was plausible that he would know the date  of
    his father's release but not why  he  was  arrested  or  where  he  was
    detained.

17. Second, again as a child in the context of Iran it was  plausible  that
    he would not inform his  parents  or  other  responsible  adults  about
    sexual abuse.

18. Third, for the same  reason,  the  judge  failed  to  explain  why  the
    Appellant would be expected to know how the bribes  were  paid  or  the
    amount.

19. Fourth, the judge's finding that  it  was  not  credible  that  on  the
    release of his mother the Appellant would be crying not celebrating and
    that such made  it  not  plausible  that  he  was  radicalized  by  the
    detention of his parents failed to  take  account  of  the  Appellant's
    first statement (17.06.09,para 18) that his mother was  crying  on  the
    day of her release because they all feared that  his  father  would  be
    detained indefinitely.

20. Fifth, the finding  that  the  Appellant  would  not  have  engaged  in
    producing and distributing anti regime leaflets because  of  the  risks
    involved failed to consider that all anti regime activity  in  Iran  is
    risky yet the background material indicates it does take  place.   Also
    the Appellant provided an account of why  he  began  these  activities.
    Further,  the  background  material  refers  to  numerous  examples  of
    arbitrary arrest, incommunicado detention and corruption of officials.

21. Sixth, the judge found it was not credible  that  the  Appellant  would
    have known how to make a 'Molotov cocktail'.  Yet this is the  simplest
    of all incendiary devices to make.  No special knowledge  is  required.
    Also, in failing to believe that the Appellant would  attack  a  random
    police car rather than the policeman who  had  abused  him,  the  judge
    failed to consider his explanation which included  that  as  a  fifteen
    year old it would have  been  difficult  to  do  anything  against  the
    policeman personally but that he 'had to  do  something'  and  it  'was
    (his) way of raging against a system that put power in the hands  of  a
    monster like Hassan' (statement [2.09.13] para 17).

22. Seventh, the judge found 'numerous discrepancies' in the evidence.   He
    mentions only what he considered to be one, namely, that he  said  that
    he and others prepared leaflets secretly in the  school  during  breaks
    yet at interview said a friend wrote them.  There was  no  discrepancy.
    The Appellant never stated that he was not required to produce some  of
    the leaflets distributed.  The production was an ongoing process.

23. Finally, as indicated, the judge  made  no  reference  at  all  to  the
    background material that was before him. It was an error of law not  to
    consider the Appellant's account  in  the  context  of  the  background
    material.

24. By consent of both parties the determination was set aside to be  heard
    again.



Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal includes the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  The decision is set aside.  The nature  or  extent  of  any
judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for  the  decision  to  be
remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First  tier
Tribunal in accordance with Practise Statement paragraph  7.2  to  be  heard
afresh by that Tribunal.  No findings stand.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

