

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07015/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 8 April 2015                      |On 13 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               FARHAD AHMADZAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T D Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Balloch, dismissing on all available grounds his  appeal  against
    refusal of further leave to remain.

 2. Pages and paragraphs 1-4  of  the  grounds  are  directed  against  the
    adverse credibility findings, which are mainly relevant to the  Refugee
    Convention outcome.  Paragraph 5 argues that the appellant should  have
    been found to be in an enhanced risk category  so  as  to  qualify  for
    humanitarian protection.  Paragraph 6  alleges  error  in  the  finding
    about contact with family members in Afghanistan, although to no  clear
    effect.  Paragraph 7 is directed against  the  Article  8  conclusions.
    Paragraph 8 is winding up.

 3. The respondent's response to  the  grant  of  permission  submits  that
    although the grounds are lengthy, thorough and detailed they amount  to
    no more than a quarrel with findings of fact which  disclose  no  legal
    error.

 4. Ground 1 says that the judge erred in relating  background  information
    about Taliban actions to the appellant's case, and did not sufficiently
    take into account his explanations.   Ground 2  complains  of  lack  of
    fair notice of the judge founding partly on the late  production  of  3
    letters allegedly from the Taliban.  Mr  Ruddy  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant  did  not  offer  any  further  evidence  to   explain   late
    production, and that grounds 1 and 2 would not by themselves be  enough
    to set the determination aside.

 5. The principal submission for the appellant arose from grounds 3 and  4.
    The judge based her decision above all on the timing of  production  of
    the letters, H19-24 of the Home Office bundle.  The  first  and  second
    letters threaten the appellant's uncle with death if he does  not  hand
    over his nephew.  The third bears to have been attached to his  uncle's
    body when he was killed for sending the appellant away, and for failing
    to produce him for jihad.   Mr  Ruddy  said  that  on  unravelling  the
    determination it gave no good reason to find  the  letters  not  to  be
    genuine,  other  than  timing,  as  to  which  the  determination   was
    misconceived,  and  that   although   the   determination   said   that
    consideration was given to the content of the  letters,  there  was  no
    such consideration.  The judge accepted  that  the  respondent's  point
    (refusal letter paragraph 24) about a letter pre-dating  the  death  it
    referred to arose only from a  typographical  error  in  a  solicitors'
    letter.  The respondent said in the same paragraph that  the  appellant
    did not provide evidence to confirm his uncle's death, but the  Taliban
    letter was such evidence.  The judge failed to appreciate that she  had
    disposed of the respondent's  reasons  for  disregarding  the  letters.
    These errors justified a rehearing.

 6. Ground 5 argues  that  the  judge  made  findings  sufficient  for  the
    appellant to fall into an enhanced risk category and   to  qualify  for
    humanitarian protection in terms of paragraphs 86(i), 208 and 209 of AK
    [2012] UKUT 00163, on account of his father's work for  the  government
    and his own interest to the Taliban.  Mr Ruddy said that  paragraph  45
    of the determination  finds  the  appellant's  account  not  inherently
    implausible and should have led at paragraph  58  to  success  in  that
    branch of the case.

 7. Mr Ruddy said there had been evidence of the  appellant's  difficulties
    in contacting his family in Afghanistan, and there were  other  factors
    in his favour regarding Article 8.  However, he did not stress  grounds
    6 and 7.

 8. Mrs O'Brien said that the appellant knew from the refusal  letter  that
    the letters were not accepted as genuine and was not taken by surprise.
     The key to the adverse credibility finding was the timing of emergence
    of evidence but that is a sound reason in various ways.    It  took  an
    inexplicably long time  for  the  threat  to  emerge.   The  background
    evidence showed that age is no protective factor from the Taliban.   It
    was strange for the threat to emerge long after the appellant left  the
    country.  It was all too convenient that the  evidence  came  to  light
    when needed for proceedings in the UK.  An examination of the  contents
    of the letters was not shown  to  make  any  difference.   The  refusal
    letter and the determination might not be best  framed  as  to  whether
    there was any evidence of the uncle's death, but the  underlying  point
    was that some other evidence such as a  death  certificate  might  have
    been expected.  The judge  had  been  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    letters did not chime with the evidence of Taliban activities and  with
    the passage of time.  Paragraph 45 opens by saying that the appellant's
    account is not reasonably likely to be wholly true, goes on to find one
    aspect not inherently implausible and another less likely, and ends  by
    saying that it lacks any real credibility due to  the  timescale.   The
    appellant also pointed to certain points the judge took in  his  favour
    regarding the letters and  discrepancies  in  his  evidence  about  his
    family but sought to give them much more significance  than  the  judge
    did, or than was justified.  Reading paragraph 45 and the determination
    fairly and as a whole  that  appellant's  overall  credibility  is  not
    accepted but rejected.  There was therefore no foundation for  a  grant
    of humanitarian protection.  The challenge to Article  8  was  no  more
    than disagreement.  That part of the case had some sympathetic features
    but no real substance.

 9. I reserved my determination.

10. The grounds search for error in a rather intricate  and  detailed  way.
    In my opinion, they do not resolve into anything more  than  insistence
    upon  the  appellant's  case  and  they  do  not  disclose   that   the
    determination is anything less than an adequately reasoned  explanation
    to the appellant of why his case has not succeeded.  Broadly, I  prefer
    the submissions for the respondent.

11. Judge Balloch was  entitled  to  find  that  the  appellant  failed  to
    establish his case to the necessary standard.   Judges are entitled  to
    find some aspects of evidence more  likely  than  others,  in  whatever
    varying degrees, as long as they apply the ultimate  standard  overall.
    I find no ambiguity in paragraph 45, read as a whole, but any  possible
    doubt is removed by reading it  in  the  wider  context  of  the  whole
    determination.

12.  Various  aspects  of  timing  are  the  main  reasons  for   rejecting
    credibility, but there is no error in that.  There is reference, albeit
    brief, to the content of the letters at paragraph 54.

13. On the overall adverse credibility  finding,  there  was  no  case  for
    humanitarian protection.  (I am not  persuaded  that  even  on  a  more
    favourable reading the appellant fell within any particular  protection
    category, but that need not be taken any further.)

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



             [pic]


             8 April 2015
             Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
