
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07288/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 5 January 2016                    |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                ABDUL RASHID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire
                    Solicitors (Scotland) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 25 June 1978.   He  has
    not requested an anonymity order, and none has been made.

 2. The appellant appears to have come to the UK on  or  around  1  January
    2004, although he made no asylum claim until detected as an  overstayer
    in 2013.  The respondent refused that claim on 19  June  2013.   First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Farrelly  dismissed  his  appeal   by   decision
    promulgated on 13 October 2015.

 3. The appellant's first ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  based
    on failure to take account of or to assess  country  information.   The
    judge found at paragraph 27 that  the  appellant  left  Pakistan  on  a
    genuine passport.   The ground states that there was no  evidence  that
    he would have been prohibited from leaving Pakistan.  Mr Winter did not
    seek to add to this ground.  The Presenting Officer said that it showed
    no error, but was simply a finding that the appellant left on  his  own
    regularly issued passport.

 4. I agree that there is no error here.  The judge  was  correct  to  note
    that there was no rational explanation of why the appellant would  have
    required an agent to obtain a genuine passport in  his  own  name,  and
    that the simpler explanation was that  this  was  a  passport  obtained
    through normal channels.

 5. Ground 2 says that at paragraph 29 the judge failed to  recognise  that
    the Tribunal is precluded from finding the appellant incredible  merely
    because he did not rely on his declared sexual orientation  when  first
    required to set out grounds of alleged persecution.

 6. That is correct as a matter of general principle, but it  misrepresents
    paragraph 29 of the determination.  The judge there  finds  failure  to
    claim on arrival to be an adverse factor.  That was  entirely  open  to
    him.  As Mr Matthews  pointed  out,  the  appellant  had  a  long  time
    thereafter to state his  case.   The  judge  made  no  finding  "merely
    because" sexual orientation was not declared at the outset.

 7. Ground  3  is  failure  to  consider  cultural  context.   Mr  Matthews
    submitted that this was a mere expression of disagreement.   I  see  no
    reason to think that the judge closed  his  mind  to  cultural  context
    which might lead to the appellant being  slow  to  divulge  his  sexual
    orientation, as disclosed by the evidence on his behalf.   This  ground
    discloses no error.

 8. Ground 4 submits that there was an onus on the respondent to verify the
    documentary evidence, and  the  overlapping  ground  5  criticises  the
    finding that the appellant did not  establish  the  provenance  of  the
    documents, which bore their own dates and details.   Mr  Matthews  said
    that at paragraph 34 the judge showed that he was aware of the  limited
    circumstances in which there might be an onus on  the  respondent,  and
    correctly explained why he did not find there to be  an  obligation  on
    the respondent in this case.  Again I prefer  the  submission  for  the
    respondent.  PJ (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA 1011 at paragraph 30 says  that
    simply  because  a  relevant  document  is   potentially   capable   of
    verification does mean that the respondent has an  obligation  to  take
    that step.  The obligation arises in exceptional cases.  This case  has
    a long history.  The appellant does not appear  to  have  advanced  the
    argument that the respondent was under any  such  obligation  prior  to
    raising it in the present grounds.  I  see  no  error  in  the  judge's
    analysis of the documentary evidence, or in giving it little weight.

 9. Ground 6 says  that  the  judge  failed  to  evaluate  the  appellant's
    response to alleged inconsistencies in his narration of his escape, and
    did not undertake his own assessment of  the  appellant's  evidence  or
    explain why his explanations were not credible.  I do not find this  to
    amount to more  than  a  further  expression  of  disagreement  with  a
    decision which provides adequate reasons  on  this  matter,  and  as  a
    whole.

10.  Ground  7  is  the  one  which  principally  triggered  the  grant  of
    permission, and on which Mr Winter centred his submissions.  It is said
    that the judge failed to make findings on the evidence of a witness who
    said that the appellant told him  about  his  sexuality  and  that  the
    witness had dropped the appellant off  at  gay  clubs,  which  was  the
    principal or only supporting  evidence  regarding  his  sexuality.   Mr
    Winter said that the gap was obvious.  He accepted that to  succeed  he
    would also have to make out ground 8, which alleges that  the  findings
    eventually reached are contrary to  HJ  (Iran)  v  SSHD  [2011]  IAC596
    because the appellant could not be expected to act discreetly  if  such
    were to avoid persecution.   Mr  Winter  said  that  the  determination
    accepted at paragraph  39  that  there  was  no  legal  sufficiency  of
    protection, and that paragraph 40 was contrary to the approach required
    by HJ.  The appellant's evidence in his statement was that  he  behaved
    discreetly in Pakistan because he was in fear of the authorities.

11. Mr Winter's final submission was that errors were disclosed principally
    by grounds 7 and 8, but backed up by grounds 4 and 5, and added  to  by
    the remaining grounds, such that a fresh hearing was required.

12. The respondent's overall argument was that the judge correctly  took  a
    holistic approach, was not required to deal with every  detail  of  the
    evidence, explained where weight was given,  left  nothing  significant
    out of account, and reached an overall sustainable conclusion.  In that
    context, the absence of a specific finding on whether the  evidence  of
    the witness was accepted  or  rejected  was  perhaps  regrettable,  but
    immaterial.  In any event, the conclusion reached at paragraph  40  was
    that the appellant, if in Pakistan, would conduct himself with relative
    discretion as he had done in the past  (without  adverse  consequences)
    "... consistent with his upbringing, nature and  the  social  mores  in
    place.  This is evidenced by the low level of activity he has described
    whilst in the UK where there were no restrictions.  It is my conclusion
    his reason  for  so  behaving  is  not  out  of  fear  of  prosecution.
    Consequently, in line with paragraph 82 in Lord  Roger's  judgment  [in
    HJ] I do not see a real risk of persecution arising."

13. On this final and overall point, again I prefer the submissions for the
    respondent.  A further specific finding would at best  have  been  that
    the appellant told the witness that he is homosexual, and that  he  had
    been dropped off occasionally at a gay club.  The judge did not  accept
    that the appellant had established he was homosexual.  I see  no  error
    therein, but in any event the judge  recognised  the  determination  of
    sexual orientation to be a difficult exercise  and  went  on  to  reach
    clear findings in the alternative.  The conclusions quoted  above  from
    paragraph 40 are indeed in line with HJ and they are properly  decisive
    of the case.

14. No error of law  has  been  shown.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           13 January 2016
