
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07247/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th September 2016                     |On 16th September 2016            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                  mr C S F
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar, Counsel, instructed by Mansfield
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 26th December 1982  and
    he formally applied for asylum on 12th March 2014 which was refused  on
    2nd April 2015.  His appeal against that refusal came before First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker at Columbus House in Newport  on  25th  September
    2015 and Judge Walker dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant challenged, with permission, the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge on the following grounds:

      1) The appellant's evidence was that he used  the  assistance  of  two
         agents, one in 2008 and later one in 2009, and that the  judge  had
         materially erred  in  law  in  this  regard  by  finding  that  the
         appellant had provided inconsistent evidence in relation to whether
         he had used one or two agents.

      2)  The  judge  had  misunderstood  the  appellant's  evidence.    The
         appellant had stated it was a requirement that all  fishermen  such
         as the appellant must register with the local council and obtain  a
         fisherman's ID card.  Counsel  for  the  appellant,  however,  made
         submissions that there was nothing in the  background  evidence  to
         demonstrate that the  local  council  had  accessed  the  main  CID
         database and the judge had demonstrably failed to engage with  this
         evidence when considering whether the  appellant  would  have  been
         making his  presence  known  to  the  authorities  by  his  adverse
         profile.

      3) The judge had failed to engage with Counsel's submission  that  the
         appellant's release was on payment of bribes and subsequent adverse
         interest of the authorities was due to the  appellant  being  on  a
         watch list as per the rationale in GJ and others  (post-civil  war:
         returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and thus the  judge
         had materially erred in law.

      4) The appellant had provided detailed oral and written evidence as to
         the fact that it had taken the agent considerable time  to  arrange
         his departure from Sri Lanka  and  to  ensure  that  the  necessary
         contacts were in place at the airport.  The judge had rejected  the
         appellant's credibility in respect of the delay based upon the fact
         that  the  appellant  had  not  explained  why  such  a  delay  was
         necessary.  It was simply perverse for the judge  to  find  against
         the appellant in this way when it was the appellant's evidence that
         the delay was caused by the agent.

      5) That the judge was not legally entitled to reach the findings  that
         she did and  this  consequently  affected  his  assessment  of  the
         appellant's risk on return.  There was no adequate consideration of
         GJ.

 3. There were two further grounds which were not  granted  permission  and
    those were in relation to paragraph 56 whereby the grounds had actually
    stated that the  agent  had  been  used  by  the  appellant  to  obtain
    illegally a properly issued Sri Lankan passport not a forged  passport.
    The judge had materially erred in law in  finding  that  the  appellant
    would not have required the  assistance  of  an  agent  to  obtain  the
    passport.   A further ground that the judge rejected  the  genuine  and
    subsisting nature of the appellant's relationship was raised.   Neither
    ground was  permitted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill  when  granting
    permission.

 4. In relation to ground 1 and the use of two agents  it  is  quite  clear
    that at paragraph 57 the judge has mistaken the  evidence  and  I  note
    that the appellant had only used one agent.  In the appellant's  Asylum
    Interview Record the appellant does in fact  refer  to  more  than  one
    agent and specifically  at  paragraph  133  the  appellant  states  "we
    applied with a different man".

 5. However, it is urged by Ms Iengar, Counsel for the appellant, that  the
    evidence assessed by the judge must be taken in the round  and  thus  I
    have considered the further errors asserted to have been  made  by  the
    judge and the decision as a whole  when  considering  either  alone  or
    cumulatively any errors made are material.

 6. I am not persuaded with respect to the second ground that the judge had
    misunderstood the appellant's evidence.  The judge was quite clear that
    the appellant's account of obtaining a fisherman's licence in 2008  had
    the effect of contradicting the story he had told about being detained.
     At paragraph 54 of the decision the judge  had  specifically  recorded
    that in his written grounds of appeal the appellant said  that  he  had
    been arrested on 25th October 2008 by five or six people from  the  CID
    and had been taken and questioned.  The documentation showed  that  the
    fisherman's licence was issued  by  the  Department  of  Fisheries  and
    Aquatic Resources on 17th December 2008, which was over six weeks after
    his claimed release from detention by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  for
    being a suspected supporter and helper for  LTTE  activities.   As  the
    judge rightly  recorded  at  paragraph  58,  this  had  the  effect  of
    contradicting his story.    As the judge stated,

         "when he made his application according to him he had been arrested
         and his release obtained by a bribe so  that  he  had  to  go  into
         hiding".

 7. The judge also concluded that:

         "It must in his mind therefore have been a huge risk that  were  he
         to  apply  for  his  fisherman's  licence  the  authorities   would
         recognise that he was still in Sri Lanka and pursue him.  He had no
         grounds for suggesting that the authorities were  likely  to  treat
         him kindly because otherwise why was it necessary  for  him  to  go
         into hiding."

 8. It was open to the judge to make  that  finding  and  which,  in  turn,
    fundamentally undermines the appellant's  narrative.   The  appellant's
    case, that he made the application  prior  to  his  detention  was  not
    accepted by the judge and for this finding the judge  gave  reasons  at
    paragraph 57 that:

         "The appellant's evidence at the hearing that he  applied  for  the
         identity card before his  arrest  lacks  credibility  because  this
         explanation was not given in his witness statement although  it  is
         apparent from the witness statement that the  appellant  knew  that
         the existence of the fisheries document represents a threat to  his
         credibility as was pointed out in the interview of him."

 9. The grounds state that there was nothing in the background evidence  to
    demonstrate that the local council had access to the main CID  database
    but that is not the point.  It is not that the local council had access
    to the CID database but whether the CID would have access to the  local
    council's databases and it is clear that the fisherman's licence  is  a
    local government requirement and open  to  investigation  by  the  CID.
    Further that the appellant had not given the  explanation  of  applying
    for that card in his witness statement albeit that he knew that  aspect
    of his account was challenged.   In  paragraph  59  the  judge  clearly
    considered that this was  an  important  aspect  which  undermined  the
    appellant's credibility.  It is  the  issue  of  the  passport  (be  it
    illegally obtained it was in his own name) and the fishing  licence  to
    someone who had only just been released, apparently  on  a  bribe,  and
    which would have alerted the authorities to the  appellant's  continued
    presence  in  Sri  Lanka  which  undermined  his  claim.    The   judge
    specifically found that this was  not  consistent  with  the  appellant
    having a high profile adverse identity in the eyes of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

10. The third ground of challenge was on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    failed to engage  with  the  submission  that  the  subsequent  adverse
    interest by the authorities following, his release after payment  of  a
    bribe, was owing to him being on a watch list.  The judge had  rejected
    the appellant's account inter alia for reasons that the  appellant  had
    applied for a passport and for a fisherman's licence and these  actions
    are fundamentally contrary to the appellant being on a watch list.  The
    first that the appellant mentioned of being placed on a watch list, was
    in the skeleton argument from Counsel.  As Ms Iengar made clear,  being
    placed on a watch list was separate  from  an  arrest  warrant.     The
    judge rejected the appellant's account and not  least  because  of  his
    varying accounts and in the appellant's screening interview  there  was
    no indication that the appellant had indeed even been arrested  and  at
    paragraph 60 the judge stated:

         "The varying versions of how the  appellant  came  by  his  fishing
         credentials and his replacement  passport  and  that  the  passport
         allowed him to travel  without  difficulty  meant  that  I  am  not
         satisfied that the appellant has an adverse profile in  Sri  Lanka.
         In reaching that conclusion I also bear in mind that the version of
         events surrounding the appellant's arrest  and  interrogation  that
         the appellant gave."

11. The fourth ground was that the  judge  had  erred  in  criticising  the
    appellant's oral and written evidence as to the fact that it had  taken
    the agent a considerable space of time to arrange  his  departure  from
    Sri Lanka.  As Mr Bramble pointed out, the criticism by the  judge  was
    the lack of explanation given  by  the  appellant  as  to  why  it  was
    necessary for there to be such a delay in making the applications.  The
    appellant gave an explanation in relation to the delay in removing  him
    from Sri Lanka,  not  in  relation  to  the  applications  and  it  was
    considered to be relevant that despite the fact that the appellant used
    an agent who was "viewed as having expertise  in  making  applications"
    there was still a delay between the failed application on 10th February
    2009 and the next application on 6th August 2009.

12. Overall the judge found that he was not satisfied with the  credibility
    of the appellant or that he had an adverse profile in Sri  Lanka.   The
    reference to the inconsistency of the appellant's account regarding the
    use of two agents was just one in a  series  on  findings  against  the
    appellant. In the light of the remaining considerations and findings by
    the judge which I refer to below, I am not persuaded that  the  judge's
    error in failing to  consider  that  there  was  more  than  one  agent
    demonstrates a material  error  in  the  decision.   The  challenge  to
    paragraph 56 of the judge's  decision  was  rejected  and  not  granted
    permission.  That paragraph makes the  particular  point  that  as  the
    appellant was not of adverse interest, on his  own  evidence,  when  he
    made the first applications for student visas in Sri  Lanka,  howsoever
    he obtained the passport, there was no reason for him not to follow the
    correct procedure as he asserts he had to do in his grounds of  appeal.
    This point was taken against him by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

13. With regards the applications in the  United  Kingdom,  I  particularly
    note the findings at paragraph  63  where  the  judge  notes  that  the
    appellant has extensive experience of making  immigration  applications
    and presented as an intelligent man and found that if the appellant had
    experienced the claimed  ill-treatment  in  Sri  Lanka  he  would  have
    expected this to be a feature of every application that he  made  since
    he came to the UK and most  certainly  following  the  refusal  of  his
    application on 30th November 2011.  This appellant had no further leave
    following the expiry of his  leave  in  2011  which  had  been  granted
    following his  departure  from  Sri  Lanka  where  he  claims  to  have
    experienced torture.  As the judge states:

         "Indeed having had his applications for leave to remain  under  the
         points-based system refused, he  then  applied  for  permission  to
         remain based on his family and private life.  At that point at  the
         latest the appellant must have known that he  was  running  out  of
         options in seeking to remain in the UK and I  would  have  expected
         him then to explain the real reason  he  was  in  the  UK  was  not
         because he wanted to be a student or a post-study worker but he was
         in fear in Sri Lanka.  I consider the fact that he did not  mention
         his asylum claim earlier is not a symptom  of  bad  lawyers  but  a
         symptom of the appellant's claim being invented."

14. The judge proceeded at paragraph 64 to find that the appellant had  not
    particularised how he was tortured.  He did not accept that  being  hit
    on the head and hands with a plastic  two  litre  bottle  which  was  a
    quarter full of water constituted torture  and  indeed  those  findings
    were not challenged.

15. The judge recorded that the  appellant  had  made  no  less  than  nine
    previous applications for either entry clearance or leave to remain  in
    the UK only two of which were successful and had made four  in  country
    applications following the expiry of his student visa and at no time in
    the making of these four applications did he  seek  asylum,  [paragraph
    67].

16. As such, as the judge found the appellant's claim to be without  truth.
    The fifth ground was that the judge failed to engage sufficiently  with
    GJ.  The head note of GJ sets out as follows

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

17. The judge set out at [66] that the appellant  did  not  fall  into  the
    categories of GJ. The judge took into  account  background  information
    [64] when considering the appellant's account.  In the light of all the
    reasoning above when referring to the judge's findings, I do  not  find
    that the judge failed to consider or apply  GJ  because,  clearly,  the
    judge found there was no suggestion that the appellant was  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka or that there was any Diaspora
    activity whilst in the United  Kingdom  such  that  would  attract  the
    attention of the Sri Lankan authorities on his return.  I conclude that
    there is no material error of law in the context of the multiplicity of
    reasons for the credibility findings made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

Notice of Decision

I therefore find that the findings were open to the judge and  there  is  no
material error of law and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
will stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            Helen Rimington                Date 15th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

