
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07115/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                  Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 27 July 2015                       |                  On 3 August 2015    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                                  A. M. A.
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel instructed by Hackney Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

1.   This is the appeal of A M A. He claims to be a citizen  of  Syria  born
    on 5 May 1998. The appellant  maintains  that  he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 5 September 2013 and he claimed asylum on 7  November  2013.
    The respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim on 15  August  2014
    but, because the appellant was an unaccompanied child, he  was  granted
    leave to  remain  pursuant  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  on
    unaccompanied children. The appellant appealed under Section 83 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  against  the  refusal  to
    grant him asylum.  His appeal was heard on 14 November 2014 by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Easterman. The  decision  was  not  promulgated
    however until 9 April 2015.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

2.   The Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim for asylum on  the
    basis of a SPRAKAB Report dated 24 March  2014.  The  report  concluded
    that the appellant was not a citizen of Syria and was in fact Egyptian.
    The analysis of the  appellant's  language  included  consideration  of
    phonology and prosody, morphology and syntax, lexica and his  knowledge
    of Syria. The SPRAKAB analysts concluded  to  a  very  high  degree  of
    certainty that the appellant came from Egypt and not Syria.

3.   In his determination the judge indicated that he approached the  report
    with a degree of caution. At paragraph  55  of  his  determination  the
    judge bore in mind that the respondent did not appear to have  informed
    SPRAKAB, or if they did, SPRAKAB had failed to note, that the appellant
    was a minor at the time of the interview. This  is  apparent  from  the
    second page of the SPRAKAB Report which identified appellant as a  man,
    a square box indicating whether he was a minor or not was  not  ticked,
    and at 1.3 of the report the appellant is again identified as a man.

4.   At  paragraph  57  of  his  determination  the  judge  noted  that  the
    linguistic element of the SPRAKAB Report appeared  to  be  compiled  by
    people who had relevant qualifications in linguistics. The judge  noted
    that he did not see the analyst as an expert  in  what  people  in  the
    particular part of Syria from which the  appellant  claimed  he  hailed
    would  eat  for  breakfast  nor  whether  all  schools  in  that   area
    necessarily had a uniform.

5.   The judge noted at paragraph 58 of his  determination  the  appellant's
    explanation  for  the  conclusions  of  the  language  analysis.    The
    appellant claimed that he watched a lot of television  from  Egypt  and
    must have picked up expressions from there.  The judge did not find  it
    credible that so many different details  had  been  picked  up  by  the
    linguists which were consistent with Arabic as spoken in Egypt and were
    inconsistent with Arabic as spoken in Syria. The judge also  relied  on
    the absence of rebuttal evidence  from  the  appellant  in  respect  of
    geographical  differences  between  his  account  and  the  information
    provided through the SPRAKAB analysis. The judge dismissed the  appeal.
    The date of his dismissal was 7 April 2015.

The Grounds of Appeal and Discussion

6.   The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are twofold.  It  is  first
    submitted that the delay of nearly five months, in the absence  of  any
    explanation, constitutes an error of law.  It is said  that  the  delay
    between  the  date  of  hearing  and  assessment  is  unacceptable  and
    therefore unlawful. Reliance is put on the case of Mario v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [1998] Imm AR 281.

7.   I am not satisfied that this ground is made out.  It is clear from  the
    authorities of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  RK
    (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868 and Arusha and  Demushi  (deprivation  of
    citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT 00080 (IAC) that there must be a nexus
    between the delay and the safety of the decision.   The  appellant  has
    not identified any factual inaccuracy in the judge's  assessment.   The
    appellant has not identified any omission in respect of the appellant's
    account or explanation for the SPRAKAB Report results. The case is  not
    a particularly complex one and the nature of the credibility assessment
    by the judge very significantly dependent on consideration  of  matters
    external to the evidence given by the appellant at the hearing,  so  it
    was not dependent on the appellant's bearing or demeanour.

8.   I am however concerned in respect of the failure  by  the  analysts  in
    the SPRAKAB Report to appreciate or take account of the fact  that  the
    appellant was a minor when he was interviewed.

9.   At page  2  of  the  SPRAKAB  Report,  under  the  heading  'Basis  for
    analysis', there are several identifying characteristics in relation to
    an interviewees background and several boxes that need  to  be  ticked.
    The box next to the word 'man' is ticked, however the box next  to  the
    word 'minor' is not ticked.  I am satisfied from this that the  age  of
    an interviewee may be of relevance not just in respect of the knowledge
    assessment but in respect of the linguistic assessment as well.   I  am
    reinforced in this by reference to 1.3, the summary of findings,  where
    the analyst indicated that the appellant was a man  when  in  fact  the
    appellant was a minor at the time. The linguistic analysis pre-supposed
    the appellant was a man. He was however 16 years old when  interviewed.
    It is not clear what, if any, difference this disparity  between  adult
    and minor would have made but this is an asylum claim and one in  which
    anxious scrutiny must be applied to all aspects of the appeal.

 10.     I am satisfied that it was, or  at  least  appears  to  have  been,
    significant to the SPRAKAB analysts to know if  an  interviewee  was  a
    minor or an adult.  The judge clearly did take  this  into  account  at
    paragraph 55 of his determination but nevertheless concluded  that  the
    linguistic analysis was safe.  I am not satisfied that  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude this aspect of the SPRAKAB  Report  safe.  It  may
    well be that the difference of two years between a 16 year old  and  an
    18 year old would have made no difference whatsoever  to  an  analyst's
    ability to analyse the an  interviewee's  language  but,  applying  the
    anxious scrutiny test, It cannot safely be said that it would have made
    no difference.

11.  I therefore find that it was unsafe for the judge to  have  placed  the
    reliance he  did  on  the  SPRAKAB  Report  and  that  he  consequently
    committed a material error of  law.   It  logically  follows  that  the
    SPRAKAB Report is not one that the Secretary of  State  can  reasonably
    rely on and I exclude it from any subsequent consideration by the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision and Directions

The Judge made a material error of law in his determination.


I direct that the matter be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
CMRH (a Case Management Review Hearing), so that the respondent can  present
her position on this appeal  in  circumstances  where  the  present  SPRAKAB
Report is being excluded.

The full appeal hearing is to be heard by  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Easterman.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               31 July 2015


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

