
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07068/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Harmondsworth                       |Promulgated                   |
|On 16 October 2014                           |On 24 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                           mr Abdelkader BOUROKBA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Chaghtai
For the Respondent:    Mr L Collingridge, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Tunisia, born on 30  December  1985.   He
    arrived in the UK on 3 December 2011 in  possession  of  a  visa  as  a
    spouse, valid until 12 December 2013.

 2. It appears that after his arrival he and his wife separated and divorce
    proceedings were commenced.  The  appellant  made  applications  on  11
    December 2013 and 12 April 2014 for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
    private life, under Article 8 of the  ECHR.   Those  applications  were
    refused.  On 7 July  2014  he  was  served  with  notice  of  being  an
    overstayer.  On 1 September 2014 he claimed asylum.

 3. His asylum claim was refused and a decision made on 15  September  2014
    to remove him under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 4. His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    O'Garro on 24 September 2014, whereby she dismissed the appeal  on  all
    grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted by  a  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the appeal came before me.

The basis of claim

 5. The appellant's claim can be summarised as follows.   He  claimed  that
    his family were involved in a dispute over property with another family
    called Al Salafie.  According to his  witness  statement  the  problems
    between the two  families  have  now  extended  beyond  a  simple  land
    dispute, with a member of the Al Salafie family (or clan)  having  been
    killed.  The appellant's father had sold his share of the land  a  long
    time ago.

 6. In August 2010 the appellant says that he was beaten by unknown men  on
    his way back from work, having been attacked from behind.   The  attack
    involved four men who ran away when a car stopped  near  to  them.   He
    believes that those men belonged to the Al Salafie family.  He did  not
    have any problems with anyone else and therefore strongly suspects that
    it was them who were involved.  As a result of the attack he  sustained
    injuries and reported the matter to the police.  He  went  to  hospital
    where he received treatment for his injuries.

 7. Following that attack he decided not to go out at night and changed his
    route to and from work.  However, in May or June 2011 he  was  attacked
    again by unknown men, again resulting in his suffering  injuries.   The
    matter was reported to the police who did not do anything to help him.

 8. Subsequently, he was granted a visa for the UK to settle with his  wife
    as her spouse.  In his witness statement he says that he did  not  wish
    to stay in Tunisia any longer because of the danger, and  also  because
    he wanted to join his wife and begin a new life in the UK.

 9. Whilst in the UK, and after having separated from his wife, he received
    a threatening phone call from a member of the  Al  Salafie  clan.   The
    caller threatened to kill him and said that they believed that  he  had
    been sending money to  his  family  in  Tunisia  to  provide  financial
    support for them so that his family could continue the dispute.

The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal and submissions

10. In summary, the grounds contend that the First-tier Judge erred in  her
    assessment of the evidence.  In stating at [46] that the appellant  had
    submitted no evidence that he or his family owned land or property, the
    judge had failed to take into account the details of the family dispute
    with the Al Salafie family.

11. Although the judge had made a point at [48] about a visit made  by  the
    appellant  from  the  UK  to  Tunisia  adversely  reflecting   on   his
    credibility, the judge had failed to take into account that it was only
    in January 2012 that he received threats over the phone in the UK.

12. It is also said in the grounds that the judge had failed to give weight
    to the medical report in relation to the appellant, concerning injuries
    he received in the second attack.  In addition, the judge had failed to
    consider that the appellant suffers from depression and his  memory  is
    not good.

13. In terms of how the Al  Salafie  family  managed  to  get  his  contact
    details in the UK, it was submitted that the judge had failed  to  take
    into account the ease with which such  information  could  be  obtained
    from relatives and friends.  Furthermore, it was after discussion  with
    his family in Tunisia that he decided to claim asylum.

14. Otherwise, it is said  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge's  Article  8
    assessment failed to take into account the length of time the appellant
    had been in the UK (three years) and the extent of his integration.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 16 October 2014

15. At the start of the hearing an application for  an  adjournment,  which
    had previously been refused prior to the hearing, was renewed.  It  has
    to be said, however, that the application was  not  pursued  with  much
    vigour, and in any event, only after enquiry by me as  to  whether  the
    application for an adjournment was renewed.

16. Mr Chaghtai stated that he did not have a full set of papers  from  the
    appellant's previous representatives.  He indicated that  what  he  was
    missing was the reasons for refusal letter and the appellant's  bundle.
    There was uncertainty over whether he had been provided with a copy  of
    the appellant's asylum interview.  It transpired, however, that a  copy
    of the asylum interview had been provided to  the  appellant's  present
    representatives  prior  to  the  hearing  and  was  in  Mr   Chaghtai's
    possession, albeit that he said that he had not read it,  stating  that
    he had only received it at about 6pm the evening  before  the  hearing.
    He indicated that he did have the appellant's witness statement.

17. In relation to country background material in the  appellant's  bundle,
    Mr Chaghtai said that he  did  not  have  a  copy  of  the  U.S.  State
    Department Report or the Human Rights Watch Report for Tunisia.   As  I
    pointed out, however, these are documents in the public domain  and  it
    is to be noted that the present representatives were instructed by  the
    appellant on 8 October 2014,  so  could  have  been  expected  to  have
    considered those documents in advance of the hearing before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

18. At 2.25pm I decided to put the matter back  in  the  list  to  give  Mr
    Chaghtai the opportunity to consider the  documents  that  he  had  not
    previously considered, either because he did not have them or  had  not
    read them.  The hearing resumed at 3.30pm.  Mr Chaghtai stated that  he
    was ready to proceed.  After my enquiry as  to  whether  he  was  still
    seeking an adjournment, he stated that an adjournment would still be in
    the best interests of the appellant but said that he was in a  position
    to make submissions on the appellant's  behalf  on  the  basis  of  the
    documentary evidence he now had.  It was not explained what the purpose
    of any further adjournment would be.

Submissions

19. In summary, the submissions were as follows. In addition to the written
    grounds before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Chaghtai submitted that the First-
    tier Judge had not considered all the evidence and the circumstances of
    the case.  The conclusion at [46] of the determination in  relation  to
    the land having been sold some years ago, fails to  take  into  account
    the appellant's evidence that the dispute had extended  beyond  a  mere
    land dispute.  It was submitted that the judge had failed to take  into
    account  the  appellant's   witness   statement   when   reaching   her
    conclusions.  Judge O'Garro, it was submitted, had failed to take  into
    account that the authorities had failed to provide  protection  to  the
    appellant.  Her conclusions generally were based  on  the  respondent's
    refusal letter. It was also submitted that the appellant's  answers  in
    interview did not reflect the questions that he was being asked.

20. Mr Collingridge referred to  various  parts  of  the  determination  in
    support of the submission that Judge O'Garro  had  considered  all  the
    evidence and come to conclusions that were open to her.

21. The evidence from  the  interview  indicated  that  the  appellant  did
    understand the questions that he was asked.   There  was  no  need  for
    Judge O'Garro to consider sufficiency of protection in the light of the
    fact that she did not accept his account.  It is  clear  that  she  had
    considered the medical report.

My assessment

22. At the outset it is necessary to deal with an issue  which  I  did  not
    draw to the attention of the parties but  which  nevertheless  requires
    resolution.  That is that the application for permission to appeal made
    to the Upper Tribunal was out of time.  The Upper  Tribunal  Judge  who
    granted permission to appeal did not deal  with  that  issue.   In  the
    circumstances, in the light of the decisions of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    Boktor and Wanis (late application for permission)  Egypt  [2011]  UKUT
    00442 (IAC), and Samir (FtT Permission to  appeal:  time)  [2013]  UKUT
    00003(IAC), I treat the grant of permission as conditional.

23. The application for permission to appeal  explains  that  it  was  late
    because the appellant's previous representatives  had  failed  to  take
    further instructions in time from the  appellant  in  relation  to  the
    First-tier judge's determination, bearing in mind  that  the  appellant
    was detained.  It is stated that he was only informed about the refusal
    of his appeal on 3 September 2014 by his previous representatives.   He
    contacted his present representatives, it is said, on 6 September 2014.
     Final instructions were received from the appellant on 7 October 2014.
    It would appear that the 3 and 6 September dates should  read  'October
    '.

24. The application for permission to appeal  was  received  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 10 October 2014.  This is outside the time period permitted
    for making the application.  Although the explanation for lateness does
    not cover precisely the entire period of the delay, bearing in mind the
    change in solicitors and that the appellant was for a short  period  of
    time unrepresented,  I  extend  time  for  submitting  the  application
    pursuant to rule 5(3)(a) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    rules 2008.

25. I now deal with the substance of the challenges to the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It is important to note two  particular  features
    of the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  The first is that  at
    [7] Judge O'Garro referred to some of the materials submitted on behalf
    of the appellant, which included "amendments to the interview  record".
    This is plainly a reference to a letter dated 15  September  2014  from
    the  appellant's  solicitors.   Amongst  other  things,   it   contains
    amendments to the answers to three questions in the  asylum  interview,
    plainly on the appellant's instructions.

26. The second matter of significance is that at [23] it is stated that the
    appellant adopted as his evidence his prepared statement.   This  is  a
    reference to the witness statement made by the appellant in support  of
    the appeal.  At [41] - [42] Judge O'Garro referred to having considered
    all the evidence, including the appellant's evidence, and  referred  in
    general terms to the documents produced.

27. The first matter that I have referred to is relevant to the  contention
    that the appellant's answers in the asylum interview  did  not  reflect
    the questions that he was being asked.  This submission  is  undermined
    somewhat  by  the  limited  extent  to  which  the  appellant's   legal
    representatives made representations  in  relation  to  the  interview,
    limited to clarification of three questions only.

28. The second matter relates to the suggestion that the  judge  failed  to
    take into account the appellant's witness statement.

29. Although it is correct to say that the appellant's account was  to  the
    effect that the  dispute  had  extended  beyond  merely  being  a  land
    dispute, the judge was entitled to take into account that the appellant
    had submitted no evidence that he or his family had ever owned land  or
    property.  At [46] the reference to  'no  evidence'  plainly  means  no
    evidence beyond the appellant's account.

30. Even if at that part of the determination the judge did  fail  to  take
    into account what the appellant said about the dispute having  extended
    beyond a mere land dispute, there were other reasons given for  finding
    his account lacking in credibility.

31. It appears that the appellant returned to Tunisia in  January  2012,  a
    matter that the appellant gave evidence  about  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  At [48] the judge concluded that  the  appellant  would  not
    have returned to Tunisia in January 2012, spending three  weeks  there,
    if he were genuinely in fear from the Al Salafie family.   The  grounds
    of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  contend  that  the  judge  failed  to
    appreciate that at that time he had had no serious threats to his life.
     It is said that the phone call threatening him in the UK  was  a  more
    recent call.

32. However, it is the appellant's case  that  he  was  attacked  twice  in
    Tunisia and at [14] of his witness statement he stated that he did  not
    wish to stay in Tunisia any longer due to the danger to his  life,  and
    also his intention of joining his wife to begin a new life in  the  UK.
    It is apparent, therefore, that the appellant's account is that he  did
    feel at risk in Tunisia.

33. In these circumstances, the judge was entitled to conclude at [48] that
    it was not credible that he would have returned to  Tunisia  for  three
    weeks in January 2012, his wife having apparently  purchased  a  return
    ticket as a surprise birthday present.  In the same  paragraph  it  was
    concluded that the appellant's wife would have  known  of  his  claimed
    fear and would not have considered  sending  him  to  Tunisia  for  his
    birthday, because of the risk that he  would  be  harmed.   That  is  a
    finding that was plainly open to the judge.

34. There was a medical report in relation  to  the  appellant,  translated
    into English.  It refers to an examination of the appellant on  11  May
    2011, stating that the appellant complained of  hearing  impairment  on
    the left side "after a brawl" and that he had diffused headaches.   The
    report  goes  on  to  state  that  the  examination  showed   a   "left
    Hemotympanum with conductive deafness".  It refers to the treatment  he
    received.  It is contended in the grounds that  the  judge  "failed  to
    give weight" to the medical evidence.

35. Of course classically, matters of weight are  entirely  for  the  judge
    assessing the evidence.  At [50] - [51] consideration was given to that
    medical evidence.   It  was  noted  that  there  was  inconsistency  in
    relation to the date of the incident, the difference being between  May
    2011 and June 2011 as between the  asylum  interview  and  the  medical
    report itself.  The judge also noted that the report makes reference to
    the appellant suffering hearing impairment "after a brawl",  which  the
    judge found to be at variance  with  the  appellant's  account  of  the
    incident that occurred in 2011.

36. Whilst it may be that other points could  be  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant in relation to  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  medical
    evidence, it is not correct to say that the report was not  considered.
    The weight to be attached to  that  report  was  for  the  judge.   The
    findings made by the judge in relation to  the  medical  evidence  were
    unarguably findings that were open to her.

37. Although it is said that the appellant suffers from memory loss,  aside
    from the fact that there is no  evidence  to  support  the  appellant's
    contention in that regard, a lack of  ability  to  remember  particular
    facts or circumstances hardly features in the judge's determination  in
    terms of any adverse assessment of credibility.

38. This in fact also relates to the suggestion, at least implied, that  in
    the interview the appellant was not able to follow the  questions  that
    were asked of him.  Again, however, that is plainly  not  the  case  as
    even a cursory examination of the asylum interview reveals.  The record
    of interview indicates a good understanding of the matters put  to  him
    and whereby the appellant  explained  the  background  to  the  claimed
    dispute, with various detailed matters being referred to.

39. The appellant's account includes the claim that he received threatening
    phone calls in the UK.  In answer to question  163  of  the  interview,
    when asked how he thought the Al Salafie  family  got  his  number,  he
    answered "From my friends or family" in  that  his  family  could  have
    given it to a friend and they could have taken it from his friend.   He
    then referred to occasions such as Eid or Ramadan whereby a greeting is
    sent to friends, stating that someone may have come and asked  for  the
    number, pretending that they worked with him, the appellant.

40.  At  [52]  of  the  determination  Judge  O'Garro,  referring  to   the
    appellant's claim that six months ago he had received threatening phone
    calls, concluded that he had provided no credible explanation as to how
    the "clan member" would have obtained his  personal  telephone  number.
    Although she did not refer to the asylum interview in this context,  it
    was plainly open to her to conclude that he had not provided a credible
    explanation for that matter.

41. Another matter raised in the grounds is the suggestion that  the  judge
    failed to take into account the evidence that the Al Salafie family  or
    clan has influence and power in Tunisia and  would  therefore  be  able
    easily to target  the  appellant.   In  fact,  at  [53]  Judge  O'Garro
    referred to submissions made on behalf of the appellant in relation  to
    background evidence about the "Salafist  movement".   She  referred  to
    having considered the "objective evidence" but found that this evidence
    did not support  the  appellant's  claim  at  all,  giving  reasons  in
    relation to the background evidence for coming to that view.

42. A further point however, is that the suggestion  that  this  family  or
    group  have  such  influence  and  power,  is  a  matter  that  further
    undermines the appellant's account in terms of his having gone back  to
    Tunisia from the UK with  his  wife  having  bought  the  ticket  as  a
    birthday present.

43. Insofar as the grounds contain other arguments, in reality they  amount
    only to a repetition of the  basis  of  the  appellant's  claim  and  a
    disagreement with the judge's conclusions on matters which were open to
    her.

44. So far as Article 8 is concerned, it was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant before me that  he  was  not  able  to  meet  the  Article  8
    immigration rules.  Indeed, so much is in any event apparent  from  the
    facts.  This was also a finding made by Judge O'Garro.  She went on  to
    conclude that it was not necessary to consider Article 8  proper  given
    that there was nothing, in effect, to indicate that there were  factors
    beyond the Article 8 immigration rules which could weigh in  favour  of
    the appellant in a proportionality assessment.

45. She was plainly correct in that conclusion.  The appellant  arrived  in
    the UK only in December 2011, on the basis of a marriage that had since
    broken down.  There was no basis from which to conclude that his appeal
    could conceivably have been allowed under Article 8 proper.

46. In conclusion, I am not  satisfied  that  the  grounds  or  submissions
    reveal any error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Accordingly, the decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds stands.

Decision

47. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds is to stand.









Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                   22/10/14
