

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07861/2014
                                                               AA/07865/2014
                                                               AA/07866/2014
                                                               AA/07872/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford Phoenix House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11 April 2016                           |On 15 April 2016               |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                         FARHAD MORID MOSHTAGH SEFAT
                          SAFEEDEH RAVARI MORTAZAVI
                             REZA MORID MOSHTAGH
                          ALI MORID MOSHTAGH SEFAT
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Hodson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Peterson a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background


    1. The Respondent notified the Appellants on 22 September 2014  of  her
       decision to refuse to grant  asylum  or  ancillary  protection.  The
       appeals against that decision were dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Balloch ("the Judge") following a hearing on 10 November 2014.
       This is an appeal against that decision.

    2. It is not necessary for me to provide significant factual detail  of
       the claim. In summary it was asserted that  the  1st  Appellant  had
       been involved for many years as an academic in writing articles that
       he claimed  were  of  interest  to  the  Iranian  authorities.  This
       continued after he was last there in 2012 and the 2nd Appellant (his
       wife) in 2013.

    3. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara granted permission to appeal on 8
       May 2015 as it is arguable;

          1. that the FTTJ erred in disregarding the recent material said to
          have been produced by the Appellant,
          2. that the judge failed to adequately  consider  the  Appellant's
          oral evidence,
          3. that the judge relied on a matter which was  not  in  issue  in
          making an adverse finding, and
          4. in remarking that the Appellant was "deliberately  providing  a
          basis for a claim to asylum in the UK," without assessing the risk
          on return to Iran, misdirected herself.

The hearing before me

    4. Despite the rule 24 notice, Mrs Peterson conceded that the Judge had
       materially erred regarding ground 4 of the application regarding the
       sur place activities given YB (Eritrea) [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360.  The
       issue of why he did it is not  critical  as  opportunist  sur  place
       activity is not an automatic bar to asylum. In addition,  the  issue
       is not why  did  he  write  something,  but  what  are  the  Iranian
       authorities likely to perceive he thinks and do to him as  a  result
       of that.


    5. It was equally clear and was conceded that this infected ground 1 of
       the  application  as  there  was  inadequate  consideration  of  the
       documentation he had written since the 1st Appellant had  last  been
       to Iran in 2012


    6. In light of that, it was clear that the decision could not stand. It
       was not necessary for me to hear arguments  on  the  other  grounds,
       although, as I  stated  at  the  hearing,  the  failure  by  her  to
       tediously recite every word stated in  the  hearing  or  excessively
       long statement was not a material error of law in itself. I did  not
       need to hear in detail from Mr Hodson although he conceded the  need
       for greater focus in the evidence.

    7. I therefore set the decision aside.

    8. Both representatives agreed that the matter needed  to  be  remitted
       for a de novo hearing.

Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    The matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
    hearing at Bradford (as the family now live in Leeds)  before  a  Judge
    other than Judge Balloch. The time estimate is  4  hours  and  a  Farsi
    speaking interpreter is required.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
12 April 2016
