
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07266/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 21 December 2015                  |on 05 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                K A KHWARAHM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Maguire
                    Solicitors (Scotland) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appeals against  a  determination  by
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fox,  dismissing  his  appeal  on  refugee,
    humanitarian protection and other grounds.

 2. The hearing was on 14 July 2015 and the determination  was  promulgated
    on 29 September 2015.  The grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    refer to  AA  (Article  15  (c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC),
    acknowledging that it was issued on 5 October 2015.  Paragraph 1 of the
    grounds seeks to apply factors listed (a) to  (g)  to  the  appellant's
    case.  Paragraph 2 says:

         "In failing to assess the evidence on the basis  of  answering  and
         assessing the appellant's position regarding those  matters  listed
         by the UT the judge erred in law.   That  the  error  of  law  only
         became  apparent  after  the  determination  was   promulgated   is
         immaterial to whether an error in law occurred."

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant granted permission  on  22  October
    2015, on the view that the judge arguably failed to apply AA.

 4. In a rule 24 response dated 2 November 2015 the  respondent  says  that
    the judge made an adverse credibility finding for sound reasons,  which
    are unchallenged,  and so there was no evidence that he does  not  have
    family support and means in Iraq, or that he should be considered to be
    at any enhanced risk on return.

 5. Mr Caskie (who was the author of the grounds) sought to widen them into
    an attack on the overall quality of the determination,  which  he  said
    showed a legal error of lack of anxious  scrutiny.   He  said  such  an
    argument properly fell within paragraph 2 of the grounds, failing which
    amendment should be permitted.  The determination was so defective that
    it could not stand.  The matters listed in the grounds  did  not  arise
    only with hindsight after AA.  They had been canvassed at  the  hearing
    and the judge had been bound to resolve them, but failed to do so.  The
    determination should be set aside.  On  re-examination,  the  appellant
    satisfied all but one of the criteria identified in AA (d; - he is  not
    female) and so a decision should be substituted to allow his appeal, in
    light of evidence which had been before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   A
    fresh claim to the respondent based on AA  would  not  be  an  adequate
    remedy, because the appellant would have  been  deprived  of  a  proper
    hearing.  The determination was "just a mess".

 6. Mrs O'Brien submitted that it was clear the grounds were  based  on  AA
    and not on any other attack on the determination.  Country guidance  is
    factual and not retrospective.  The determination was not a  manifestly
    defective one as now alleged, and that line of criticism came much  too
    late.  Any remedy the appellant might have in light of the findings  in
    AA would be by way of a fresh claim (as  to  the  merits  of  which  no
    concession was made) and not by artificially finding error of law.

 7. I reserved my determination.

 8. As Mrs O'Brien rightly put it, judges are not to be faulted for failing
    to see into a crystal ball.  It is now said that relevant matters  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, but the grounds make no  case  that  an
    argument was put to the judge which ought to have led him to   findings
    similar to AA.  The grounds depend on AA.  Their points (a) to (g)  are
    copied directly from paragraph 15 of its headnote.   The  authority  of
    country guidance is of  a  uniquely  fact  based  nature.   It  is  not
    declaratory of a situation which tribunals ought to  have  acknowledged
    in previous cases,  whether  a  case  was  specifically  made  or  not.
    Paragraph 2 of the grounds is wrong about the materiality of when  such
    an "error" becomes identifiable.  The grant of permission seems to have
    overlooked that AA post-dates promulgation of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination.

 9. There is no error of failure to apply AA.

10. The wider attack on the determination is not  to  be  found  hidden  in
    paragraph 2 of the grounds.

11. There are errors in the determination.  By  way  of  example  only,  at
    paragraph 20 "lesson 20 years" makes no  sense.   That  should  plainly
    read "less than 20 years".  In the same paragraph, "content" appears in
    place of "contend".  I do not purport to make a  finding  on  how  such
    errors arose, but I think that representatives agreed that there was  a
    strong suspicion that a computerised system of  voice  recognition  had
    been used and its results had not been  adequately  checked.   All  the
    errors to which Mr Caskie drew attention were of a similar nature:  the
    determination  could  be  made  sense  of  by  obvious  deletions   and
    substitutions.  That is unsatisfactory, but whether such errors require
    a determination to be set aside must be a question of fact  and  degree
    in each case.

12. The test is whether the determination, notwithstanding  its  errors  of
    expression, provides a legally adequate set of reasons.   As put by  LP
    Emslie in Wordie Property Co Ltd v Secretary  of  State  for  Scotland,
    1984 SLT 345, at 348:

         "The decision must, in short, leave the  informed  reader  and  the
         court in no real and substantial doubt as to what the  reasons  for
         it were and what were the material considerations which were  taken
         into account in reaching it."

13. The minimum legal requirement  is  not  grammatical  perfection  but  a
    comprehensible explanation why findings have been made one  way  rather
    than another.  The challenge that this  determination  fails  to  reach
    even the minimum standard comes surprisingly late, if  it  really  were
    defective to that extent.  I do not  think  it  is  a  challenge  which
    should now be permitted and  in  any  event  it  aims  too  high.   The
    determination answers the questions which were put  to  the  judge,  it
    does not leave the reader in doubt about the considerations taken  into
    account and it gives its reasons for the decision reached.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           21 December 2015
