
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07292/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2015                  |On 4 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                      Mr jOE nELSON anton arriyaratnam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jesurum of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Emma Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is the adjourned hearing of the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss his appeal.

Background

2.   The appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on 7 October 1980.

3.   The appellant applied for entry clearance to the UK as a student on  30
    September 2002.  This was granted and he entered  the  UK  pursuant  to
    that leave.  On 4 August 2005 he sought further leave to remain as this
    was granted to 31 October 2006.  Further extensions  were  obtained  to
    his student visa until 31 March 2010 but he returned to Sri Lanka on  3
    November 2009 and came back to the UK on 24 December 2009.   A  further
    three and a half years  elapsed  before  the  appellant  contacted  the
    Asylum Support Unit of the respondent and requested an appointment.  On
    18 March 2013 he claimed asylum.  On 19 April 2013 he was interviewed.

4.   On 4 September 2014 the respondent rejected his application as she  did
    not accept the appellant  had  given  a  credible  account.   She  also
    considered the appellant's claim that he had established  a  family  or
    private life in the UK but rejected that application also.

The Appeal Proceedings

5.   The appellant appealed the refusal  of  his  asylum  and  human  rights
    claim on  24  September  2014.   The  appellant's  appeal  came  before
    Immigration Judge Lawrence ("the Immigration Judge") sitting at  Hatton
    Cross on 9 March 2015.

6.   In  his  decision  the  Immigration  Judge  found  that  the  appellant
    suffered  from  colitis  and  related  conditions.   He  rejected   the
    suggestion the appellant had a condition known as sinus  or  any  other
    physical injury as a consequence of torture in 1997.   The  Immigration
    Judge rejected two medical  reports,  one  from  Professor  Lingham,  a
    doctor with expertise in preparing medico-legal reports on  victims  of
    torture including torture in Sri Lanka, and one  from  Dr  Lawrence,  a
    general adult psychiatrist.

7.   The appellant appealed the decision to dismiss  his  appeal  on  asylum
    and human rights grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  claiming  that  the
    Immigration Judge appeared to draw on his own experience as a doctor or
    healthcare professional rather than reach a proper finding based on the
    medical evidence presented before him.

8.   The appellant was given permission to appeal by  Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Astle.  Judge Astle considered that the Immigration Judge
    "superimposed his own knowledge of the cause of  the  sinus".   It  was
    arguable that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  not  treated  the  medical
    evidence properly, including the evidence of Professor Lingham who said
    that  the  appellant  had  given   a   "highly   consistent"   account.
    Accordingly, permission to appeal  was  granted.   Standard  directions
    were sent out stating that no new evidence would be allowed before  the
    Upper Tribunal unless it was served 21 days after directions were  sent
    on 28 April 2015 setting out all the material to  be  relied  on.   Any
    failure to serve such evidence would result in a refusal to admit  that
    evidence.

9.   Subsequently, on 8 May 2015, the respondent submitted a response  under
    Rule 24 stating that the appeal was opposed.

10.  The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  first  listed  on  Friday  11
    September 2015.  On that day I found a material error  of  law  in  the
    assessment of the medical evidence and the adverse credibility findings
    consequent thereon by the FTT.  Accordingly, it was necessary to fix  a
    further hearing with a time estimate of three hours and 20 October  was
    allocated at the hearing on 11 September 2015.

11.  Unfortunately, when I attended on 20 October  2015  the  case  for  the
    respondent had not been fully prepared.  This was due, in part, to  the
    fact that the respondent, despite being represented at the  hearing  on
    11 September 2015, did not appear to be clear as to the purpose of  the
    hearing of 20 October 2015.  One of the reasons for the adjournment had
    been to give the respondent the opportunity, if so advised, to apply to
    cross-examine the medical experts and for  both  parties  to  file  any
    updating evidence. However, the respondent confirmed that she  did  not
    wish to call any evidence of  her  own  or  cross-examine  the  medical
    experts.

The Adjourned Hearing

12.  At the  adjourned  hearing  on  30  November  2015  both  parties  were
    represented.  Mr Jesurum initially wanted  to  clarify  the  extent  to
    which the decision of the FTT could stand in the light of the fact that
    the findings on the medical evidence were  unsatisfactory.   Helpfully,
    Ms Savage, who appeared for the respondent at  the  adjourned  hearing,
    conceded that the adverse credibility findings could not stand  in  the
    light of  the  incorrect  analysis  of  the  medical  evidence  by  the
    Immigration  Judge.   I  therefore  decided  to  approach  the  medical
    evidence afresh and from the appellant himself through  an  interpreter
    before making appropriate findings, including any relating to credit.

13.  Having established the ambit of the hearing, it  was  ascertained  that
    there were two bundles- a respondent's and an appellant's  bundle.   In
    addition to bundles referred to I had a core documents sent out  to  me
    in advance of the hearing. References to page numbers are to  those  in
    the bundle of documents filed by the appellant at the  Tribunal  on  27
    November 2015 unless it is stated otherwise.

14.  I heard evidence in chief from the appellant,  who  confirmed  that  he
    lived at the  address  on  the  Tribunal  file  and  that  his  witness
    statement was true.  In addition to his first witness statement (at A1-
    8) he had also prepared a supplemental statement at (B1-4).  Mr Jesurum
    asked several supplemental questions.  The appellant said that  he  had
    not seen his GP to complain  of  the  torture  giving  rise  to  severe
    injuries to his rectum because his GP  had  been  Sinhalese  with  good
    connections to the Sri Lankan government.  He said that as an  ordinary
    person he feared that if he told his GP this would  only  increase  his
    risk if he returned to Sri Lanka.  I asked him why it was not  possible
    to find a substitute GP but the  appellant  appeared  to  consider  the
    whole practice would be under the control of his own GP.

15.  The appellant said that his father had been killed by the army  because
    he had been doing business in Vivuniya.  The LTTE extorted  money  from
    him as a trader.  When the army found out they were "furious"  and  his
    father was shot for collecting money.  His sister had been arrested  on
    suspicion of selling goods to the LTTE.  Within  a  few  days  of  this
    incident on 25 October 2005, when the appellant's mother was  returning
    from hospital,  she  found  the  appellant's  sister  unconscious  with
    bruises on her.  The appellant's sister was taken to hospital where she
    was pronounced dead.   The  cause  of  death  was  certified  as  being
    "electric  shock".   The  appellant  was  asked   in   what   way   the
    circumstances were "suspicious".  He said that there was "no  evidence"
    that she died of electric shock that at the time  neighbours  had  seen
    Sri Lankan  soldiers  entering  her  house.   After  seeing  this,  the
    neighbours stayed indoors for their own  protection.   The  appellant's
    sister's husband's name was Mohammed Ali Rajai, although there was more
    than one spelling of his  name.   In  particular,  I  was  referred  to
    documents at A32 and A34.  A police  report  was  prepared  (see  A34).
    However, the appellant was told that his brother-in-law,  his  sister's
    husband, was missing.  The appellant's mother had last had contact with
    the authorities on 4 September 2012.  She had made a complaint  to  the
    Human Rights Commission in Vivuniya (see A11-12).

16.  The appellant was then asked why  he  had  not  claimed  asylum  before
    2013.  He said that he had not claimed asylum in 2009 on his return  to
    the UK because "Everybody had advised him not to claim asylum  at  that
    time."  The civil war had come to an end and therefore he  was  worried
    he might be sent back to Sri Lanka.  The appellant had a valid  student
    visa and therefore decided to renew it further.  He also had  to  renew
    his Sri Lankan passport which was due to expire in 2010.  He said  that
    he had been scared of going to the Sri Lankan  High  Commission  to  do
    this.

17.  The appellant then said that in January or  February  2010  an  unknown
    armed group had gone to his mother's house and searched  the  property.
    The appellant also said  that  his  mother  was  questioned  about  the
    appellant's whereabouts.  The appellant was  asked  why  this  had  not
    stimulated him to go to the UK  authorities  and  ask  for  help.   The
    appellant said that he was minded to "run away" from  the  problem  but
    when he learned of his mother's problems again in 2012 he accepted that
    he had still not claimed asylum.  At this point it was  explained  that
    the visa had expired in March 2010.   The  only  explanation  for  this
    further delay was a  deterioration  in  the  appellant's  physical  and
    mental health between September 2012 and March 2013,  when  he  finally
    claimed asylum.  He decided having  consulted  a  Tamil  charity  which
    explained the "situation" to finally make a claim and to tell the  Home
    Office the "whole story".

18.  In cross-examination the appellant accepted that his  sister,  who  was
    to give evidence, had come to the UK in 2001 and  claimed  asylum.   He
    therefore accepted that he knew of the right to claim asylum throughout
    his period in the UK.  It was also put to  him  that  in  2002  he  had
    already been detained.  The appellant maintained that he would  be  "in
    trouble" if he advanced such a claim so  he  decided  to  remain  on  a
    student visa.  The appellant said he had gone back to Sri Lanka in 2009
    because the war was over and because he believed that  his  mother  was
    unwell.  He explained that he had treatment on the NHS but did not find
    it quick and therefore decided to get medical attention back home.   He
    explained that consultants could be  engaged  at  modest  cost  in  Sri
    Lanka.  At this point in  the  proceedings  the  appellant  decided  to
    produce a number of documents which had not previously been  disclosed.
    These broadly confirmed that he had  medical  attention  in  Sri  Lanka
    between November and December 2009.  The appellant explained that these
    appointments had been at Mannar  Hospital.   The  appellant  said  that
    there were not given details of his  treatment  at  the  hands  of  the
    authorities at his medical appointments, because he  believed  that  he
    would have to register a complaint.  The appellant  explained  that  he
    did not wish to give a detailed explanation for his injuries to the Sri
    Lankan medical professionals in fear that  this  would  be  seen  as  a
    complaint against the authorities. However, he had referred the doctors
    in Sri Lanka to his NHS records.  The appellant was  also  asked  about
    his earlier medical treatment.  He said that after the torture incident
    in 1997 he had been admitted to hospital for five days.   This  was  in
    Mannar.  The appellant was asked whether he had any  evidence  of  that
    attendance.  He confirmed that he did not, which  was  consistent  with
    his answer to question 80 in interview.  He  expanded  on  his  earlier
    answers by explaining that if he were to report  that  the  injury  was
    sustained as a result of police or army action it would be necessary to
    make a formal complaint.  The appellant also feared that  he  might  be
    sent back to the detention centre if the doctors to  whom  he  reported
    decided to keep a record of it.

19.  The appellant was  then  asked  about  his  medical  history.   He  was
    concerned that if he told another doctor about  his  treatment  at  the
    hands of the authorities in Sri Lanka that doctor would  report  it  to
    the authorities.  However, when he saw  Dr  Lingham  he  had  made  his
    asylum claim.  The appellant had registered with a new GP  on  arriving
    into the UK in 2002.  However, he was worried about his GP's connection
    with the Sri Lankan government.

20.  At this point I was referred to document B5 in the  appellant's  bundle
    which states that the Executive Committee of  the  APSL,  presumably  a
    body or  organisation  that  supports  Sri  Lanka,  included  both  the
    appellant's doctor and also the Sri Lankan High Commissioner to the UK.
     This, it was claimed by the appellant, fuelled his  suspicions  as  to
    the connection between his GP and the Sri Lankan government.

21.  The appellant was then asked about the treatment he had been given  for
    his injuries.  He said that he had been  maltreated  in  2009  but  the
    majority of the injuries subsided.  These included  some  swelling  and
    some injuries incurred by forcing a pencil between his fingers.  He was
    also beaten up.

22.  The appellant then went on  to  explain  his  symptoms  of  PTSD.   The
    appellant was asked when he first suffered psychiatric or psychological
    problems.  He said that he had been treated  in  Sri  Lanka  after  the
    incident in 1997 but, I assume, that was  for  physical  injuries.   In
    2002 when he came to the UK he had "forgotten everything".  He attended
    a doctor in 2009 complaining of headaches.  He was referred to an  ear,
    nose and throat (ENT) specialist.  He was prescribed Amitriptyline,  an
    anti-depressant drug.  The appellant said that his  helped  him  sleep.
    When he returned to Sri Lanka in 2009 he was  prescribed  the  same  or
    similar medication there.   However,  his  mental  health  deteriorated
    after 2012, when the appellant learned of  an  incident  involving  his
    mother.  The appellant found that Amitriptyline stopped helping and  he
    decided to  obtain  a  report  from  a  medico-legal  expert  into  his
    depression in 2015.  He confirmed he had no treatment for depression or
    psychological illness before 2015.

23.  At this point the appellant was asked about a letter in his  bundle  of
    documents (at A15).  This refers to the death of his father.   However,
    it was put to the appellant that there was no mention in that  document
    to the fact that his father had been killed by the authorities.

24.  The appellant said that Father De Silva had  known  his  family  for  a
    long time.  The appellant accepted that Father De Silva would have been
    aware of the appellant's detention by the authorities.   The  appellant
    could not explain why he had made no mention of  this  in  his  letter.
    The appellant said that he did not wish Father De Silva to say anything
    about the appellant's detention  or  the  circumstances  in  which  his
    father was killed because he feared this would come to the attention of
    the authorities.  It was then pointed out that in the following  letter
    (A16 in the same bundle) Reverend Navratnam from the  same  church  had
    referred to the arrest of the Appellant in 1997, his  detention  at  an
    army camp and adverse health  consequences  consequent  thereon  having
    been "tortured mercilessly".  The appellant explained that  the  letter
    from Reverend Navratnam had been written in 2014.   By  that  year  the
    appellant was in a "better place" and did not fear the  authorities  to
    the same degree he had previously.  It was put to the appellant that he
    had failed to mention to Reverend Navratnam that he had  been  detained
    in 2002 and 2009 as well as in 1997.  The appellant's response was that
    the Reverend Navratnam had "not been involved at those stages".

25.  The appellant was then asked about the disappearance of his brother-in-
    law.  He said that in 2005 his sister disappeared and that her  husband
    had been  released  shortly  afterwards.   It  was  believed  that  the
    appellant's brother-in-law was accused of selling goods  to  the  LTTE.
    He was arrested by the Sri Lankan Army two days before being  sentenced
    to death, he believed, on 25 October 2005. The appellant "did not know"
    what  happened  to  him  after  that.    The   circumstances   of   his
    disappearance were suspicious and a complaint was  made  to  the  Human
    Rights Commission.  However, his sister's death was not reported.   The
    army would "find out" who had reported it  and  he  feared  that  there
    would be retaliation.

26.  In re-examination the appellant was taken to a  photograph  at  B10  in
    his bundle which shows his GP with the Sri  Lankan  High  Commissioner.
    This,  the  appellant  contended,  supported  his  fears   about   that
    individual.

27.  Mrs Sabitha Thayaparan was then called to give evidence.

28.  Having adopted her witness statement as being true Mrs Thayaparan  then
    significantly added  to  its  contents  in  examination-in-chief.   She
    stated that at paragraph 2 where she referred to an "incident" this was
    in 1993.   There were other incidents in 1997  which,  apparently,  she
    had omitted to mention when she prepared her  witness  statement.   She
    was asked when she found out about the incident in  which  her  brother
    was taken away by men in civilian clothing in 2009.  She said  she  had
    found out about the incident on "the same day" because her  father  had
    telephoned her on the day of the arrest to tell her about it.  She  did
    not speak to her mother directly but had learned the information from a
    priest.  She had wanted to avoid  any  problems  of  her  own  and  had
    therefore avoided contacting her mother.   She  was  referring  to  the
    incident on 12 December 2009  when  a  group  of  armed  men  came  and
    abducted the appellant.  She was aware of other  incidents  since  2009
    which she had also omitted to mention in her witness statement.

29.  Mrs Thayaparan went on to say that  the  authorities  had  "threatened"
    her mother, because her brother had "disappointed them".  He  had  been
    threatened with death if he returned to Sri Lanka.

30.  Mrs Thayaparan also gave evidence about an incident in  2012  when  she
    was questioned by  an  armed  group  whilst  speaking  to  the  village
    "headman".   The same armed group went to her house on 4 September 2012
    and "threatened her".  They said they were going to "kill your son".

31.  Mrs Thayaparan said she had found out about the incident in 2010 via  a
    telephone call with her mother.  This is how she found  out  about  the
    incident in 2012 also.

32.  Mrs Thayaparan was cross-examined.  She said that her brother had  come
    to the UK in 2002 because "his life  was  in  danger".   He  could  not
    continue in higher education in Sri  Lanka  and  therefore  decided  to
    continue his studies here.   Mrs  Thayaparan  confirmed  that  she  had
    claimed asylum in the UK, unsuccessfully.  She  had  been  to  a  Tamil
    welfare charity in the UK and got advice about that.  She was asked why
    she did not tell her brother to claim asylum.  She said that she feared
    that the UK "was deporting people" and she did not wish to lose him but
    she could not otherwise explain her brother's failure to  claim  asylum
    for several years.  She was asked whether her mother had  any  problems
    in Sri Lanka. Mrs Thayaparan said she had problems in  2009.   She  had
    not told her solicitor about specific incidents.  Her witness statement
    had been read back to her in Tamil and she could not  explain  why  she
    had not made reference to incidents in 2010 and 2012 in that  document.
    The best explanation she could give was that she believed the  document
    had to be "brief".

33.  In re-examination  the  appellant  said  she  had  told  her  brother's
    solicitors about the additional incidents when preparing her statement.
     She could not explain why her additional reference had  been  made  to
    those incidents in the deposition.

34.  Proceeding to submissions, the  respondent  submitted  that  there  had
    been no claim for asylum between  2009  and  2013.   In  addition,  the
    appellant had been in the UK since 2002 and had numerous  opportunities
    to claim asylum between 2002 and 2013.  Both he  and  his  sister  were
    plainly aware of the process by which asylum was claimed.

35.  As far as the appellant's injuries were concerned, I  was  referred  to
    Professor Lingham's report at C5, where he noted that there was no  way
    of linking any scarring on the appellant with the torture  he  suffered
    whilst detained in 1997.  However, it was accepted  that  there  was  a
    "highly consistent" clinical assessment in relation to the injuries  to
    the appellant's internal organs.  This specification meant  that  there
    were possible other causes.  It was noted that  the  incident  occurred
    eighteen years ago, but none of the NHS documents supported the alleged
    cause and that there was a physiological explanation(s) connected  with
    his haemorrhoids.  It was incredible that  even  where  allegations  of
    torture were concerned, they would not be discussed at all with medical
    professionals for such a long period of time.  It was  not  as  if  the
    appellant's contacts with the NHS were rare.  The appellant could  have
    requested a new doctor if he did not have confidence  in  his  existing
    one.  The psychiatric report into PTSD  and  other  symptoms  suggested
    that he did not have  any  psychiatric  history.   In  any  event,  the
    medical evidence of Dr  Lawrence,  for  example,  was  of  questionable
    quality.  He  had  referred  to  the  appellant's  "self-neglect"  upon
    examination on 5 March 2015 but, Ms Savage noted,  a  nurse  prescriber
    who examined the appellant only two months later  describes  his  self-
    care as "good" (see B13).  The appellant had relied on letters from  St
    Joseph's Church in Vivuniya but those  were  not  consistent  with  his
    account either.  In any event,  those  documents  lacked  detail.   The
    appellant's explanation for not fully describing his treatment  in  Sri
    Lanka was that he did not wish his complaints to come to the  attention
    of the authorities, but this was inconsistent with his own evidence  in
    the form of the letter written by St Joseph's Church at A16.

36.  The appellant's claim did not succeed  even  on  the  low  standard  of
    proof which applied.  Even if the appellant had been tortured in  1997,
    which was disputed, there is no evidence that the appellant remained of
    interest to the authorities in 2009 and therefore the detention in that
    year was disputed also.  The appellant's sister  had  mentioned  things
    for the first time at the hearing.  I was referred to the  case  of  GJ
    [2013] UKUT 00319 for an up-to-date analysis of the risk factors  in  a
    Tamil case.  The authorities in Sri Lanka now adopted a  more  targeted
    approach and were not  concerned  necessarily  with  historic  acts  of
    terrorism.

37.  I then heard from Mr Jesurum who said that  the  case  of  GJ  and  the
    latest Country of Origin Information Report, the date of which  he  was
    unable to be precise about and  a  copy  of  which  he  was  unable  to
    produce, made it abundantly clear that "they" (meaning the  Sri  Lankan
    government) "torture people".  It was submitted you were likely to  get
    "unreliable evidence" in this type of case.  I understood this to  mean
    that those subject to torture  are  likely  to  be  reluctant  to  come
    forward with clear evidence of their experiences.  The  fact  that  the
    appellant was not a member of  the  LTTE  did  not  prevent  him  being
    tortured as claimed.  He claims that there were incidents as recent  as
    2010 and there had been a further  incident  involving  his  family  in
    2012.

38.  In relation to the medical evidence,  Mr  Jesurum  submitted  that  the
    respondent could have obtained her own evidence, indeed  had  a  recent
    opportunity to do so.  She could have asked questions  of  any  of  the
    medical experts.  However, she had chosen not to do this either.   Both
    subjectively and  objectively  the  appellant  was  depressed  and  his
    diagnosis was  consistent  with  his  alleged  ill-treatment.   It  was
    understood why the appellant was reluctant  to  speak  about  his  past
    treatment.  Professor Lingham had considered other possible causes  but
    overall the appellant's account appeared plausible.  The symptoms  from
    which the appellant suffered to his internal  organs  were  not  to  be
    confused with  his  external  haemorrhoids.   He  had  been  questioned
    extensively about the chronology of events but, overall, the  appellant
    had not been seriously damages in cross examination and his account was
    consistent.

39.  As far  as  factors  under  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 were concerned, the appellant  had  naturally
    feared ill-treatment if he came forward with an explanation which might
    come to the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities.   It  was  clearly
    preferable for the appellant to come to the UK as a student  and  avoid
    this risk.  He was concerned that he may be forcibly  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka.

40.  I allowed Mr Jesurum some additional time to take instructions  on  the
    appellant's sister's witness statement and the  fact  that  there  were
    significant additions to it despite an opportunity being given  to  the
    parties to update their evidence in advance of  the  adjourned  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal.  His instructions were that  Mrs  Thayaparan
    had not been in touch with the solicitors.

41.  I allowed Ms Savage a further comment on these matters.  She said  that
    in her view these matters had been raised at the last  minute  and  the
    bundle had only been submitted a week before the  hearing.   No  proper
    explanation had been given for  the  absence  of  important  pieces  of
    evidence from the witness statement prepared by the appellant's sister.



42.  At the end of the hearing  I  reserved  my  decision,  having  found  a
    material error of law on the last occasion, as  to  how  ultimately  to
    dispose of this appeal.

Discussion

43.  At the outset of the adjourned hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  I
    determined that it was appropriate, having set aside the findings as to
    the medical  evidence,  to  also  set  aside  the  adverse  credibility
    findings of  the  Immigration  Judge.   Any  other  findings  of  fact,
    however, remain.

44.  The key issues as far as credibility is concerned are:

    (1)  Whether the appellant has given an adequate  explanation  for  the
         delay of eleven years between his arrival into the UK in  2002  and
         2013 when he finally submitted  a  claim  for  asylum/human  rights
         protection?

    (2)  Whether the appellant's account is materially corroborated by  the
         medical evidence of Professor Lingham and Dr Lawrence?

    (3)  Whether in the light of these findings the  extent  to  which  the
         appellant would be at material risk on return to Sri Lanka?

45.  Before I turn to  consider  these  issues  I  will  make  some  general
    points.

    General points as to credit

46.  There is  no  requirement  in  asylum  appeals  for  the  applicant  to
    corroborate his account.  However, it is appropriate  to  look  at  the
    overall  cogency  of  the  account  and  explanation  for  any  missing
    documentation.  In  this  case  the   appellant   has   produced   some
    corroboration in the form of letters from the  local  Catholic  Church.
    Unfortunately, these documents do not entirely support his case in that
    the letter from Reverend Navratnam (at A16) only refers to incidents in
    1993 and 1997 and not to all the later  incidents.   Unfortunately  for
    the appellant, the absence of reference to the later  incidents  cannot
    be explained by his reluctance  to  reveal  the  details  for  fear  of
    retaliation by the authorities because the Reverend Navratnam refers in
    detail to the 1997 incident.

47.  In addition  to  the  written  evidence  from  the  appellant's  former
    priest, I had the benefit of oral evidence from his sister, Mrs Sabitha
    Thayaparan.  Unfortunately, nearly all  Mrs  Thayaparan's  evidence  is
    either hearsay or double hearsay. Although  this  does  not  in  itself
    prevent me having regard to her evidence it may  affect  the  weight  I
    attach to it and has done so in this  case.   Mrs  Thayaparan  departed
    significantly  from  her  witness  statement  and  her  oral   evidence
    providing, in my view, an embellished account to assist her brother.  I
    am afraid I did not find Mrs Thayaparan came to the Tribunal  with  the
    intention of telling the truth.  Rather, she came to the Tribunal  with
    the intention of helping her brother out.  Virtually all  her  evidence
    could have been learned second hand  from  other  sources  and  I  have
    decided to attach no weight to her evidence.

48.  I found a number of features of the appellant's own  evidence  also  to
    be unsatisfactory. For example, I did not  find  it  credible  that  he
    feared his problems in Sri Lanka would "increase" if he told his doctor
    in the UK about the torture and abuse to which he had  been  subjected.
    Nor did I accept the hearsay evidence about his  mother's  house  being
    searched in 2010 and his reasons for not claiming asylum at an  earlier
    date than 2013 are extremely doubtful but these issues will be explored
    further below.

49.  Bearing these general background points in mind I now turn to  consider
    the questioned posed above in greater detail.

    (1)  Delay

50   It is a feature of torture allegations that the victims of torture  are
    often late in coming forward with complaints.  They are often unable to
    relive their horrendous experiences at the time or  shortly  thereafter
    and even then there may be a variety of reasons why they cannot  recall
    the precise details.  Is it possible that the appellant,  who  appeared
    to be an intelligent person, would be so fearful of return to Sri Lanka
    that he would submit a succession of student visa  applications  rather
    than advance an asylum claim.  In  particular,  have  to  consider  the
    possibility that, following the expiry of his last period of  leave  in
    March 2010, he did not feel able to submit an  application  for  asylum
    until March 2013 for fear that this may increase rather than lessen the
    likelihood of return to Sri Lanka.

51.  I find that if the appellant had suffered horrendous torture  in  1997,
    as he claims, he would have mentioned it to somebody between  2002  and
    2015, especially to a medical professional  charged  with  keeping  his
    confidence. His medical advisors owed him a duty of confidentiality and
    I do not accept that his GP, even if he was a sympathiser with the  Sri
    Lankan government, was the only GP to whom the appellant could turn for
    medical attention in a city the size of London.   The  appellant  would
    have been able to go to a different practice or consult a different GP.
      I reject the appellant's explanation for  his  failure  to  make  any
    report of his symptoms of torture between 2002  and  2013  and  do  not
    accept he has given a truthful explanation for his failure  to  advance
    his asylum claim during this period.  Furthermore,  if  he  did  suffer
    torture in 1997 I am satisfied that he would not have returned  to  Sri
    Lanka in 2009. On his return to the UK in late 2009, allegedly with the
    assistance of an agent, he would have known that he  would  undoubtedly
    have been less well protected under the limited forms of leave given to
    students  as  opposed  to  the  more  substantial  and  internationally
    recognised status of refugee that he now seeks. It is  incredible  that
    even then he did not seize the opportunity to advance such a claim  but
    waited another three years.

    (2) The Medical Evidence

52.  The appellant relies on the two medical reports  referred  to.   It  is
    not clear what Professor Lingham holds a professorship of.  I assume he
    is a GP himself but with specialist experience in  a  large  number  of
    medical  disciplines.   He  seems  to  have  a  special  experience  of
    preparing reports for use in the medico-legal context.  I cannot ignore
    his wide experience but I do note that his assessment of the  appellant
    was carried out eighteen years after the alleged torture.  He relies no
    doubt to a large degree on the patient history and the absence of other
    physiological explanations.  I can find no evidence that he carried out
    an examination of the relevant parts of the appellant's anatomy  and  I
    am not convinced that he has  specialist  experience  as  a  colorectal
    surgeon so as to say more than other  medical  professionals  had  said
    following the appellant's large number of  medical  consultations  over
    the  years.   His  report  does  include  a  detailed  account  of  the
    appellant's medical history but it is not clear to me why the sinus  of
    the  rectum  that  he  identifies  is  "highly  consistent"  with   the
    appellant's history of trauma as opposed  to  being  highly  consistent
    with other medical causes. He also  says  (at  paragraph  7)  that  the
    appellant's sinus "could have originate  from  the  history  of  trauma
    described by the patient (which is the insertion of a bottle neck  onto
    (sic)  his  rectum)".  In  addition,  it  is  also  possible  that  the
    appellant, who I have  found  to  be  an  intelligent  individual,  who
    clearly wishes to stay in the UK, may have adapted the history  of  the
    trauma that he gave to fit his  symptoms  rather  than  the  other  way
    around.  When properly analysed, Dr Lingham's report is not in any  way
    conclusive. I find that the condition from which the appellant suffers,
    which is of a highly unpleasant, uncomfortable and personal  kind,  was
    consistent with a number of possible explanations.  It  is  unnecessary
    to speculate  about  the  possible  explanations  for  the  appellant's
    injuries; that is where Judge Lawrence fell into error.

53.  As far as Dr Lawrence's evidence is concerned he describes  himself  as
    "a general adult psychiatrist".  He is a member of the Royal College of
    Psychiatrists.  He does not appear to be authorised under Section 12 of
    the Mental Health Act 1983.  Again, he seems to have a  great  deal  of
    experience of providing medico-legal  evidence.  It  is  rare  in  this
    jurisdiction for that evidence to be tested in cross  -examination  and
    that is the case of his evidence too. It is not clear from  his  report
    that he has a material  amount  of  experience  of  clinical  practice,
    certainly recent clinical practice.

54.  I find it extraordinary that Dr Lawrence gives no explanation  for  the
    absence of any psychological or PTSD symptoms in  the  medical  records
    between 2002 and 2015 when the appellant saw Dr Lawrence.  Furthermore,
    Dr Lawrence diagnoses "major depressive illness in  the  severe  range"
    (page 15G) as well as PTSD yet Dr Lawrence does not consider it in  any
    way a matter of comment that the appellant did not seek  any  treatment
    for this major depressive illness over the previous thirteen years.  Is
    it suggested that the onset of the illness had been of  recent  origin?
    If so, he does not  say  so.   Moreover,  he  does  not  recommend  any
    particular form of treatment  and  I  note  that  besides  taking  some
    Amitriptyline, although this is not mentioned by Dr Lawrence at 15K, he
    does not recommend any form of  treatment  for  this  major  depressive
    illness in the future.  In addition,  some  of  the  symptoms  that  Dr
    Lawrence recognises as being typical of  depressive  illness,  such  as
    inadequate self-care (see page 15L) are inconsistent  with  what  other
    medical professionals have said,  for  example,  a  nurse  manager  (Mr
    Williams) prepared a report in May 2015 (at B13)  which  described  the
    appellant's self-care as "good".

55.  It is true that some of the symptoms described  by  the  appellant  are
    typical of PTSD such as nightmares, difficulty  in  sleeping,  but  the
    diagnosis of major depressive illness is questionable in the  light  of
    the lack of medical history or treatment.  A  number  of  the  symptoms
    described by Dr Lawrence appeared to be based on  the  appellant's  own
    history relayed to him.  If  the  appellant  suffers  from  a  form  of
    depression, there is no proper basis for attributing this to  incidents
    which occurred many years before in Sri Lanka.  I found  the  appellant
    to have a little difficulty in recounting the  relevant  events  before
    me.

    (3)  Risk on return

56.  The only case law referred to by the parties' representatives  was  the
    case of GJ (reference above).  Mr  Jesurum  also  referred  me  to  the
    Country of Origin Information Report but was unable to specify the year
    or refer me to any particular passages within that document  which  was
    not produced.

57.  I find that the case of GJ remains the leading authority  on  the  risk
    of returning failed Tamil refugees to Sri Lanka.  This also provides  a
    great deal of background material. Both parties seem to agree  that  it
    presents an accurate up to date  picture  of  the  risks  facing  Tamil
    returnees. Among the conclusions reached  in  that  case  which  appear
    relevant to the facts of this case are:

    (1)  That the government of Sri  Lanka  is  concerned  with  those  who
         continue to pose a threat to the unitary state and not  those  who,
         historically, are alleged to have been supporters of the LTTE.

    (2)  Those who are detained, nevertheless, continue to face a  risk  of
         ill-treatment or harm requiring international protection.

    (3)  Those on a stop-list may be detained at the airport on arrival.

58.  Turning to the facts of this case I have rejected the veracity  of  the
    appellant's account and found that the delay in  advancing  his  claim,
    which is largely unsupported  and  uncorroborated  by  other  evidence,
    causes me to reject his  alleged  torture  and  subsequent  periods  of
    detention.  Even if one or more of the incidents occurred, as Ms Savage
    submitted, it is questionable whether he would be "at risk".  He is not
    a person who has been a member of the LTTE or who would pose  a  threat
    to the unitary state and there is no reason why the  authorities  would
    perceive him to be such a person.  I note that he has  not  engaged  in
    anti-government activities since arriving into the  UK  and  I  do  not
    accept his evidence or that of his  sister  about  any  alleged  recent
    visits by the authorities to family members.

Findings and conclusions

59.  The appellant need only prove his  case  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
    true.  There must be at least credible evidence that there would  be  a
    real risk of persecution in Sri Lanka if he were  now  to  be  returned
    there. The appellant's case turns to a large extent on the  credibility
    of  his  account.   Whilst  superficially  there  appears  to  be  some
    corroboration or support  for  his  case  from  other  family  members,
    medical professionals and documents emanating from Sri Lanka, on  close
    examination  I  have  not  found  that  evidence  or  those   documents
    sufficient to explain why the appellant returned to Sri Lanka  in  2009
    having, he alleges, previously suffered horrendous torture twelve years
    previously.  A genuine refugee suffering  PTSD,  depression  and  other
    symptoms would not have even considered returning there.

60.  Furthermore, the appellant has not given an  adequate  explanation  for
    his failure to claim asylum between 2002 and  2013.  I  therefore  find
    that he failed to take advantage of a reasonable opportunity  to  claim
    asylum at the first opportunity and that  this  adversely  affects  his
    credibility for the purposes of Section 8 of the Asylum  (Treatment  of
    Claimants) Act 2004 is relevant and applies.  The  appellant  was  well
    aware of the opportunity to claim asylum in the UK I find.  His  sister
    was also aware of it because she had submitted a claim of her  own.   I
    have found the appellant to be an intelligent individual who understood
    that asylum would have afforded him international protection  and  that
    he would not have  been  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.  It  was  infinitely
    superior to the limited leave that he had and I find he  was  aware  of
    this fact.

61.  I find it not to be credible that the appellant would not tell  any  of
    his medical professionals about his past ill-treatment  despite  taking
    account of the fact that torture victims are reluctant to come  forward
    in many cases.  The delayed complaints only go to  reinforce  the  view
    that the appellant has advanced his asylum claim at the last minute  to
    avoid removal from the UK and not for any other reason.

62.  On careful  analysis  I  have  not  found  that  the  medical  evidence
    provides  the  degree  of  support  for  the  appellant's   case   that
    superficially it appears to.  His  medical  history  and  the  lack  of
    previous complaints and treatment tend to suggest that even if the full
    extent of his physical and mental illness  is  established  it  is  not
    attributable to any past ill-treatment in Sri Lanka.  I have also taken
    into account the extent of the expertise displayed  by  the  respective
    experts when deciding what weight to attach to their  evidence.   I  do
    have certain concerns in that regard  which  I  have  expressed  above,
    particularly in relation to the psychiatric evidence.

63.  I have decided to attach no weight  to  the  hearsay  evidence  of  the
    appellant's sister for the reasons I have given.

64.  I  have  therefore  concluded  that  the  appellant's  account  is  not
    credible and that he did not suffer torture  and  ill-treatment  as  he
    claims.

65.  The appellant has not in my view established that he would be  at  risk
    on return in the light of the above findings but even if those findings
    were more favourable the appellant has not been a past  member  of  the
    LTTE and the events he describes are  now  of  some  age  and  I  would
    question, even if I had accepted his account, that he would  be  within
    an "at-risk" category.  Certainly, based on my findings, he is  not  at
    risk.

Notice of Decision

66.  I find that there was a material error of law in the treatment  of  the
    medical  evidence  by  the  FTT  and  consequent  adverse   credibility
    findings.  I have set aside those findings and will  now  re-make  that
    decision.

67.  My decision is to dismiss the appellant's appeal against  the  decision
    of the respondent to refuse his asylum and human rights protection  and
    that claim stands dismissed.

68.  An anonymity direction was made by the FTT  but  the  proceedings  thus
    far in the Upper Tribunal have not been anonymised and little would  be
    achieved by anonymising them now.  Accordingly,  I  make  no  anonymity
    direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable and the appellant had been unsuccessful in his appeal  and
I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
