
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/07330/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 October 2015                    |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                         MS ZINEB ICHALLALENE CHARIF
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Chapman of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Tufan Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Algeria born on  31  January  1979.  She
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge EB Grant, dated 16 October  2014,  refusing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 11 September 2014 refusing
    her application for asylum and humanitarian protection  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Lambert on 12 January 2015 but on 4 May 2015 granted by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Chalkley who stated that "the first challenge does raise properly
    arguable issues which may disclose an error of law on the part  of  the
    Judge and that he does not seek to limit the challenges".

    First-tier Tribunal's findings

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in his determination made  the  following
    findings which I summarise. Judge  JW  Khan  in  his  determination  in
    respect of the appellant's husband's appeal with the appellant  as  his
    dependent of 2 May 2012 found that the appellant's husband's claim  was
    not credible and dismissed the appeal. Judge Khan in his  determination
    at paragraph 28 stated that "the actions of  the  appellant's  wife  in
    returning to Algeria in order to sell her gold  and  jewellery  is  not
    consistent with any fear that the  appellant  may  have  had  from  the
    authorities. She did not experience any problems whilst in Algeria from
    anyone. If there was any risk to the appellant's family, his wife would
    not have returned to Algeria. She could easily have asked her sister to
    sell the gold and jewellery on her behalf and transfer the money to her
    in the UK". Judge Khan  found  that  there  is  no  real  risk  to  the
    appellant's husband because in his asylum appeal it was found  that  he
    has no connections to international terrorism or that he  would  be  at
    real risk of being detained on arrival in Algeria and interrogated.

 4. Although this  determination  concerns  the  appellant's  husband,  the
    appellant was a dependent on that  appeal  and  underwent  a  dependent
    interview. The appellant's husband is dependent on the outcome  of  the
    appellant appeal. Matters raised by  the  appellant's  husband  in  the
    earlier appeal have been repeated by the appellant to Mr Joffe.

 5. The Judge following the case of  Justin  Surendran  Devaseelan  v  SSHD
    [2002] UKIAT 00702 stated that the earlier determination of Judge  Khan
    in respect of the appellant's husband, should form the  starting  point
    for the appellant's determination insofar as  findings  made  by  Judge
    Khan relate to matters also raised before Judge Grant.

 6. The appellant has reiterated her husband's claim in her  own  claim  to
    the respondent and says they are  at  real  risk  on  return  from  the
    Algerian  authorities  because  her  husband  will  be   suspected   of
    connections with internal terrorism. Those  claims  have  already  been
    found to be devoid of any merit by Judge Khan. The Judge found that the
    appellant is not at risk on return to Algeria and  in  coming  to  this
    finding,  the  Judge  adopted  the  findings  of  Judge  Khan  made  in
    AA/02989/2012. The Judge agreed with the conclusions of the  respondent
    in her reasons for refusal letter set out in paragraph 37-46. The Judge
    found that the appellant's husband will not be detained on  arrival  on
    return to Algeria as alleged or at all.

 7. The Judge then considered the updated evidence  which  was  not  before
    Judge Khan in  respect  of  the  appellant's  husband  in  the  Medical
    Foundation Report.  This  report  states  that  the  appellant  husband
    suffers from PTSD arising from his claimed kidnapping in  Algeria.  The
    appellant's husband did not give evidence  in  support  of  his  wife's
    appeal or give evidence about the matters referred to  in  the  medical
    report. These are the same matters which were considered at  length  by
    Judge Khan who give cogent reasons for  finding  that  the  appellant's
    husband has not told the truth, including his failure to  claim  asylum
    until after he had been living  in  working  illegally  in  the  United
    Kingdom for almost 3 years.

 8. This is bolstered by evidence that the appellant's husband  worked  for
    an agency called Urbnis who was contracted to the province  of  Algiers
    Town Planning and Development Department and  he  worked  there  as  IT
    expert who maintained the computer equipment for  the  agency.  It  was
    therefore found not to be credible that  the  appellant's  husband  was
    able  to  access  government  information   useful   to   a   terrorist
    organisation as he had no access to government information.  He  merely
    maintained the IT systems. The appellant husband may be suffering  from
    or PTSD as diagnosed by the Medical Foundation but the  Judge  did  not
    accept, for the same reasons given by Judge Khan that it is on  account
    of a kidnapping in 2007.  The  Judge  did  not  accept  the  report  as
    evidence that the appellant husband was kidnapped as alleged.

 9. The appellant give evidence before Judge Khan at her  husband's  appeal
    hearing. She gave evidence about the reason for her return  to  Algeria
    which was to sell her  gold  and  jewellery  to  raise  funds  for  the
    appellant's and her husband's ongoing stay in the United Kingdom.

10. Judge Khan  found  at  paragraph  28  of  his  determination  that  the
    appellant did not experience any problems from anyone whilst in Algeria
    or upon her return from Algeria. She now says in her evidence that  she
    told her family that she had sold her jewellery for the expenses  of  a
    medical treatment to help conceive. Her family will now  want  to  know
    why she has not have children. If her brother  discovers  that  she  is
    still a virgin, this will bring shame on her family because she has not
    consummated her marriage and this will put her at real risk.

11. The Judge found no reasons for why the appellant's brother should  fall
    out with her simply because  the  appellant  has  not  consummated  her
    marriage. Fertilisation takes two people  and  it  is  clear  from  the
    appellant's husband's witness statement that the sexual difficulties in
    the marriage are not solely those of the appellant. He has difficulties
    both of them are receiving counselling for these  difficulties  at  the
    Helen Bamber Foundation. Even if the appellant and her husband  resolve
    their problems, the medical evidence shows that the  appellant  suffers
    from polycystic ovary syndrome which can cause female infertility.  The
    appellant has the perfect explanation  to  offer  her  family  for  her
    failure to have a child and there will be no reason for her  family  to
    know that the marriage has not been consummated.

12. As Judge Khan  in  his  determination  for  the  appellant's  husband's
    appeal, found that the appellant's husband will not be at risk  on  his
    return to Algeria because to his claimed involvement with the terrorist
    group which has been found not to be credible. Judge Khan  stated  that
    there would be no reason for the appellant's  husband  to  be  arrested
    upon return to Algeria. Dr Joffe's  report  is  largely  based  on  the
    appellant's potential  plight  on  return  to  Algeria  on  information
    provided to him. Therefore no weight is attached to the report  insofar
    as it seeks to address risk on return to the appellant  on  account  of
    her husbands dismissed claim.

13. The appellant's claim about her sexuality and the difficulties she  and
    her husband have had on the sexual level, which are still ongoing,  and
    the absence of children and the risk this will cause  her  upon  return
    was not placed before Judge Khan. This evidence was  brought  up  after
    the appellant's husband's appeal was dismissed with  the  appellant  as
    his dependent.  It  is  clear  from  the  appellant  husband's  witness
    statement who did not attend the Tribunal to  give  oral  evidence,  is
    devoted to his wife. He is attending counselling with her and they  are
    doing  whatever  they  can  do  together  to  overcome   their   sexual
    difficulties.

14. The Judge stated in her determination that she has had the  opportunity
    to observe the appellant give evidence before her and it  is  clear  to
    her that the appellant  loves  her  husband.  The  appellant's  husband
    protects the appellant and she is very attached to him.  The  appellant
    has no intention of leaving her  husband.  The  Judge  noted  that  the
    actions of this couple are of a couple  determined  to  overcome  their
    sexual difficulties and not to walk away from one  another.  In  short,
    the evidence shows that the appellant and her  husband  are  a  devoted
    couple and committed to one another.

15. The appellant's alleged fears on return stem from her  claim  that  her
    brother will perceive  that  the  appellant's  marriage  has  not  been
    consummated due to a lack of children. The Judge  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claim that she is at risk from her brother as alleged or at
    all.

16. The appellant in her evidence before Judge Khan at her husband's asylum
    appeal described how her brother rescued her from being raped when  she
    was 15 years old. She describes her father and brother being taken away
    and detained and in 1996 been released from prison. She  described  her
    father getting cross with her because she had left her  first  husband.
    The appellant's evidence was that after her divorce  until  2006,  many
    men came to her father and brother to ask for the appellant's  hand  in
    marriage and every time she refused by giving any reason that  came  to
    her mind. This led to her father and  brother  getting  angry  and  her
    brother beating her for not marrying one of his friends. The  appellant
    went on to recount meeting her husband in the library and she liked him
    treating her with respect and gentleness.  She  married  in  2006  they
    married even though some members of her husband's family were reluctant
    to accept because she had been married before.

17. The appellant returned to Algeria in 2009 and  did  not  encounter  any
    problems from anyone as recorded by Judge Khan. The appellant stated in
    her evidence before Judge Khan "I returned to Algeria to my family home
    not my husband's. So I stayed in hiding in my  family  home  whilst  my
    sister sold the gold for me. Once I received payment I came back to the
    UK". She made no mention of her fear of  her  brother  at  the  hearing
    before Judge Khan. The Judge  drew  an  adverse  inference  as  to  the
    appellant's credibility for her  failure  to  mention  her  fear  of  a
    brother prior to or during her husband's asylum claim  where  she  gave
    evidence in support of his appeal. The appellant  failed  to  make  any
    mention of the purported threats from her brother during her  screening
    interview as a dependent on her husband's asylum claim.

18. The Judge found this is because she was not threatened by  her  husband
    as alleged or at all and that she has fabricated this account once  her
    husbands fabricated  claim  for  asylum  was  found  not  credible  and
    dismissed  for  very  good  reasons  given  by  Judge   Khan   in   his
    determination. The Judge also found that the appellant would  not  have
    returned to Algeria if she was in fear of her brother or  anyone  else.
    Instead she would have asked her sister to sell her gold  for  her  and
    send her the money raised to the United Kingdom. This reasoning equally
    extends to the appellant's brother. If there had been any risk  to  the
    appellant from her brother (as opposed to the Algerian  authorities  as
    claimed before Judge Khan) the appellant would  not  have  returned  to
    Algeria but would have adopted the course of asking her sister to raise
    the necessary funds.

19. The appellant has now made a new claim that she is attracted  to  women
    and refers to an alleged relationship  with  her  female  cousin  which
    began she was a teenager and which was discovered by her  brother.  The
    Judge did not believe that the appellant is telling the truth and found
    this to be another fabrication designed to bolster a very  weak  asylum
    claim once her husband's asylum  claim  was  dismissed  for  very  good
    reasons in 2012. The Judge stated that even if she is wrong  about  the
    appellant's claimed sexuality, she finds it is clear from the  evidence
    before her that the appellant has no intention of finding love  with  a
    woman. She told Yvonne Stine,  her  psychotherapist  that  she  has  no
    intention of finding love with a woman and  will  stay  bonded  to  her
    husband. Together they seek to overcome their sexual difficulties.  The
    Judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  ever  acted   upon   her
    inclinations as alleged or at all in Algeria and did  not  accept  that
    the appellant is at risk on return from a brother on account of this.

20. The Judge considered  the  evidence  from  Dr  Agnew  Davies  that  the
    appellant suffers PTSD. The Judge  stated  that  this  is  not  at  all
    surprising given the attempted rape at the age of 16. It is  clearly  a
    factor in all of the sexual difficulties experienced by  the  appellant
    with her husband.

21. She considered the detailed  expert  report  about  the  couple  sexual
    difficulties and found that this does not support a claim for asylum.

22. On return to Algeria, the Judge stated that  she  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's evidence that the appellant's husband's family  will  exert
    pressure on him to divorce the appellant and find a wife who  can  give
    him children. The Judge  also  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
    husband will divorce the appellant, given that he  has  remained  in  a
    sexless marriage for many years and has not  divorced  her.  The  Judge
    stated that there is no reason at all for this couple to return to  the
    city where their families live in Algeria. The couple do not live  with
    or near their families now and there is no reason for them to do so  in
    Algeria. She continued that if they wish to have a child, perhaps  they
    can adopt and present themselves to their families with children later.
    There is the opportunity to do this at Algeria.  She  cited  background
    evidence on adoption in Algeria and said that this is a  viable  option
    for the appellant and her husband and said that there are many unwanted
    babies in state nurseries in Algeria and that  adoption,  is  a  viable
    alternative

23. The Judge found that the appellant and her  husband  both  have  mental
    health difficulties but  stated,  just  as  Judge  Khan  found  in  his
    determination, that it would not be unreasonable for them to return  to
    Algeria together and obtain their medication  as  there  is  background
    evidence which states that there is healthcare facilities available  in
    Algeria. They can both continue their  treatment  on  their  return  to
    Algeria.

24. The Judge found that the appellant is not at risk on return to  Algeria
    on account of her brother. She also found that she is not  at  risk  on
    return on account of her claimed sexuality. She is  also  not  at  risk
    because she does not have any children. She is  also  not  at  risk  on
    return because she is still a virgin. The appellant herself  said  that
    Algiers is a big city where they can hide. The appellant has  therefore
    not shown substantial grounds for believing she will face serious  harm
    upon return.

25. As regards Article 8, the Judge found that mental health  treatment  is
    available in Algeria and it is not unreasonable to expect the appellant
    and her husband to avail themselves of continuing treatment  when  they
    return.

26. The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal, adopting  the  findings  of
    Judge Khan, under the Immigration Rules,  under  the  humanitarian  and
    protection provisions and Article 3 of the European Convention on human
    rights. She granted the appellant anonymity.

    Grounds of appeal

27. The appellant grounds of appeals are as follows which I summarise.  The
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 October 2008 with the six-
    month visit visa. She returned to Algeria for  two  weeks  in  February
    2009 before returning to the United Kingdom.  On  14  March  2011,  the
    appellant's husband claimed asylum with the appellant as his dependent.
    His application was  refused  on  7  March  2012  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 1 May 2012. He became appeal rights exhausted on 20 August
    2012. The appellant made an appointment to claim asylum on 2  May  2013
    and made an asylum claim in her own  right  on  3  May  2013  with  her
    husband as her dependent. The basis of her claim as put forward in  her
    interview on 28 May 2013 and supported  by  the  expert  evidence,  was
    twofold (i) she feared persecution  on  account  of  imputed  political
    opinion arising from the authorities suspicion  that  her  husband  has
    links with the terrorist group and (ii) she feared violence and  murder
    from her brother because she had not  consummated  her  marriage.  This
    application was refused in a decision dated 11 September 2014.

28. The appellant subsequently  disclosed  to  her  solicitor  and  to  her
    therapist that she had a  same-sex  relationship  with  her  cousin  in
    Algeria from the ages of 13 or 14 to the age of 25.  She  also  claimed
    that her brother caught them once together and  she  fears  if  she  is
    returned to Algeria, in the absence of any children, which is a  source
    of shame, she would be forced to undergo another  physical  examination
    to confirm whether or not her marriage had  been  consummated  and  she
    would be beaten and killed by  her  brother.  Her  brother  would  also
    disclose her relationship with her cousin, which would put a real  risk
    of divorce and ostracism, the loss of the children  and  being  killed.
    She has not told her husband about her relationship with her cousin nor
    her fears on this account.

29. Judge Grant in her findings at paragraph 20 gave no reason for why  the
    appellant's  brother  should  find  out  that  her  marriage   is   not
    consummated. She failed to take into account a  material  consideration
    which is that the appellant  was  subjected  to  a  virginity  test  in
    Algeria after the failure of her first marriage. A copy of the test was
    submitted in evidence. The expert report from Dr Seddon states that  it
    is usual for families to insist on a virginity test and  this  has  not
    been addressed by  the  Judge.  The  Judge's  speculative  comments  in
    respect of the possibility of adoption are simply not material  in  the
    circumstances, not least because there  is  no  provision  for  instant
    adoption nor can the appellant and her husband be  reasonably  expected
    to lie about the provenance of any adopted child for the  remainder  of
    their lives.

30. The Judge failed to provide any or adequate reasons for  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim as to her relationship with her  cousin  but  rejects
    the account solely on the basis of its timing. The Judge in  doing  so,
    failed to look at the evidence in the round. The Judge further attempts
    to minimise this relationship by asserting that this  took  place  when
    she was a teenager whereas in fact the relationship was of more than 11
    years duration. The Judge states that it is  clear  from  her  evidence
    that she had no intention of finding love with a  woman  when  in  fact
    this is materially factually incorrect as in both her statement and  in
    her oral evidence and at paragraph 36 of the letter from  Yvonne  Stine
    the appellant stated that she would like to be with her cousin.

31. Secondly in respect of  the  persecution  by  her  brother,  the  Judge
    rejects this on the bases that he rescued her from being raped when she
    was 15 and the timing as to when she  raised  this  claim.  Neither  of
    these points constitute adequate reasons for rejecting the entirety  of
    the appellant's claim particularly given that the  appellant's  brother
    was bound to rescue her in order to protect the family honour. This  in
    no way indicates that her brother would take  a  liberal  view  of  her
    sexuality and the threat from her brother inextricably  bound  up  with
    the appellant sexuality. The IAT Asylum Gender Guidelines  20005  state
    that there are cogent reasons as to why women who  were  dependents  do
    not put forward a separate claim and this is particularly so when their
    issues relating to sexual violence and shame. As a consequence  of  the
    Judge's erroneous findings as to the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account, she failed to consider her  account  in  the  context  of  the
    jurisprudence and the social and  cultural  context  of  Algeria  as  a
    consequence of which it is clear that there is  a  serious  possibility
    that the appellant would be at risk of persecution on  account  of  her
    sexuality or perceived sexuality.

32. The Judge failed to consider the appellant's credibility  in  light  of
    the evidence as a whole, particularly the expert evidence is set out in
    the case of Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 the Judge at paragraph 29 notes
    "having examined her claim I do not agree with Mr  Stines  opinion  and
    attach little weight to it". There is no reference to  at  all  to  the
    expert evidence of Dr Seddon and his opinion that  (i)  if  her  family
    were to discover that  her  difficulties  were  linked  to  a  same-sex
    relationship with a cousin, they would be appalled, deeply offended and
    angry and this is highly likely to manifests itself  in  very  credible
    personal verbal abuse and emotional pressure  with  a  good  chance  of
    physical violence from the male members  of  her  family,  notably  her
    brother and evidence of honour killings indicates that there is even  a
    possible risk of her life; (ii) there is no sufficiency  of  protection
    for gay people by the state from harassment and  persecution  by  third
    parties;  (iii)  social  attitudes  and  behaviours   to   a   same-sex
    relationships and those involved in  them  are  extremely  hostile  and
    often violent and have become more so in recent years under the growing
    influence of Islamic fundamentalism; (iv) the  appellant  would  be  at
    extreme risk from fundamentalist Islamist if it was known that she  had
    been involved  in  a  same-sex  relationship  and  had  refused  sexual
    intercourse with two husbands; (v) extreme violence-GBH, disfiguration,
    even killing-is entirely possible by her family; (vi)  the  appellant's
    husband would be under extreme pressure from his family to divorce  her
    for failing to produce a child in nearly  a  decade  of  marriage.  The
    Judge further failed to consider the issue of credibility in  light  of
    the country context and particularly the fact that  same-sex  relations
    are illegal in Algeria and would clearly be considered to be shameful.

33. The Judge further found that it would not be unduly harsh to expect the
    appellant to internally relocate within Algeria in light of the  expert
    evidence of Mr  Joffe  that  the  appellant  would  find  it  extremely
    difficult to successfully relocate elsewhere in Algeria because  family
    support is a crucial component of survival, a consideration  which,  in
    itself, makes relocation a  very  difficult  alternative.  The  Judge's
    findings that the  appellant  and  her  husband  have  significant  and
    ongoing sexual dysfunction and mental health  issues  and  suffer  from
    PTSD and Yvonne Stine's clear view that  the  appellant  would  require
    specialist  clinic  treatment  for  a  number  of  years  to  come,  in
    circumstances where such treatment is simply not available in  Algeria.
    The Judge did not correctly apply the correct jurisprudential test  set
    out in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5.

34.  The  Judge  makes  frequent  references  to  sexual  difficulties  but
    erroneously fails to take into account that the  the  reason  that  the
    marriage has  not  been  consummated  is  because  of  the  appellant's
    sexuality. Moreover,  nowhere  in  the  determination  does  the  Judge
    address the appellant's evidence that she  has  not  told  her  husband
    about her relationship with her cousin and the fact that in the context
    of Algeria, it would simply not be possible for the appellant to do  so
    as part of any "treatment".  The  Judge  further  mischaracterised  the
    medical evidence that the appellant  remains  a  virgin  as  confirming
    "that they have never been sexually active" when this would  relate  to
    heterosexual sex and thus erroneously failed to  take  account  of  the
    corroborative effect of this  evidence  in  respect  of  the  appellant
    sexuality.

    Rule 24 response

35. In the Rule 24 response the  respondent  stated  that  the  Judge  made
    adequate findings of fact  and  gave  reasons  for  those  findings  in
    respect of the appellant's claim to be in  fear  of  her  brother.  The
    Judge has given clear reasons as to why he disbelieves the  appellant's
    version of events and there is no material error of law.

    The hearing

36. At the hearing, Miss Chapman relied  on  her  grounds  of  appeal.  She
    accepted that the Judge was entitled to rely on Judge  Khan's  findings
    in her husband's appeal. The  Judge  did  not  take  into  account  the
    medical letter dated 30 April 2000 in relation to the  virginity  test,
    which the appellant underwent. She did not take into account  that  the
    appellant  failed  to  consummate  her  first  marriage  and  that  the
    appellant remains a virgin. The  absence  of  children  will  make  the
    appellant's brother question her virginity. Dr  Seddon  in  his  expert
    report stated that virginity tests are common  in  Algeria.  The  Judge
    assumes that because the appellant has polycystic ovaries, she will not
    get pregnant. There is no evidential  basis  to  this  assumption.  The
    Judge in raising that the appellant  can  adopt  a  child  and  present
    themselves with children, is not reasonable to expect the appellant  to
    lie. The Judge did not reach a rational and  reliable  conclusion.  The
    Judge did not take into account that the appellant claims that she  had
    a relationship with her cousin from the age of 18 until 25 years. There
    is no reason for why the appellant is not telling  the  truth  and  she
    remains a virgin.

37. Although this  was  a  late  claim,  the  report  from  the  appellants
    therapist where she states that the appellant's future  lies  with  her
    husband. The Judge cannot assume this in the heterosexual  context.  Dr
    Seddon's report states that same-sex  relationships  are  abhorrent  to
    Algerian society. The Judge rejects at paragraph 27 family  honour  and
    that her brother would protect the appellant if she was getting  raped.
    The Judge failed to take into account the social and  cultural  context
    of the appellant. The Judge failed to assess her credibility  in  light
    of all the evidence. The Judge does not  refer  to  the  report  of  Dr
    Seddon. The Judge stated internal relocation is an option but this is a
    collateral issue.

38. Mr Tufan on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State's  made  the  following
    submissions. The Judge has  made  a  comprehensive  determination.  The
    findings are  lengthy  and  detailed.  Internal  relocation  is  not  a
    collateral issue because if it is available to the  appellant  and  the
    appellant's appeal fails on this basis alone. There is  no  reason  for
    the couple not to return to Algeria and live away from the  appellant's
    brother and her husband's family. In Januzi, is a high test  for  there
    is no error in the determination.

39. In the case of MF [MF (Albania) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  902]  it  is
    stated that it is for the Tribunal not an  expert  to  decide  risk  on
    return. At the previous  hearing  of  the  appellant's  husband  appeal
    before Judge Khan there was no mention of the appellant's  brother  and
    her sexuality. The fact that the appellant and her  husband  have  PTSD
    has no bearing on the appeal. The Judge does not refer  to  the  expert
    report of Dr Seddon because there is  no  material  importance  in  the
    report which will advance the appellant's case.

40. Miss Chapman in reply said internal relocation has  not  been  properly
    considered as there is no analysis by the Judge  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh or difficult for the appellant to relocate to Algeria. The
    appellant's objective fear is that the appellant's husband  will  leave
    her on return to Algeria. There is an error of law in the decision  and
    requested that the appeal be sent back to the first-tier  Tribunal  for
    findings of credibility to be made.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law

41. I have given anxious scrutiny to the determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and have taken into account the appellant's grounds of  appeal
    and the arguments at the hearing. The gist of the ground of  appeal  is
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make correct findings on the
    evidence before her.

42.  The  Judge  applied  the  principles  in  Devaseelan  which  sets  out
    guidelines  on  how  a   second   adjudicator   should   approach   the
    determination of another adjudicator who has previously heard an appeal
    by the same appellant. The Judge noted that the  appellant's  husband's
    appeal with the appellant as his dependent was dismissed by Judge  Khan
    and that has to be her starting point. There was no objection taken  on
    the approach by the Judge which is entirely correct.

43. The Judge then only considered the evidence which was not before  Judge
    Khan. That is the correct way of approaching an appeal of an  appellant
    whose case has been previously decided. The appellant was  a  dependent
    on her husband's claim  and  Judge  Khan  found  that  the  appellant's
    husband's claim was not credible.

44.  The  appellant's  asylum  claim  included  the  appellant's  husband's
    previous claim which was  decided  by  Judge  Khan  and  also  set  out
    additional and  different  basis  for  why  she  fears  persecution  in
    Algeria. The appellant's evidence is that she had a  relationship  with
    her cousin in Algeria and her brother found out and this  puts  her  at
    risk  from  her  brother  and  the  authorities  in   Algeria   because
    homosexuality is not tolerated in  Algeria.  The  other  bases  of  the
    appellant's claim  which  was  not  before  Judge  Khan  was  that  the
    appellant fears persecution from her brother  in  Algeria  because  she
    does not have any children and that this puts her  at  real  risk  from
    him. She claimed that her brother will subject her to a virginity  test
    and if she is found not to have consummated her marriage she  would  be
    presumed still to be a virgin, this will bring shame on her family  and
    will also put her at risk from her brother.

45. The Judge placed reliance on the findings of Judge  Khan  that  as  the
    appellant returned to Algeria, this demonstrated that she  was  not  in
    fear of anyone in that country. The judge  made  adverse  credibility's
    findings about the appellant's conduct in returning to Algeria, as  the
    appellant claimed, to sell her jewellery and gold in order  to  finance
    their ongoing stay in the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  considered  this
    evidence and also considered the appellant's explanation  for  why  she
    returned, which was that you wanted to sell her  golden  jewellery  and
    rightfully rejected it.

46. The Judge was entitled to find on the  evidence  before  her  that  the
    appellant would not have returned to Algeria in order to sell her gold,
    if she was in fear of anyone in that country. The evidence  before  the
    Judge was that the appellant went to Algeria  and  remained  in  hiding
    while her sister sold her gold and therefore the Judge stated that  the
    appellant's sister could have sold her jewellery  while  the  appellant
    remained in the United Kingdom. The finding is sustainable because  the
    appellant would have returned to Algeria if she  genuinely  feared  her
    brother or anyone else for any reason.

47. The Judge was  also  entitled  to  find  that  the  appellant  did  not
    mentioned fear of her brother at her husband's asylum claim. The  Judge
    was bound to find that the appellant's failure  to  mention  this  very
    important  fact  at  the  first  available  opportunity  went  to   her
    credibility. This is a sustainable finding on the evidence.

48. The Judge considered the appellant's new claim that she  had  a  sexual
    relationship with her cousin while in Algeria and that she cannot  tell
    her husband about it. The Judge gave cogent  reasons  for  her  finding
    that the appellant and her husband are in  a  loving  relationship  and
    took into account the appellant's evidence that she does  not  wish  to
    have a relationship with a woman but intends to live with her  husband.
    She also took into account the evidence  that  the  appellant  and  her
    husband are receiving therapy for their sexual problems which shows her
    that they are committed to each other.

49. The Judge was also entitled to find that the timing of the  appellant's
    claim, which came after her husband's appeal had been  dismissed,  goes
    to the credibility of this  evidence.  The  Judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant's claim that she had a relationship with her female cousin in
    Algeria is an attempt to bolster her very weak asylum  claim  has  been
    properly made. I find no perversity in these findings.

50. I find that the Judge was entitled and required to reach the conclusion
    that she did based on her consideration and evaluation of the  evidence
    as a whole.  The appellant's  medical  condition  of  PTSD  was  of  no
    relevance to her findings. The Judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant's asylum claim is no more than an attempt to  have  a  second
    bite at the cherry after her husband's asylum claim  with  her  as  his
    dependent was dismissed by Judge Khan.

51. The Judge has taken into account all the evidence including the medical
    evidence and it is implicit in the determination that he found that  it
    had  no  relevance  in  respect  of  the  appellants  credibility.  The
    appellant's mental condition cannot explain the complete implausibility
    in her account. The Judge found that there are mental  health  services
    available in Algeria. The judge also found that the appellant  and  her
    husband can relocate within Algeria and correctly stated that  they  do
    not at present live near their families anyway.

52. The Judge was entitled to find the appellant's  evidence  not  credible
    that her brother will subject her  to  a  virginity  test  given,  even
    though there was evidence that in Algeria women are sometimes forced to
    do virginity tests but no mention has been made in the report  for  the
    reasons why a woman  would  be  asked  to  undergo  a  virginity  test.
    Implicit in the determination is that the appellant is a married  woman
    who is with her husband and  therefore  her  brother  would  have  very
    little influence on her personal matter as she is under the  protection
    of her husband.

53. I find  there  is  nothing  unreasonable  or  perverse  in  the  Judges
    conclusion that the appellant will not be subjected to a virginity test
    merely because she does not have children. It is also complicit in  the
    determination that the Judge did not believe  that  the  appellant  was
    previously subjected to a virginity test because  this  aspect  of  the
    claim was not mentioned before Judge Khan.

54. It is evident that even in Algeria everyone must know that there can be
    many reasons for lack of conception and it also  does  not  necessarily
    mean that a woman is a virgin if she does not have children. The  Judge
    rightfully did not find this to be credible evidence.

55. The appellant's grounds of appeal are no more than a quarrel  with  the
    findings of the Judge set out in a detailed and  careful  determination
    and her reasoning and conclusions are understandable.

56. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:

         "15. It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls used the words
         "vital" and "critical" as synonyms of the word "material" which  we
         have used above. The whole  of  his  judgment  warrants  attention,
         because it reveals  the  anxiety  of  an  appellate  court  not  to
         overturn a judgment at  first  instance  unless  it  really  cannot
         understand the original judge's thought processes when  he/she  was
         making material findings."

57. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning in  the
    Judge's determination for why she reached her conclusions. I find  that
    the grounds of appeal and no more than a disagreement with  the  Judges
    findings of fact and the conclusions that she drew from such findings.

58. I find that no error of law has  been  established  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination. I find that she was entitled to conclude that
    the appellant is not entitled to be recognised as a refugee  or  to  be
    granted humanitarian protection in this country. I uphold her decision.

DECISION

Appeal dismissed


                                         Dated this 27th day of October 2015
Signed by,

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
