
[pic]




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07900/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 21 January 2014                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               HABIB AHMED RIAZ
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms J Todd, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order in place, and none requested.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant appeals against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge McGavin, dated 5 October 2013, dismissing on all available  grounds
   his appeal against refusal of recognition as a refugee.  His complaint is
   that the First-tier Tribunal should have adjourned  his  hearing  pending
   receipt of a report which the Medical Foundation had agreed to provide.

2) Unfortunately this  issue  does  not  appear  to  have  been  dealt  with
   particularly well by either side or  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
   considerable wasted time and expense in consequence.  There  was  failure
   to focus on exactly what purposes the report might serve, and failure  to
   refer to the respondent's policy.

3) The policy is easy to locate on the respondent's  website.   This  is  an
   excerpt from the most recent version:

        Asylum Policy Instruction
        Medico-Legal Reports from the Helen Bamber Foundation and the
        Medical Foundation Medico-Legal Report Service
        Version 3.0, 17 January 2014

         2.4 Cases accepted for a pre-assessment

        When the caseworker is informed in writing by the applicant's legal
        representative that the case has been accepted for a pre-assessment
        appointment, they should normally suspend the substantive  decision
        if they are not minded to grant any leave ... If the caseworker  is
        informed by phone, the legal  representative  should  be  asked  to
        provide written confirmation and a copy  of  the  letter  from  the
        Foundation (which should be available).

        However, there may  be  cases  where  the  applicant's  account  of
        events, including incidents of torture, is accepted but  this  does
        not give rise to a need for  international  protection  where,  for
        example, the country situation has changed or there is  sufficiency
        of protection. In such cases the caseworker may proceed to decision
        without waiting for the MLR but  should  first  contact  the  legal
        representatives  and  give   them   an   opportunity   to   provide
        representations as to why the decision should be suspended to  wait
        for the MLR ...

4) The approach of the First-tier Tribunal to  adjournment  requests  should
   be informed along similar lines.

5) The appellant by the date of  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
   confirmation from the Foundation that he would be seen  with  a  view  to
   providing a report.   He  now  has  it,  dated  13  December  2013.   The
   Presenting Officer  fairly  and  correctly  did  not  argue  against  its
   admission into evidence, and conceded that non-adjournment was an  error.
   She accepted that the report is potentially  relevant  not  only  to  the
   credibility  of  the  appellant's  torture  allegations  as  assessed  by
   physical examination but also to the assessment of his evidence generally
   in light of  psychological  considerations,  and  to  resolving  internal
   relocation issues.  The respondent's decision letter held that  the  case
   should fail on internal relocation alone.  The judge did  not  deal  with
   that issue.  However, Mrs O'Brien did  not  argue  that  the  case  could
   properly be resolved on that point alone.

6) Parties agreed that the  determination  should  be  set  aside;  that  no
   findings of fact were to  be  retained;  and  that  the  case  should  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.



7) Whatever view the First-tier Tribunal comes to on credibility, it  should
   not again fail to decide the case on internal relocation.

8) There is a discontinuity in the report at the foot  of  page  9,  end  of
   paragraph 45, where at least  part  of  one  sentence  is  missing.   The
   passage, judging by the  context,  is  potentially  significant,  so  the
   appellant's agents may wish to have this put right in  good  time  before
   the next hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

9) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   The  nature
   of the error is such that none of its findings can stand.  Under  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement  7.2  the  nature  and
   extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to  be  remade
   is such that it is appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.   The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider
   the case are not to include Judge McGavin.


                               [pic]
                                24 January 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
