
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07719/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 11 November 2013                             |ON 28 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     i d

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Young, Sentinel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, I D, was born on 30 January 1978 and is a female citizen
    of Albania.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 April 2013 with her
    two dependent children.  By a  decision  dated  30  January  2013,  the
    appellant was refused leave to enter the United Kingdom.  She  appealed
    against that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grimshaw),
    which, in a determination promulgated on 19 September  2013,  dismissed
    the appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds.   The  appellant  had
    appealed on the grounds that she is a member  of  a  particular  social
    group (a victim of trafficking by loan sharks who seek  the  return  of
    money owed by her spouse).  The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal record that the appellant claims to have  been  a
    victim of sex trafficking but that a decision by the respondent  as  to
    her status has not yet been taken.  Judge Grimshaw had  noted  at  [10]
    that

         "At the date of the hearing no formal  decision  had  been  issued.
         However, I am aware that even if the appellant is  found  to  be  a
         victim of trafficking, this does not necessarily mean that  she  is
         prevented from returning to  her  homeland.   Accordingly,  I  have
         proceeded on the basis that the decision to  refuse  the  appellant
         asylum and leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  with  her  two
         children is a separate decision that  requires  my  determination."



    The grounds submit that the judge should, in the absence of a  decision
    as to whether the appellant had been trafficked or not,  "approach  the
    instant appeal with a great deal more caution and  circumspection  than
    she did ...".  No authority for that assertion is given in the grounds.

 3. I find that the judge was entirely correct to approach the  immigration
    appeal as a separate  matter  from  that  of  trafficking.   The  judge
    correctly set out at [5] the burden and standard of proof in the appeal
    and it is clear from her determination  that  she  has  approached  the
    evidence with the appropriate anxious scrutiny.  The  fact  that  there
    had been no trafficking decision did not require the judge to apply any
    different standard of proof or, indeed, to approach the  evidence  with
    "a great deal more caution".

 4. The grounds go on to assert that the  judge  compounded  her  error  of
    failing to approach the evidence with extra caution by rejecting in  an
    "erroneous and wholly irrational manner" the expert report  adduced  by
    the appellant.  The report (prepared by Ashiana Sheffield Limited)  was
    not prepared by a mental health or medical professional although it did
    comment on the appellant's  description  of  her  physical  and  mental
    health symptoms and claimed post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).   At
    [23], the judge wrote this:

         "I have seen the report prepared by Ashiana  Sheffield  Limited  on
         behalf of  the  appellant,  together  with  additional  information
         provided by the case worker concerned.  In my view, any value to be
         gained from the report is marred by the fact that the appellant was
         provided with  an  interpreter  who,  by  her  own  admission,  had
         difficulties communicating with her.   She  also  refers  to  being
         upset and in tears when describing her reasons for leaving  Albania
         which  causes  me  to  question  whether  a  coherent  account  was
         recorded.   Of  particular  concerned  is  the  admission  by   the
         appellant that the report submitted on her behalf was not read over
         to her in a  language  that  she  understood  nor  signed  by  her.
         Indeed,  it  is  apparent  from  the  witness  statement  that  the
         appellant was not even aware that a report had  been  prepared  and
         that the first she knew of it was when she was asked to  clarify  a
         number of inconsistencies which had been raised by  the  respondent
         on its receipt.  In these circumstances, I am  not  persuaded  that
         the content of the Ashiana report is reliable.  I indicated at  the
         hearing that it was my intention to place no significant weight  on
         this document."

 5. The grounds complain that the judge's reasoning  was  "speculative  and
    wholly irrational".  Amongst her conclusions, the author of the  report
    (Ms Baxendale) concluded that the  appellant's  account  of  events  in
    Albania had been "credible and consistent with the  other  accounts  of
    other women who  have  been  trafficked  for  the  purposes  of  sexual
    exploitation.  The judge, however, was  concerned  that  there  was  no
    medical evidence to support the suggestions in the Ashiana report  that
    the appellant was suffering from PTSD.

 6. I find that the ground is without merit.  It was open to the  judge  to
    consider the circumstances in which the expert report had been prepared
    and her concerns in that regard were sufficient to lead  the  judge  to
    place little weight on the contents of the report.  The grounds amount,
    in effect, to a disagreement  with  those  findings  and  little  more.
    Likewise, it was open to the judge to be concerned that  there  was  no
    medical evidence to support the suggestion of medical problems suffered
    by the appellant made in the report  which  had  been  prepared  by  an
    individual without medical expertise.  Further, the comments  regarding
    the appellant's credibility which I have quoted above  were  likely  to
    attract little weight in any event.  The  expert  should  have  limited
    herself to considering whether the appellant's account  was  consistent
    with undisputed evidence concerning trafficked women from  Albania;  it
    was no part of the expert witness's task to assess the  credibility  of
    the appellant's account (which remained a matter for the judge) and the
    mere fact that her account may  have  been  consistent  with  those  of
    "other women" did not mean that it was true.

 7. Further at [27], the judge referred to the appellant's  "vagueness"  in
    giving evidence.  The grounds assert that the judge had failed to  have
    regard  to  Ms  Baxendale's  conclusion  that   "the   experiences   of
    trafficking and  exploitation  have  had  a  profound  impact  on  [the
    appellant's] mental and physical health".  Contrary  to  the  assertion
    made in the grounds, it would have been an error of law for  the  judge
    to have relied upon such comments from a person who  is  not  medically
    qualified.

 8. The grounds assert that the judge was irrational at [29] to  find  that
    it was "not plausible  that  the  guard  [charged  with  detaining  the
    appellant] would have been content to let her walk  to  freedom".   The
    grounds note that the appellant had stated in her asylum interview that
    the guard had been drunk "something the Immigration Judge conspicuously
    and erroneously ignores".  That statement is not accurate.  Earlier  in
    the same paragraph the judge had noted  that  "[the  appellant]  states
    that the guard stationed at the door of her room was  drunk  and  as  a
    result allowed her to leave her room for some fresh air".   The  ground
    of appeal is no more than a disagreement  with  findings  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence before her.

 9. The judge noted at [28] that the appellant had  been  fearful  for  the
    safety of her children.  She had been

         "too frightened to stay in the  marital  home  [so]  she  left  her
         village to find sanctuary at her  aunt's  house  and  in  order  to
         conceal herself and the children from the loan  sharks.   In  these
         circumstances I  question  her  decision  not  only  to  enrol  her
         children in the local school but to  openly  walk  along  a  public
         highway with her aunt in the process of visiting shops.  This  does
         not suggest to me that the  appellant  had  any  real  concerns  to
         protect herself or her children."

    Mr Young submitted that the appellant had not been trafficked  for  sex
    at that time and that the judge's finding  was  irrational.   I  reject
    that submission.  I am not satisfied that the judge  had  misunderstood
    any part of the appellant's account.  The appellant stated that she had
    left the marital home to live with her aunt because she was fearful for
    herself and her children; it was open to the judge  to  find  that  her
    behaviour having reached her aunt's home was not consistent  with  that
    fear.

10. At [22] the grounds of appeal state:

         "Paragraph 34  of  the  determination  is  of  real  concern.   The
         Immigration Judge accepts that the appellant's  agents  forced  the
         appellant to have sex.   That  too  could  be  said  to  amount  to
         trafficking and it is of note that there was no analysis whatsoever
         for further risks from these people, Albanians of  course,  if  the
         appellant returns to Albania."

    At [34], the judge had written:

         "The appellant's claim that she was 'used' by  the  agents  during
         the course of the journey has not been denied  by  the  respondent.
         However,  it  seems  to  me  the   agents   were   seeking   sexual
         gratification from a woman who was in their charge over the  course
         of the journey to the United Kingdom  and  took  advantage  of  the
         situation to force her to have sex.  I have not seen  any  evidence
         that would cause me to be concerned that once the appellant arrived
         in the United Kingdom she was sexually exploited or  that  she  was
         transported for that purpose."

    The appellant's claim was that she had been forced into prostitution by
    loan sharks to whom her husband owed money.  There is nothing in any of
    the papers before me to indicate that the appellant has  ever  asserted
    that the men with whom she may have had sex  en  route  to  the  United
    Kingdom would seek to harm her should she return to Albania.  Mr  Young
    had not been the advocate before the First-tier Tribunal but  he  could
    not confirm that such a claim had been made to the judge.  The  wording
    used in the grounds is perhaps significant ("that too could be said  to
    amount to trafficking ...") gives the indication that  the  matter  has
    been raised for the first time in the grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I find that the appellant has never previously asserted that
    she would be at risk from the men who may have "used"  her  during  her
    journey to the United Kingdom.  Further, there was no  obligation  upon
    the judge to speculate regarding possible risks  to  the  appellant  in
    Albania that she herself had not raised.

11. Finally, the grounds assert that at [38] the judge failed to apply  the
    proper test concerning the internal flight alternative.  The judge  was
    satisfied [37] the appellant could be returned  to  her  home  area  of
    Albania without "any difficulties".  She considered, in the alternative
    that, assuming the appellant was at risk in her home area, she would be
    able to relocate within  Albania,  the  country  in  which  she  was  a
    national and where she had spent the majority of her life and where she
    had friends and relatives who would  be  likely  to  assist  her.   The
    grounds assert the judge failed to apply the proper test; in  his  oral
    submissions, Mr Young explained that the judge had made no reference to
    the option of internal flight not being "unduly harsh".  I do not  find
    that the judge has erred in law by failing to use particular  words  or
    expressions; what  is  important  is  that  she  has  applied  the  law
    correctly.  I find that the judge's findings regarding the  possibility
    of internal flight are reasonable and adequate.  The judge has erred in
    law in her assessment of the appellant's return to her home area (which
    I find that she has not) then the alternative findings as  to  internal
    flight are sufficient to dispose of the appeal.  Conversely, any  error
    in the internal flight assessment is nugatory given that the judge  has
    not erred in law and concluding that the appellant could return to  her
    home area.

12. In the circumstances, I find that the judge has not erred  in  law  and
    this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

13. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
