
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07791/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2015                           |On 27 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     DK
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan, instructed by Duncan Lewis (Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, DK, is a citizen of Turkmenistan and  has  been  granted
    refugee status in Bulgaria.  She was born in 1988.  She appealed to the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shimmin)  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 30 July 2013 to refuse her further leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom and to remove her by way of directions under Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed her appeal.  She now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There has been a substantial delay in this appeal in the Upper Tribunal
    following  an  adjournment  of  the  hearing  on  14  May  2014.   That
    adjournment was necessary in  order  that  further  evidence  could  be
    obtained from the Supreme Administrative Court of Bulgaria concerning a
    case which the appellant had before that court.  Documents relating  to
    the  Supreme  Administrative  Court's  judgment  have  now  been   made
    available to the respondent and to the Tribunal.   It  had  been  hoped
    that the litigation in Bulgaria would  have  been  terminated  by  that
    judgment but that is not the case; the Supreme Administrative Court has
    remitted the matter to a lower court for a further decision.

 3. I was assisted by Ms Khan, counsel for the appellant, at the hearing on
    16 February  2015  and  also  by  Mr  Diwnycz,  who  appeared  for  the
    respondent.  Ms Khan submitted that Judge Shimmin's determination could
    not stand in any event because he had misunderstood the nature  of  the
    appellant's appeal on Article 3 ECHR  grounds.   The  judge  had  found
    [100] that the  appellant  was  suffering  from  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder (PTSD).  He also  accepted  Counsel's  submission  [101]  that
    "because of her precarious mental health, the appellant would  be  more
    susceptible to serious harm such that the discriminatory measures taken
    by the Bulgarian Authorities are more likely to pass the threshold into
    persecution discrimination."  Notwithstanding that finding,  the  judge
    went on to conclude that "because of the  absence  of  current  medical
    evidence, I find the appellant has failed to provide evidence of  where
    that  threshold  [of]  lies  (sic)."   Ms  Khan  explained   that   the
    appellant's case is that, because she suffers from PTSD, any  detention
    or questioning of her by the Bulgarian Authorities would be  likely  to
    render her treatment persecutory.  However, although it is  clear  from
    the papers that that was the basis upon which the appellant's case  was
    put before the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Shimmin at [102] wrote:

         The  appellant's  condition  comes  nowhere  near  the  very   high
         threshold set in N [2005] UKHL 31.  That case found that Article  3
         is not breached by the return of an AIDS  sufferer  unless  in  the
         extreme circumstances and suffering the critical illness as in  the
         case of D v UK [1997] EHRR 45.  The appellant has not provided  any
         medical evidence to indicate that her condition is at a stage where
         she is critically ill  nor  has  she  provided  evidence  that  her
         condition would deteriorate significantly such that there would  be
         a significant effect on her physical and moral integrity as set out
         in the case of Bensaid 44599/98 (6 February 2001) ECHR.   Therefore
         I find that she has  not  come  within  the  extreme  circumstances
         required to constitute a breach of Articles 3 and 8.

 4. Whilst Judge Shimmin's statement of the law  relating  to  Article  3/8
    ECHR in "medical" cases is probably accurate, it appears  that  he  has
    misunderstood the basis of the appellant's submissions; this is  not  a
    "medical" Article 3/8 case; rather, the appellant claims that Article 3
    is engaged in the manner which I have outlined above.  Mr Diwnycz,  for
    the respondent, accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    and that the determination should be set aside.  I direct that none  of
    the findings of fact shall stand.   Given  the  need  for  a  new  fact
    finding exercise, I consider that it is  appropriate  that  the  appeal
    should be returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  Shimmin)  for
    that Tribunal to remake the decision.

NOTICE OF DECISION

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal dated 28 November 2013  is
    set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The appeal shall
    be considered de novo by the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Shimmin)
    and that Tribunal shall remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 26 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

