

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07439/2015
     AA/08741/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15th March 2016                    |On 12th April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     SSK
                                     TSK
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby - Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Gaisford, counsel, instructed by Sriharans
solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the parties  in
   this determination identified as SSK and TSK or to K or I. This direction
   applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this
   direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings





   1. SSK and TSK are Afghan Sikhs. SSK is the father of TSK who was born on
      8th November 1996. Their appeal against removal decisions  dated  15th
      April 2015 and 20th April 2015 respectively, made  subsequent  to  the
      refusal of their claim for international protection was allowed  in  a
      Decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walker  promulgated  on  10th
      December 2015 following a hearing on 6th October 2015.


   2. Permission to appeal that decision was granted by FtT  Judge  Frankish
      in the following terms:


                  "...


                  2. The application for permission to appeal  asserts  that
                  the F-tTJ followed DSG and not  SL  &  ors  in  finding  a
                  generalised risk to Sikhs in Afghanistan which was correct
                  at the time of hearing (6.10.15) but she  allowed  herself
                  to get caught out by not promulgating  until  10.12.15  by
                  which time TG [2015] UKUT 595 had overruled a  generalised
                  risk in favour of a case by case approach.
                  3. This application is a case  study  in  the  hazards  of
                  dilatory determination writing. Current  country  guidance
                  cases are available on a publicly  accessible  list,  but,
                  unfortunately, the current country guidance case popped up
                  on 9th November 2015, this decision having been drafted on
                  30 November 2015 and promulgated on 10 December 2015.  The
                  fact that it has not been applied amounts to  an  arguable
                  error. No issue  is  taken  with  this  otherwise  careful
                  determination as to the findings of fact which are  hereby
                  preserved. The appellants should take heart from the  fact
                  that, even applying  TG,  there  is  every  likelihood  of
                  arriving at the same conclusion as arose here and as arose
                  in the determination of a similar case by  F-tTj  Eldridge
                  as referred to in this determination."




   3. Ms Brocklesby-Weller confirmed no issue was taken with regard  to  the
      findings of fact made by the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge.  Thus  the
      undisputed findings are as follows:


   i. SSK and TSK are Afghani Sikhs.
  ii.  SSK's  son  K  (and  brother  to  TSK)  lives  in  the  UK  and   was
      recognised as a refugee on  11th  March  2015  after  his  appeal  was
      allowed in February 2015. He had arrived in the UK on 25th April 2014.
      Another son, I, is missing.
 iii. SSK's daughter had been killed, aged 4, in 1996 in cross fire  when  a
      missile went off while she was playing outside.
  iv. SSK's brother in law had been shot and died in 1997.
   v. SSK speaks Pashtu, Dari and Punjabi.  TSK  speaks  Punjabi  and  Kabli
      Punjabi.
  vi. The family is from Jalalabad
 vii. SSK and his wife left Afghanistan in 1998 to Russia where  they  lived
      until 9th  November  2014  when  they  came  to  the  UK.  No  adverse
      inferences were drawn from the failure  to  claim  asylum  until  18th
      November 2011.
viii. SSK has a brother in the UK who has been in the UK since 2001.
  ix. SSK has limited mobility due to a disability in his leg. His  wife  is
      diabetic and suffers from arthritis.
   x. TSK left Afghanistan when he was aged about 6 months  and  arrived  in
      the UK on 10th November 2014. He suffers from epilepsy  but  takes  no
      medication. He has never been to school and did not leave the house in
      Moscow until he was aged about 12.
  xi. When in Afghanistan, SSK had owned and worked in a ladies fancy  goods
      shop in partnership with his wife's brother. In 1997 when opening  the
      shop his brother in law had been shot by the Taliban about  30  times.
      There had been no problems with the Taliban until this incident.
 xii. In the winter of 1996 the Taliban started coming  to  the  shop  about
      every 15 days, told not to tie their hair, to become Muslims.
xiii. SSK sold the shop (for $20,000)  and  their  house  (for  $90,000)  in
      1997. An agent took the family (SSK,  his  wife,  TSK,  K  and  I)  to
      Moscow.
 xiv. None of the children went to school in Moscow.
  xv. In Moscow SSK made and sold jewellery and worked in a shop. The  owner
      of the shop died in March 2013. He had continued to work  there  until
      the stock ran out.
 xvi. SSK had problems in Moscow from  1999  from  the  mafia  when  he  was
      attacked on his way to market. He was further attacked in April  2012.
      TSK was attacked in November 2012. In 2013 SSK and  TSK  were  stopped
      whilst walking, about 15 or 20 days after the shop owner's death and a
      demand for $500,000 made.
xvii. In March 2013 SSK started looking for an agent to get the family  away
      from Moscow.
xviii. SSK, his wife and TSK had lost contact with I when they had been  put
      on a lorry and were told that I would follow in one or two days.
 xix. The SSK and  TSK  present  as  Sikhs.  TSK,  has  not  been  lived  in
      Afghanistan since  he  was  a  baby  and  has  not  had  any  previous
      integration into Afghan society.
  xx. Although SSK's medical problems do not meet the threshold  of  N,  his
      and his wife's failing health represents a problem in that  they  will
      not have the resilience of fitter younger people in the  face  of  the
      harm and harassment they will face.




   4. In [57] of her decision, Judge Walker says


                   ....the only question to be determined in respect of  the
                  appellants is what would be there position  if  they  were
                  returned to Afghanistan....


            Judge Walker considered  the  background  material  before  her
            including a Freedom House report, a report from Fox  News,  the
            COI dated 17th September 2013. There was no assertion by either
            party that the judge had failed to have proper  regard  to  the
            relevant  background  material  presented.  In   reaching   her
            decision on the facts found, the judge, in [67] said


                  ...In addition to my findings and reasoning above  I  also
                  adopt the reasoning of Immigration Judge Eldridge  in  his
                  decision.


   5. Judge Eldridge, who heard and decided the appeal of K,  considered  in
      considerable detail the reduction in numbers of Sikhs in  Afghanistan.
      He concluded that there was a continuing decline in Sikh numbers and a
      systematic  intolerance  of  minority  religions  in  Afghanistan.  He
      concluded that K had shown he had a well-founded fear  of  persecution
      for the reason of his religious belief.


   6. The country guidance  in  TG  and  others  (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)
      Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC)  reads as follows:


            Risk to followers of the Sikh and Hindu faiths in Afghanistan:
            (i)  Some  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities   in
            Afghanistan continue to  suffer  harassment  at  the  hands  of
            Muslim zealots.
            (ii) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan
            do not face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment such as
            to entitle them to a grant of international protection  on  the
            basis of their ethnic or religious identity,  per  se.  Neither
            can it be said that the  cumulative  impact  of  discrimination
            suffered by the Sikh and Hindu communities in  general  reaches
            the threshold of persecution.
            (iii) A consideration of whether an individual  member  of  the
            Sikh and Hindu communities is at risk real of persecution  upon
            return to  Afghanistan  is  fact-sensitive.  All  the  relevant
            circumstances must be considered but careful  attention  should
            be paid to the following:
            a.  women  are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence   of
            appropriate protection from a male member of the family;
            b. likely financial circumstances and ability to  access  basic
            accommodation bearing in mind
            - Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member of the Sikh
            and Hindu communities
            - such individuals may face  difficulties  (including  threats,
            extortion, seizure of land and acts of violence)  in  retaining
            property and / or pursuing their remaining traditional pursuit,
            that of shopkeeper / trader
            - the traditional source of support for such  individuals,  the
            Gurdwara is much less able to provide adequate support;
            c.  the  level  of  religious  devotion   and   the   practical
            accessibility to a suitable place of religious worship in light
            of declining numbers and  the  evidence  that  some  have  been
            subjected to harm and threats  to  harm  whilst  accessing  the
            Gurdwara;
            d. access to appropriate education for  children  in  light  of
            discrimination against Sikh and Hindu children and the shortage
            of adequate education facilities for them.
            (iv) Although it appears there is a willingness at governmental
            level to provide protection,  it  is  not  established  on  the
            evidence that at a local level the police are willing, even  if
            able, to provide the necessary level of protection required  in
            Refugee  Convention/Qualification  Directive  terms,  to  those
            members of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  who  experience
            serious harm or harassment amounting to persecution.
            (v) Whether it is reasonable to expect a member of the Sikh  or
            Hindu communities to relocate is a fact  sensitive  assessment.
            The relevant factors to be considered include those set out  at
            (iii) above. Given their particular circumstances and declining
            number, the practicability of settling elsewhere for members of
            the Sikh and Hindu communities must  be  carefully  considered.
            Those without access to an independent income are  unlikely  to
            be able to reasonably  relocate  because  of  depleted  support
            mechanisms.
            (vi) This replaces the county guidance provided in the cases of
            K (Risk - Sikh - Women) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT  00057  and
            SL and Others  (Returning  Sikhs  and  Hindus)  Afghanistan  CG
            [2005] UKAIT 00137




   7. Judge Walker did not consider TG in reaching her decision  despite  it
      being in the public domain prior to her reaching  her  conclusions  on
      the evidence. That is plainly an error of law,  as  submitted  by  the
      respondent in the grounds seeking permission to  appeal.  Mr  Gaisford
      sought to persuade me that although it was an error of law,  in  fact,
      the judge had considered material over and above that required  to  be
      considered under the previous CG cases and the inevitable  outcome  of
      specific consideration of those findings of fact made and  upheld,  in
      the context of TG would result in a finding allowing  the  appeals  in
      any event. Thus the error of law was not such as required the  setting
      aside of the decision to be remade.


   8.  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  submitted  there  needed  to  be  an  holistic
      assessment of all factors and this had not been undertaken. There  was
      no assessment of the  potential  availability  of  funds  from  family
      members in the UK or the availability of the voluntary return  package
      and that there was no conclusion as regards potential employment.  She
      referred to [109] and [110] of TG:


            Employment opportunities


                  109. As with many aspects of  this  country  the  evidence
                  relating to economic  reality  for  Sikhs  and  Hindus  is
                  contradictory. On  the  one  hand  there  is  evidence  of
                  members of the Sikh and Hindu community holding  positions
                  within the legislative bodies and  various  community  and
                  other influential groups,  holding  trading  licences  and
                  having viable businesses, owners being able to retain land
                  and property or to rent accommodation for  themselves  and
                  their families and  being  able  to  send  remittances  to
                  families living abroad, in places such as  India.  On  the
                  other hand, there is  evidence  of  poor  members  of  the
                  community being unable to earn a living and having to live
                  in the Gurdwara which, in accordance with the tradition of
                  Sikh and Hindu hospitality, provides  food  aid,  shelter,
                  and a degree of companionship and protection. The evidence
                  indicates that the declining numbers  and  economic  well-
                  being of those remaining in Afghanistan has an  impact  on
                  the ability of the Gurdwara to continue  to  provide  such
                  hospitality and support as it  is  itself  dependent  upon
                  donations to be able to meet its own financial  needs  and
                  purchase food and other items.
                  110. A family without adequate resources is unlikely to be
                  able to pay for private education which  may  be  relevant
                  when considering the situation of Sikh and Hindu  children
                  in Afghanistan whom it is proposed to return if  receiving
                  such education is demonstrated to be fundamental  to  that
                  person's identity. There is also evidence that a Muslim is
                  unlikely to employ a member of the Sikh or Hindu community
                  in place of a Muslim, out of fear of potential reprisal or
                  loss of business, indicating difficulties in  securing  an
                  income with which to fund accommodation or essentials such
                  as food, heating, clothing. The evidence we have been able
                  to consider indicates that there is nothing  in  the  law,
                  the attitude  of  the  Afghan  government,  or  in  theory
                  preventing a  member  of  either  of  these  faith  groups
                  returned to Afghanistan from being able to  set  up  their
                  own businesses but whether they are able  to  do  so  will
                  depend upon the availability of  adequate  funding,  their
                  ability to  secure  business  premises  in  the  light  of
                  possible hostility or opposition from Muslim  traders  who
                  may see them as competition or not wish to  rent  premises
                  out to them, making it difficult for them to  pursue  what
                  has  now  become  the  remaining  traditional   trade   of
                  shopkeeper/trader. Whether an  individual  is  in  such  a
                  position is fact specific and they will  have  to  satisfy
                  the  Tribunal  that  they  are  without   economic   means
                  especially if they have paid a considerable sum  of  money
                  to come to the United Kingdom, that they will not be  able
                  to re-establish themselves economically,  and  the  impact
                  upon family members as a result. Such individuals may also
                  be required to provide appropriate evidence to  show  that
                  there are no alternatives such as being supported by  NGOs
                  or through the Gurdwara and that any impact upon them,  if
                  destitution is alleged, is  such  that  the  threshold  of
                  Article 3 ECHR will be breached.


   9. Although Judge Walker makes reference to the attendance of SSK and TSK
      at the Gurdwara, she makes no finding on the level of their  religious
      devotion. She refers to the employment of SSK in Russia but there  are
      no findings as to the possibility of employment/trading  opportunities
      in Jalalabad. It may be that the level of devotion would increase  the
      possibility of local assistance or, the  converse  may  apply.  It  is
      simply not possible to establish from the  findings  of  Judge  Walker
      what the possible consequences would be. Although  TG  refers  to  the
      difficulties faced by Sikhs, TG did not find that all Sikhs will  have
      problems that amount to either persecutory or Article 3  mistreatment.
      There has been no assessment of the finances available to  the  family
      if they were removed to  Afghanistan,  particularly  given  that  they
      appear to have been able to make  a  living  in  Russia  whilst  there
      illegally. Although on the face of it,  it  seems  unlikely  that  TSK
      would find employment from Muslims, there has been  no  assessment  of
      how this would fit with the possibility of his family commencing  some
      sort of trade. Although there is reference to  SSK's  health  problems
      there is no finding whether or to what extent that would prohibit  him
      setting up some sort of business. Nor  is  there  a  finding,  or  any
      evidence, as to the possibility of SSK's brother in law  who  has,  it
      seems, been in the UK for some considerable time and is now a  British
      Citizen, assisting them financially. Although Judge Walker adopted the
      reasoning of Judge Eldridge in addition to  her  own  findings,  those
      findings do not shed any light  upon  the  issues  that  ought  to  be
      included in any holistic assessment. There  is  limited  consideration
      given to the funds  that  SSK  left  Afghanistan  with  other  than  a
      reference to him having paid the agent to transport him and his family
      to the UK.


  10. Given these shortcoming, I am satisfied that the failure of the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge to take account of TG is a material error  of  law
      and I set aside the decision  to  be  remade;  all  findings  of  fact
      preserved.


  11. Given the very specific circumstances of this case it  is  appropriate
      for the remaking  of  this  appeal  to  be  undertaken  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Walker such that she makes findings  upon  evidence  in
      the context of the country guidance case of TG.

     Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision to be remade, all findings of fact preserved.

     Consequential Directions


    This appeal is remitted to First-tier Tribunal judge Walker  to  enable
    her to complete her decision.

                                    Date 16th March 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
