
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/07199/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 22 February 2016                       |On 29 February 2016         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                            NATHALIE BATELA BOATE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr Tettey of counsel for GMIAU
For the Respondent:      Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Edwards promulgated on 23 February  2015  which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against a decision to  refuse  an  application  to
   remove her from the UK dated 3 September 2014  following  an  application
   for asylum made on 30 May 2014 the reasons for which were set  out  in  a
   letter dated 3 September 2014.

Background
4. The Appellant was born on  8  August  1984  and  is  a  national  of  the
   Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Appellant and her husband  and  son
   travelled to France for a visit on 5 February 2014. On 12 April 2014  the
   Appellant travelled by coach to the UK. The Appellants claimed asylum  on
   30 May 2014 on the grounds that she feared  persecution  in  the  DRC  on
   account of her role and that of her brothers as  activists  in  the  UDPS
   (Union pour la Democratie et le Progres Social)
5. On 3 September 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) There were inconsistencies between her  Screening  Interview  and  her
      Asylum interview in relation to how she became aware that  she  had  a
      problem in the DRC.
   b)  There  were  inconsistencies  in  relation  to  witness  summons  the
      Appellant asserts was issued against her.
   c) The Appellants delay in claiming asylum undermines her credibility.
   d) The Appellant gave inconsistent evidence  about  how  many  times  her
      brother Landry had been detained by the authorities.
   e) The Appellant's claim to be at  risk  after  being  detained  once  is
      undermined by the fact that  although  her  brother  Landry  had  been
      detained several times there was no evidence that he had  stopped  his
      political activities.
   f) The Appellant claimed treatment by the  authorities  was  inconsistent
      with how her brother was treated.
   g) The Appellant demonstrated a lack of knowledge about senior members of
      the UDPS, the party structure and the events after the 2011 elections.
   h)  The Appellants claim that she was accused of being a member of Kaluna
      is inconsistent with background material about the group.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Edwards ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision. The Judge found :
   a) The case turned on the credibility of the Appellant.
   b) The Judge did not find the account the Appellant gave for leaving  the
      DRC and claiming asylum was credible and  set  those  reasons  out  at
      paragraph 28(a)-(g)
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that:
   a) The Judge made no clear finding as to  what  the  impact  was  of  his
      finding that the Appellant was 'not the best of witnesses.'
   b) The Judge made a mistake of fact in stating that the Appellant  had  a
      'prominent' role  in  the  UDPS  when  she  claimed  only  to  have  a
      'specific' role.
   c) The country guidance did not require an activist to have  a  prominent
      role to be at risk.
   d) The Judge did not give the Appellant the opportunity  to  address  his
      concerns about how she came into possession of the summons and  arrest
      warrant.
   e) In paragraph 28(e) the Judge erred in substituting his  own  reasoning
      for that of the Appellants husband.
   f) The Judge failed to make  any  findings  in  relation  to  the  expert
      report.
   g) The Judge did not engage with the Appellant's claim  to  be  estranged
      from her husband and how that impacted on her account.

8.   On  20  March  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  gave
   permission to appeal.

9. There was a Rule 24 response from the Respondent in which it was argued:

   a) The Judge found that  the  case  hinged  on  the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant and the Judge gave a plethora of reasons as to  why  he  did
      not find that the Appellant was a credible witness as to why she  left
      the DRC.

   b) The experts report could only have made a material difference  of  the
      Judge found that the Appellant was credible. Moreover the  expert  had
      not interviewed the Appellant nor was there evidence of visits to  the
      DRC on which the expertise was based.

10.  At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Tettey  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) In relation to the assertion that the Judge had made no clear finding
      as  to  what  conclusion  he  drew  from  his  observation  that  the
      'Appellant was 'not the best of witnesses' he conceded  that  if  the
      Judge had not in fact made an adverse finding but  had  resolved  the
      matter in the Appellants favour it was not an error of law.

   b) A more substantial concern was that the Judge had  misunderstood  the
      basis of the  Appellants  claim.  She  had  never  claimed  to  be  a
      prominent member of the UDPS just to have a specific role within  it.
      This error was linked to his  misunderstanding  of  the  most  recent
      caselaw which did not require  prominent  membership  just  that  the
      Appellant had engaged with and had historical support  for  the  UDPS
      and had thereby come to the attention of the authorities.

   c) The Judge had failed to make clear findings about  the  documentation
      that supported her claim. One of his concerns appeared to be how  the
      Appellant had come into possession of the summons and arrest  warrant
      but if this was a concern the Appellant should have  been  given  the
      opportunity to address this concern.

   d) In relation to the findings at paragraph 28 (e) about the  Appellants
      husband these were not open to him as he had not heard evidence  from
      the Appellants husband and had substituted his own reasoning for that
      of her husband and failed to take into account that the Appellant and
      her husband were estranged.

   e) The Judge had failed to engage with the expert's report or  make  any
      findings in relation to it. The expert addressed  the  likelihood  of
      the type of intervention against ordinary UDPS members  described  by
      the Appellant. This was a significant part of her case.

11. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison submitted that :

   a) He relied on the Rule 24 response.

   b) In relation to the experts report he was not obliged to make  findings
      given the damning nature of his credibility findings.

   c) In relation to whether the Appellant was a  prominent  member  of  the
      UDPS she claimed to have a role mobilising women so must  have  had  a
      profile.

12. In reply Mr Tettey on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) If the issue was one of the credibility the Judge was required to take
      into account the experts report as it addressed the likelihood of  the
      type of  treatment  described  by  the  Appellant  and  therefore  was
      releavnt.

Caselaw
13. In AB and DM (DRC) CG 2005 UKIAT 00118 (confirmed by the Tribunal in  MK
   (DRC) CG 2006 UKAIT 0001) the Tribunal said that the position as at  July
   2005 was that there was a real risk at present for  UDPS  activists.   In
   the eyes of the authorities in Kinshasa UDPS supporters  are  assimilated
   with supporters of the RDC/Goma movement because of the alliance  reached
   in 2003 even if later officially ended. In MM (UDPS  members  -  Risk  on
   return) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2007] UKAIT 00023  the  Tribunal
   said that, despite indications from recent political events  in  the  DRC
   that the UDPS is perceived as less  of  a  threat  than  previously,  the
   guidance given in AB and confirmed in MK remains correct. In essence that
   advice was that there is a real risk at present for UDPS  activists.   In
   the eyes of the authorities in Kinshasha UDPS supporters are  assimilated
   with supporters of the RDC/Goma movement because of the alliance  reached
   in 2003 even if later officially ended.  However, a low level UDPS member
   with no opposition profile who would be of no interest to the authorities
   was not considered at risk on return by the Tribunal in BK (Failed asylum
   seekers) DRC CG (2007) UKAIT 00098 upheld  on  appeal  by  the  Court  of
   Appeal in BK (DRC) v SSHD 2008 EWCA Civ 1322)

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. The Appellants case in her claim for asylum was that  her  and  her  two
   brothers  have  been  targeted  by  the  authorities  because  of   their
   activities in support of the UDPS in the DRC. She claimed  to  have  been
   detained for two days in March 2013 and then  summonsed  on  two  further
   occasions by the authorities to renounce  her  political  activities  and
   warned of the consequences to her family if she did not. In 2014 her  two
   brothers allegedly disappeared and she had been summoned to appear before
   the police. The Respondent refused her claim on the basis that it was not
   accepted that she had given a credible account of  her  involvement  with
   the UDPS and therefore she would not be of interest to the authorities on
   her return.

16. The first challenge raised in the grounds is  that  the  Judge  made  no
   clear finding in paragraph 27 as to what  conclusion  he  drew  from  his
   observation that the Appellant was 'not the  best  of  witnesses.'  I  am
   satisfied that the Judge was making an  observation  about  the  way  the
   Appellant gave evidence in recording what happened in the  hearing,  that
   she was prone to giving long and rambling answers, and  that  he  had  to
   warn her about this and of the possible consequences. He went on  to  say
   however that 'the warning was heeded.' So I am satisfied that having made
   this observation that the Judge drew no adverse conclusions  from  it  as
   his advice was followed. There was no error of law.

17. It is suggested that the Judge made an error of law in  concluding  that
   the Appellant had a  'prominent'  role  within  the  UDPS  and  therefore
   misunderstood the basis of her claim. I am satisfied that the Judge  made
   clear in paragraph 18 and 28(a) that he understood her case  to  be  that
   her role was to mobilise women in her area of the DRC. She was  therefore
   not simply a party member but had a defined and distinctive  role  within
   the party. Her case was, as set out in the Judge's  record  of  her  oral
   evidence at paragraph  18,  that  her  husband  did  not  know  of  these
   activities and would have disapproved had he done  so.   He  sets  out  a
   number of credibility issues one of which  is  at  paragraph  28(b)  that
   given her own evidence of her distinct and defined role within her  local
   area which he categorises as 'prominent' it was  not  credible  that  her
   husband would not have known about it. I am satisfied  that  this  was  a
   conclusion that was open to him which must be read in the context of  the
   evidence as a whole rather than focusing on the word 'prominent'. I  also
   note that had I found an error of law I would have  been  asked  to  take
   into account a letter dated 12 February 2016 from the UDPS in  Oldham  in
   which the it is stated that the Appellant 'has taken a prominent role  in
   our party in Kinshasa.'

18. The Judge rejected the summons and warrant the  Appellants  produced  in
   support of her claim. His assessment of these  documents  is  challenged.
   While I accept that the Judge expressed concerns about how the  Appellant
   came into possession of these documents this was only one of a number  of
   reasons why he attached little weight to them: he noted that the  summons
   required her to report to a police officer who was un named at an address
   that was unspecified; that she was given only  two  days  to  answer  the
   summons yet there was no evidence about how or on  whom  service  of  the
   summons was effected; he also took into account his  overall  credibility
   findings . I am satisfied that given that there were other reasons  given
   for placing little weight on the documents the fact that  in  respect  of
   one of his concerns, how she came into possession of them, the  Appellant
   was not given an opportunity to comment it would have  made  no  material
   difference to his overall conclusions.

19. It was also suggested that the Judge failed to engage with the  expert's
   report. The Judge I am satisfied read the report  because  he  summarised
   its contents at paragraph 22 summarising his opinion that  as  'a  failed
   asylum seeker to DRC,  who  has  links  to  a  prominent  member  of  the
   political opposition, will put the appellant at risk'. Nowhere  does  the
   Judge suggest that if he accepted the Appellants  account  as  true  this
   would not put her at risk on return. He was referred  to  and  noted  the
   relevant caselaw at paragraph 17 that underpins the expert's  conclusion.
   However given that the Judge made clear findings as to  why  he  did  not
   accept that the Appellant had given a credible account of what caused her
   to flee from the DRC I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled to  place
   no weight on the experts report in so far as it relates to the Appellants
   risk.

20. The Judge summarised this case as resting  on  the  credibility  of  the
   Appellant and set out at paragraphs 28 (a)-(g) why he did not find her to
   be a credible witness and therefore why he rejected  he  account  of  her
   involvement with the UDPS and why she feared that  she  was  at  risk  on
   return  to  the  DRC.  I  was  therefore  satisfied  that   the   Judge's
   determination when read as a whole set out findings that were sustainable
   and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                                              Date 25
2 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell















