
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07072/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th November, 2016                 |On 07th December, 2016               |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                    N C O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Faryl, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  15th  December,  1986.
    She entered the United Kingdom on 26th June, 2007 and was  given  leave
    to enter until 31st October, 2010.  On 20th October that year she  made
    application to renew her visa and that was refused  on  13th  November,
    2010.  On 15th November, 2011 she applied for an EEA residence card and
    that  application  was  refused  on  22nd  December,  2011.   A  second
    application was made on 19th January, 2012 and  refused  on  4th  July,
    2012 and a third application made on 18th October, 2012 and refused  on
    11th June, 2013.  On 14th October, 2014 the appellant made a claim  for
    asylum.  She appeals against the decision of the respondent,  taken  on
    2nd April, 2015, to refuse to grant her claim and to seek to remove her
    by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2 of the 1971
    Immigration Act.

2.   While in the United Kingdom the appellant met and  married  a  man,  Mr
    Fortune Jean Joel Losse, described as being a Nigerian Muslim and  also
    a French national.  They married on 4th April, 2011 by proxy,  on  27th
    May, 2012, the appellant's daughter Audrey Chimdinma Okpala  Losse  was
    born.  The appellant fears that on return to  Nigeria  inter  alia  her
    daughter will be subjected to female genital mutilation (FGM).

3.   The appellant appealed the decision of the Secretary of State  and  her
    appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 18th  January,  2016  by
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  A  K  Simpson.   The  judge  found  herself
    satisfied on the basis of an expert report that there is  a  real  risk
    that the appellant's daughter would be subjected to FGM by  members  of
    her extended maternal family in the event that she were  to  return  to
    Nigeria.   That  is  a  finding  at  paragraph  28   of   the   judge's
    determination.

4.   Unfortunately, the judge then went on to conflate her consideration  of
    the appellant's Article 8 human rights appeal with the decision in  the
    case of Zambrano and appears to have proceeded on the  basis  that  she
    believed  that  the  appellant's  daughter  was  entitled   to   French
    nationality and on that basis could not be removed  from  the  European
    Union.  She therefore allowed the appellant's appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The respondent was dissatisfied with that decision and sought
    permission to appeal.  In  granting  leave  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Holmes said this:

         "There appears to be little  merit  in  the  first  ground,  which
         appears to be no more than a disagreement with the judge's  finding
         that the appellant had been subjected to FGM.  However the decision
         to dismiss the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds, but to allow
         it on Article 8 grounds is arguably confused.   Previous  decisions
         of the Tribunal  have  found  that  the  appellant's  daughter  was
         entitled to French citizenship (although no attempt appears yet  to
         have been made to formalise that), and, that the appellant might be
         entitled to a derivative right of residence as her daughter's  sole
         carer.  No EEA Regulation application however has  yet  been  made.
         Removal of the appellant and her daughter together would not affect
         their "family life" together, and thus would not engage Article  8.
         If there was some other aspect of the evidence that  gave  rise  to
         "private life" of the  requisite  nature  and  strength  to  engage
         Article 8 then arguably it was not identified.  If the judge's real
         conclusion was that the appellant's daughter was at  risk  of  harm
         from members of the general population, either  of  FGM  or  as  an
         autistic child who may be perceived to be a witch, then that called
         for an assessment of whether the appellant herself was at  risk  of
         serious harm and a breach of her Article 3  rights  in  seeking  to
         protect her child. "

    Mr McVeety suggested that the judge had  erred  by  assuming  that  the
    appellant's child is entitled to French nationality and by allowing the
    appeal under Article 8, without dealing with the questions of  internal
    relocation and sufficiency of  protection.   Counsel  agreed  that  the
    judge had conflated Article 8 and the question of Zambrano.

5.   I have concluded that there are,  as  agreed  by  the  representatives,
    errors of law in the determination such that it cannot stand.  For  the
    avoidance of doubt however I preserve the finding at  paragraph  28  of
    the determination that there  is  a  real  risk  that  the  appellant's
    daughter would be subjected to FGM by members of her maternal family in
    the event that she were to be sent to Nigeria, but otherwise set  aside
    the  decision.   The  question  of  internal  flight  alternative   and
    sufficiency of protection do however need to be considered.  As far  as
    I am aware the appellant has not sought and obtained confirmation  from
    the French authorities that her daughter is a French national and until
    such time as that  happens,  the  sole  issues  for  the  Tribunal  are
    alternative relocation in Nigeria to a safe  area  and  sufficiency  of
    protection.   I  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  no
    interpreter is allowed, two hours should be allowed for the hearing  of
    the appeal.

Richard Chalkley
Richard Chalkley, a Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

