
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07348/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2016                              |On 9 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     ms
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding of Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on [ ]  1976.   She  appeals
    the decision of the respondent  dated  21  April  2015  to  refuse  her
    protection claim.  The hearing came before a  First-tier  Judge  on  14
    December 2015 when the appellant was represented by Mr Harding, as  she
    was before me.

2.   The appellant arrived in this country on 17 October 2014.  She made  an
    application for asylum on 30 October 2014 with her  four  daughters  as
    her dependants.  This application was refused by the Secretary of State
    on 21 April 2015.

3.   At the hearing the judge was provided with a  bundle  of  documents  to
    which he refers in paragraph 7 of his decision.  The appeal came before
    the judge on 7 October 2015 but was adjourned part heard to enable  the
    appellant's siblings to give oral evidence in support  of  her  appeal.
    On 14 December 2015, at the adjourned hearing, the judge  was  provided
    with witness statements from the appellant's  brother  and  sister  who
    were both British citizens.  A further bundle  was  prepared  for  that
    hearing.

4.   The  judge  records  that  Mr  Harding  summarised  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's protection claim as  being  a  fear  that  upon  return  to
    Mogadishu she would be returning as a minority clan  member  without  a
    network of family or clan  support  which  would  expose  her  and  her
    children to forced marriage and FGM and a  general  fear  of  reprisals
    from Al Shabaab pursuant to the threats previously made by  Al  Shabaab
    against the appellant.  The appellant has consistently claimed to be  a
    member of the minority Reer Hamar, sub-clan Faqi, and the  judge  found
    that this was not in issue before him and he accepted accordingly  that
    the appellant was a member of this minority clan.  The judge  confirmed
    that he had had regard to all the documentary evidence before him.   He
    heard oral evidence from the appellant and her siblings.

5.   For reasons set out at length in the decision the judge  did  not  find
    the  appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness.   The  judge's   negative
    credibility assessment is not the subject  of  challenge.   The  points
    accepted by the judge were recorded by the author  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal (not settled by Mr Harding) namely 1)  the
    appellant is a Somali national, 2) the appellant is from Mogadishu,  3)
    she is a member of the Reer Faqi  minority  clan  and  it  was  not  in
    dispute that the appellant was a woman with four daughters aged 10, 14,
    15 and 17.

6.   The judge did not accept the appellant's  account  regarding  the  past
    events she claimed triggered her departure from Somalia and  stated  in
    paragraph 27 of his decision as follows.

         "Given the findings I have made in this decision, I have taken  the
         same into account in light of the guidance of the Upper Tribunal in
         MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT  00442
         (IAC).  It was concluded in MOJ that a person, like the  appellant,
         who is an ordinary civilian  or  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a
         period of absence will face no real risk of persecution or risk  of
         harm such as to require protection.  In particular,  the  appellant
         would not be at real risk simply on account of having  lived  in  a
         European location for  a  period  of  time  of  being  viewed  with
         suspicion either by  the  authorities  as  a  possible  Al  Shabaab
         supporter or being viewed with suspicion by Al Shabaab.  Indeed,  I
         take note of the durable change noted by the Upper Tribunal in  MOJ
         of the Al Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu having  been  completed
         and there is no real prospect of any re-established presence within
         the city.  Notwithstanding that I have not accepted the appellant's
         account of past events,  this  background  position  would  further
         undermine any assertion that a fear of Al Shabaab within  Mogadishu
         is well-founded.  Moreover, it was concluded in MOJ that  there  is
         no real risk of forced  recruitment  to  Al  Shabaab  for  civilian
         citizens of Mogadishu, including  for  recent  returnees  from  the
         West, which again has direct relevance  and  undermines  any  claim
         that the appellant would  have  any  well-founded  fear  of  forced
         recruitment to Al Shabaab either for herself or her  children  upon
         return to Mogadishu.  Finally, I take into account, in  particular,
         that the appellant is a person who would be returning to  Mogadishu
         with  a  network  of  familial  support  and  financial  assistance
         available, both within Mogadishu and from outside Somalia,  and  is
         not therefore a person who  would  be  without  such  support  upon
         return.  I believe that upon  return  to  Mogadishu  the  appellant
         would have available to her, as she did prior to her departure from
         Mogadishu,  an  effective  network  of  close  familial,  clan  and
         financial support from her family and clan members within Mogadishu
         and from her immediate and numerous family members  living  abroad.
         Therefore, in line with the guidance in MOJ I find that it would be
         reasonable to expect the appellant to return to Mogadishu with  her
         children and that upon return she and her children would not be  at
         real risk or have any well-founded fear of persecution."

    The judge went on to dismiss the  appellant's  humanitarian  protection
    appeal in relation to the appellant's Article 8 claim.  The judge noted
    that the appellant would be returned to Somalia with her children as  a
    family unit and concluded his decision as follows:


         "34. The appellant's children are currently aged 17, 15, 14 and 10.
              I have given consideration to  the  best  interest  of  these
             children as a primary consideration.  I take into account that
             they have at all times been  living  with  their  mother  (the
             appellant) both previously in Somalia and since their  arrival
             in the United Kingdom just over a year ago.   Prior  to  their
             arrival in the United Kingdom they were  residing  in  Somalia
             all of their lives, apart from the four days or so they  spent
             in Kenya en route to the United Kingdom.  The children are all
             Somalian citizens and would be returning  to  the  country  of
             their citizenship and birth and to a culture and society  with
             which they are  totally  familiar  and  accompanied  by  their
             mother.  They and their mother would also  have  available  to
             them the network of familial, clan and  financial  support  to
             which I have already referred.  In all  the  circumstances,  I
             consider it is in the best interests of these children  to  be
             with their mother and that there is no reason why this  family
             unit should not be expected to return to Somalia.
         35.  I have taken into account that every state has  the  right  to
             control the entry of non-nationals into its territory.   There
             is no obligation on the respondent to respect  the  choice  of
             residence of the appellant.  It has long been recognised  that
             Article 8 is not be regarded as a  vehicle  for  circumventing
             the Immigration Rules and immigration  control.   I  recognise
             that I  need  to  balance  the  individual  interests  of  the
             appellant and her children  against  the  public  interest  in
             maintaining effective immigration control.   I  have  had  due
             regard to the public interest considerations to be taken  into
             account  under  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.   In   this
             particular appeal, I take into account that I have found  that
             the appellant has  manufactured  and  fabricated  a  claim  to
             asylum and I find that this gives added weight to  the  public
             interest in this appeal in maintaining  effective  immigration
             control.  It is also provided under Section 117B  that  little
             weight should be given to any private life  established  by  a
             person at a time when  that  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious or whose present is unlawful.


         36.  I see no reason why the appellant should not  be  expected  to
             return with her children to Somalia.  I believe that she would
             be able to return to a network of familial  and  clan  support
             there, as well  as  have  available  a  network  of  financial
             support from relatives both inside and outside  Somalia.   She
             would be able to  maintain  contact  with  any  relatives  and
             acquaintances in  the  United  Kingdom  or  elsewhere  through
             modern methods of communication, as indeed she  did  prior  to
             her departure from Somalia.  She would also be able  to  renew
             her former acquaintances in  Somalia.   The  appellant  is  an
             adult aged 39 and in good health.  It  was  confirmed  at  her
             substantive  interview  that  her  children  have  no  medical
             conditions.  The appellant and her children would be returning
             to their country of birth and citizenship, where they  resided
             all of their  lives  until  leaving  Somalia  for  the  United
             Kingdom only just over a year ago.  In all the  circumstances,
             I can find nothing compelling in the appellant's circumstances
             to warrant leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules and I
             am    satisfied   that   the   respondent's    decision    was
             proportionate."

7.   Mr Harding confirmed that the negative credibility assessment  was  not
    the subject of challenge.  However the judge had failed to  make  clear
    findings.  Although she had clearly rejected the claim that the husband
    and children had been abducted she had not made it clear  whether  they
    had disappeared or were in the family home.  He had not made clear  the
    points that he had accepted.  He submitted that  paragraph  25  of  the
    determination could have been expected to make the matters clear.  More
    was required in a case where a female accompanied by four daughters was
    to be returned.  All the appellants in the country guidance  case  were
    male.

8.   Mr Avery referred to  the  substantial  adverse  credibility  findings.
    The judge had clearly found that the account given about the kidnapping
    was untrue and had made reference to her having many relatives  and  an
    extensive  network  of  support  in  paragraphs  22  to   24   of   the
    determination.  She had made attempts to conceal this support.

9.   In response Mr Harding submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  make
    clear findings on an important matter and the determination  should  be
    set aside for a fresh hearing.

10.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered the points advanced.  I remind myself that  I  can
    only interfere with the decision if it was materially flawed in law.

11.  As the negative credibility assessment is not the subject of  challenge
    I will not set out  at  length  the  extensive  critique  of  what  the
    appellant had claimed and the judge's devastating analysis of  it.   Mr
    Avery referred to paragraphs 22 to 24 of the decision.  The judge noted
    in paragraph 22 that at interview the appellant had confirmed that  she
    had  had  no  problems  living  with  relatives  in  Hamr  Jajab.   The
    determination continues

         "Bearing in mind that this is in Mogadishu this would indicate that
         she had no problems remaining in Mogadishu and had no fear in doing
         so.  Moreover, any claim that she was in hiding with her  relatives
         or had a fear for her safety is, in my view,  seriously  undermined
         by the fact that she has given an account of returning to the  area
         of her former residence in Karan on no  less  than  six  occasions,
         allegedly to  make  enquiries  regarding  the  whereabouts  of  her
         husband and children. ..."


    I will not reproduce  the  rest  of  this  paragraph  where  the  judge
    rejected the explanation given by the appellant of why she was able  to
    return to her home area without being  recognised  but  it  is  perhaps
    relevant to note the last sentence of  the  paragraph  which  reads  as
    follows.


         "The appellant's account simply does not run  true  and  I  do  not
         accept that she would have returned to her home  area  on  no  less
         than six occasions if she really had any fear of doing so or  there
         was any truth in the account she has given of past  events  at  the
         core of her claim to asylum."

12.  In paragraph 23 the judge notes that  the  appellant  confirmed  during
    cross-examination that she had an aunt, uncle and cousin in  Karan  and
    many cousins in Hamar Weyne in Mogadishu, as well  as  in  Hamr  Jajab.
    She also confirmed at the interview that prior to her husband's alleged
    abduction in June 2014 "he had provided her with full financial support
    and that following his alleged abduction she  had  been  provided  with
    financial support by  her  relatives  in  Mogadishu."   She  stated  at
    interview that if she  had  any  problems  in  Somalia  her  clan  were
    available for assistance.

13.  The judge notes  in  paragraph  24  the  stark  contrast  to  what  the
    appellant had previously said and her claim in  her  witness  statement
    dated 9 September 2015 that she had no family or  clan  affiliation  in
    Mogadishu, no access to financial assistance  from  anywhere  else,  no
    relatives in the United Kingdom or Switzerland who  could  provide  her
    with financial support and that when she was previously in Somalia  she
    was reduced to begging for assistance.  The judge found the appellant's
    attempt to conceal the existence of any  such  support  was  a  further
    demonstration of her propensity to fabricate matters as  she  had  gone
    along and to change her account to embellish  her  chances  on  appeal.
    The judge found the appellant to be devoid of any credibility.

14.  It is somewhat ambitious in my respectful view to criticise  the  judge
    for a lack of clear findings  in  all  the  circumstances.   The  judge
    rejected the appellant's claim for an abundance of reasons  in  a  very
    carefully reasoned decision.  It is said that  the  judge  should  have
    found whether or not the appellant's husband was still  in  the  family
    home.  The appellant put forward an  account  which  the  judge  wholly
    rejected.  The judge found that the appellant had made  six  visits  to
    her home area to make enquiries about  her  husband  and  children  and
    found that she would not have returned to the home  area  had  she  any
    fear of doing so.  The appellant had put forward a false case which the
    judge rejected and I am not satisfied in the circumstances of this case
    that it was necessary for him to do any more.  The judge stated that he
    believed

         "That upon return to Mogadishu the appellant would  have  available
         to her, as she did  prior  to  her  departure  from  Mogadishu,  an
         effective network of close familial,  clan  and  financial  support
         from her family and clan members  within  Mogadishu  and  from  her
         immediate and numerous family members living abroad."

15.  He correctly applied the guidance in MOJ and found  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant  to  return  to  Mogadishu  in  such
    circumstances.

16.  Although it was not developed before  me  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Eshun
    granted permission on paragraph 4 of  the  grounds  dated  29  February
    2016.  It was said that the country guidance case only concerned  adult
    male Somali claimants and "thus the consequent need for a  particularly
    careful and nuanced analysis as to the risk facing women  and  children
    on return to Mogadishu which is of course the position in  the  instant
    case."  Reference was also made to material postdating MOJ to which  it
    was submitted had not been adequately addressed.

17.  As I say these points were not developed by Mr Harding before  me.   In
    my view the judge was correct to apply the country guidance and he  was
    also presented with further material which he records in paragraph 7 of
    the decision which he confirms in paragraph 11 that  he  had  carefully
    considered.  I find no error of law in  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    material before him and he correctly applied MOJ in  the  circumstances
    of this case.  I am not persuaded that the grounds or  arguments  raise
    any material error of law in the decision of the judge.

Notice of Decision

Appeal  dismissed  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.

Anonymity Decision

The First-tier Judge made an  anonymity  order  and  it  is  appropriate  to
continue that order in the light of the fact that children are involved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable and I make no fee award.




Signed                                  Date 3 May 2016


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

