
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  AA/07570/2013
     IA/14353/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2016                          |On 7 October 2016             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Yasinthan [G]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Rothwell, Counsel instructed by A & P
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  a  decision  of
    Judge Martins whereby he  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  respondent  in
    relation to two adverse  decisions  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  his
    decision being promulgated on 11 June last year.  The  two  matters  in
    issue were first a claim for asylum, the respondent being a Tamil  from
    Sri Lanka, and the second was an application that he had made  pursuant
    to paragraph 8 of the EEA Regulations of 2006  that  he  fulfilled  the
    conditions in that paragraph which meant that he was entitled to remain
    because he was dependent upon his uncle,  an  EEA  national,  not  only
    financially but also because of his health and he needed  the  personal
    care of his uncle.

2.   The decision of Judge Martins is, we are  bound  to  say,  inordinately
    long.  What he has done is to recite in great detail first the  reasons
    why the Secretary of State decided as she did,  secondly  the  evidence
    that was given before him and thirdly  the  submissions  made  both  on
    behalf of the respondent, appellant of course as he was before him, and
    the Secretary of  State.   His  conclusions  were  set  out  in  eleven
    paragraphs at the end of his determination at paragraphs 100 to 111.

3.   It adds to the burden of those who have  to  consider  these  cases  if
    such lengthy  decisions  are  made.   It  is  important  that  sensible
    summaries be made.  We appreciate  that  this  may  involve  a  greater
    degree of time in producing the necessary summary and making clear what
    the reasons are.  However, before going to the detail, it is clear that
    the judge essentially accepted  the  submissions  which  were  made  on
    behalf of Mr [G] as opposed to those made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State, and thus it is possible when one adds  together  the  record  of
    those submissions with the reasons that he gives, which are undoubtedly
    relatively sparse, to see, in our judgment, sufficiently the basis upon
    which he concluded as he did.  Having said that, however,  it,  in  our
    judgment, we regret to have to say does not excuse the way in which his
    judgment has been put together.

4.   We come now to the detail.  As we say, the respondent is a  Tamil  from
    Sri Lanka.  He came to this country initially as a student, having been
    issued with a student visa in February 2010.  He did not  claim  asylum
    until June of 2013 by which time he was an overstayer, his student visa
    having expired in 2012.  That of course was a factor relied on  by  the
    Secretary of State to show that the asylum claim was not a proper one.

5.   His case was that he had joined the  LTTE  in  2004  and  that  he  was
    involved in the intelligence and political group.  He  had  obtained  a
    passport in his proper name and he said that he had used this  in  2006
    accompanying an LTTE lieutenant  to  Singapore  for  a  conference  and
    attended meetings in Malaysia.  He worked in a communication centre and
    he alleged that he was effectively carrying out work for  the  LTTE  in
    sending them coded faxes from the office which were of use to them.  He
    left that in 2009 and he obtained the visa but on 23  February,  as  he
    was travelling in a bus, the bus was stopped and he with two others was
    arrested, taken to a detention centre and was  there  interrogated  and
    tortured.  Importantly, he said that his back had been burnt with a hot
    iron and also that a drunken soldier had smashed the butt  of  a  rifle
    into his face, knocking out some teeth.

6.   He asserted that he had escaped from a dispensary in a hospital and  he
    had managed to obtain via an agent an  escape  from  Sri  Lanka,  which
    meant, as  we  have  indicated,  that  in  accordance  with  his  entry
    clearance he could enter this country, which he did in early 2010.  The
    dates are not precisely given in the decision.

7.   In addition he said  that  in  this  country,  at  his  uncle's  behest
    because his uncle took the  view  that  this  would  help  him  in  his
    rehabilitation, he joined the  TGTE,  which  is  a  Tamil  organisation
    outside Sri Lanka and which has been  proscribed  there  and  there  is
    certainly some indication that active members of the TGTE who are known
    to be such may on return to Sri Lanka  suffer  detention  and,  as  the
    authorities make clear, anyone who is detained will be liable to be ill-
    treated to such an extent as breaches both the Human Rights  Convention
    and also insofar as the Refugee Convention is concerned.

8.   Now it is right to say that there were considerable matters  raised  by
    the Secretary of State which, it was said, meant that the account given
    by the respondent really was not a credible account  and  it  is  clear
    that there was considerable force in many of those  points  which  were
    raised but there was medical evidence before  Judge  Martins  which  he
    regarded as being of considerable importance and  we  are  not  at  all
    surprised when one considers what that evidence was.  He refers  to  it
    in paragraph 103 and he states that the doctor noted and  detailed  the
    burns and was of the opinion that they were caused by  long  hot  metal
    instruments.  The nature of the scars suggested that the respondent had
    been  held  down  and  had  flinched  while  the  injuries  were  being
    inflicted.   He  discounted  the  possibility  of  self-infliction  and
    examined whether they could be self-inflicted by proxy but viewed  this
    as a remote possibility.  There was also the injury to his teeth.  That
    could have been caused in other ways. There was also the  deterioration
    in his mental health, which was  consistent  with  a  degree  of  post-
    traumatic stress disorder.

9.   In the grounds of appeal the Secretary of State has  sought  to  attack
    reliance on the medical evidence on the basis that  it  was  not  clear
    that the medical evidence established that the  respondent's  condition
    was as claimed.  There was an  attack  on  whether  the  doctor  was  a
    consultant psychiatrist and whether his assessment of the mental  state
    of the respondent was reliable and also that the report of  the  doctor
    who dealt with the scarring was not entirely clear.

10.  Mr Melvin has very properly indicated that he does not seek to  suggest
    that the medical qualifications, as it were, were not properly regarded
    by Judge Martins.  What he submits is that the medical condition is not
    such as indicates that the rest of the account given by the  respondent
    was reliable and the fact that he may have been detained and  assaulted
    in the way that he describes does not of itself now mean that he is  or
    will be at risk if he is returned to  Sri  Lanka  and  therefore  Judge
    Martins was wrong to take the view that the medical evidence tipped the
    balance in the respondent's favour in terms of him having been involved
    with the LTTE. Certainly detained  and  tortured  but  not  necessarily
    involved in the LTTE because that would go no further than that he  was
    suspected of involvement with the LTTE.

11.  However, it is  there  that  the  TGTE  association  becomes  important
    because if he was detained, and  in  our  judgment  Judge  Martins  was
    entitled to decide on the medical evidence that he was, then that  must
    have been because of suspicion of involvement with  the  LTTE  and  the
    fact, if it be a fact, that he escaped is of some importance  as  well.
    We say if it be a fact because that is something which the Secretary of
    State has regarded as implausible, that is to say  the  description  of
    how he escaped, but it is not impossible and equally, as must be known,
    there are ways and  means,  particularly  bribery,  which  can  achieve
    leaving the country with the assistance of an agent.  Accordingly it is
    not at all impossible.  However, he was, according  to  his  uncle,  an
    active member of the TGTE, who had attended demonstrations and  equally
    Judge Martins was entitled to decide that that would have drawn him  to
    the attention of the authorities and put him at  risk  were  he  to  be
    returned.

12.  The judge depended largely upon  the  uncle's  evidence  and  that  was
    because the appellant's mental health was such that his ability to give
    evidence in a satisfactory manner was undoubtedly affected  but  it  is
    important to note what the judge says about the uncle's  evidence,  the
    uncle having been cross-examined.  We will turn to the  aspect  of  the
    uncle's evidence that deals with paragraph 8 of the 2006 Regulations in
    due course but so far as the TGTE is concerned the uncle's evidence was
    that the respondent supported the TGTE, attended demonstrations, one in
    particular in  2014  and  another  at  Wembley  and  indeed  the  uncle
    encouraged  that  activity  because   it   assisted   the   respondent.
    Accordingly there was, in our judgment, sufficient evidence upon  which
    Judge Martins was entitled to decide that he would be at risk  were  he
    to be returned to Sri Lanka.  While it is true  that  the  reasons  are
    relatively sparse, by setting out, as we say, the submissions  made  on
    his behalf by his representative it is clear that  the  judge  accepted
    essentially  those  submissions  and  thus   they   properly   can   be
    incorporated into the reasons that he gave for his decision.

13.  We turn then to paragraph 8.  That provides so far as material:

         "8.  (1) In these Regulations  'extended  family  member'  means  a
                person who is not a family member of an EEA  national  under
                Regulation  7(1)(a),  (b)  or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  the
                conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).


            (2)   A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse  or  his
                civil partner and -


                (a)    the person is residing in a country  other  than  the
                   United Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national  or
                   is a member of his household;


                (b)    the person satisfied the condition in  paragraph  (a)
                   and is  accompanying  the  EEA  national  to  the  United
                   Kingdom or wishes to join him there; or
                (c)    the person satisfied the condition in paragraph  (a),
                   has joined the EEA national in  the  United  Kingdom  and
                   continues to be dependent upon him or to be a  member  of
                   his household.


            (3)   A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                person is a relative of an EEA national or his spouse or his
                civil partner  and,  on  serious  health  grounds,  strictly
                requires the personal care of the EEA national his spouse or
                his civil partner."


14.  Dealing first with 8(2), 8(2)(a) and (c) are material and 8(2)  is  met
    in four separate circumstances, that is to say the individual must have
    been living in the household or dependent upon the EEA national  whilst
    he was not in the United Kingdom and then equally either  be  dependent
    upon or living in the household of the EEA national in this country and
    he must of course also be a relative of the EEA national.

15.  There is no issue so far  as  two  matters  are  concerned.  First  the
    respondent is a relative of his uncle and secondly he is living in  the
    uncle's household in this country and has been since he  came  here  in
    2010.  The issue therefore is whether he was dependent upon  his  uncle
    before he came to this country when he was in Sri  Lanka.   So  far  as
    that is concerned the uncle's evidence, which  was  accepted  by  Judge
    Martins (indeed he found that the uncle was a very good witness  and  a
    reliable witness) was that  he  had  been  providing  support  for  the
    respondent.

16.  He said that he had been sending money to the respondent's  father  for
    some  fifteen  to  twenty  years  because  they  had  no  income.   The
    respondent's father had retired and was involved in  nothing  else  and
    therefore was solely dependent upon the uncle's income and  indeed  the
    whole family were dependent upon that  income  and  that  included  the
    respondent.  He was asked about how he had sent money and  he  said  he
    had sent it via Western Union but he had  not  produced  the  documents
    because he did not know that they were needed but he could produce them
    if that was required.  So the judge had evidence from the uncle that he
    effectively had been funding the respondent and indeed his father while
    the respondent was in Sri Lanka.

17.  Accordingly, on that evidence the judge had decided that 8(2) was  met.
     We should add that there were produced bank statements,  passport  and
    other documents but as a matter of fact there were no documents to show
    that he had been sending money to Sri Lanka and  the  uncle's  evidence
    was that this was because he had not been asked for them or that he had
    been asked for what was  his  income,  accommodation  and  evidence  of
    relationship.

18.  Our attention has been drawn to a decision of the  Tribunal  consisting
    of Mr Justice Blake and Senior Immigration Judge  Storey  in  Moneke  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]  UKUT  00341  (IAC),
    which considered paragraph 8(2).  In that the Tribunal said this:

         "We of course accept (and as the ECIs reflect) that dependency does
         not have to be 'necessary' in the sense of the  Immigration  Rules,
         that is to say an able-bodied person who chooses to  rely  for  his
         essential needs on material support of the sponsor may be  entitled
         to do so even if he could meet those needs from his or her economic
         activity: see SM (India).  Nevertheless where, as in  these  cases,
         able-bodied people of  mature  years  claim  to  have  always  been
         dependent  upon  remittances  from  a  sponsor,  that  may   invite
         particular close scrutiny as to why this should be  the  case.   We
         note further  that  Article  10(2)(e)  of  the  Citizens  Directive
         contemplates documentary evidence.  Whether dependency can ever  be
         proved by oral testimony alone is not something  that  we  have  to
         decide in this case, but Article 10(2)(e)  does  suggest  that  the
         responsibility is on the applicant  to  satisfy  the  Secretary  of
         State by cogent evidence that is in  part  documented  and  can  be
         tested as to whether the level of material  support,  its  duration
         and its impact  upon  the  applicant  combined  together  meet  the
         material definition of dependency."


19.  Article 10(2)(e) states that the document required by Member States  to
    establish admission is a document issued by the relevant  authority  in
    the  country  of  origin  or  country  from  which  they  are  arriving
    certifying that they are dependents or members of the household of  the
    Union citizen.  One can well understand that in  the  case  of  someone
    such as  the  respondent  who  is  fleeing  the  country  it  would  be
    impossible or certainly exceedingly  difficult  to  obtain  a  document
    issued by the relevant authority which  establishes  that  there  is  a
    dependency.

20.  It depends, we suppose, on  what  is  meant  in  the  circumstances  by
    authority but the natural meaning of that is a body or person  who  has
    some authority recognised by the state.  Be that as it may,  that  does
    not seem to us to preclude the possibility that in a given case  cogent
    evidence  which  is  believed  even  though  there  are  no   documents
    specifically to support it can be relied on in an individual  case  and
    that is what has happened here.  The judge heard the uncle,  the  uncle
    was cross-examined, the judge took the view that he  was  a  thoroughly
    impressive witness and accepted his evidence so far as  dependency  was
    concerned, and that was confirmed by the respondent.

21.  In those circumstances, although we recognise that  the  evidence  must
    be cogent and that in many cases, perhaps most cases, there will  be  a
    need for at least some documentary proof of the dependency  we  do  not
    think that the law goes as far  as  to  say  that  there  cannot  be  a
    favourable decision  unless  there  is  some  documentary  evidence  to
    support it.  Accordingly, in our judgment, the judge  was  entitled  to
    find that 8(2) had been met.

22.  So far as 8(3) is concerned the question was whether  he  required  the
    personal care of his uncle on serious health grounds.  Again there  was
    the uncle's evidence  coupled  with  that  of  the  psychiatrist  which
    concluded, as we have already indicated, that he suffered from PTSD and
    also severe depression with an enduring personality change and he was a
    high suicide risk and the report emphasised the importance of the  care
    provided by his uncle in looking after him.  The view was taken by  the
    judge in the light of the medical evidence that his mental  health  was
    such that he did require the care and  support  of  his  uncle  and  he
    derived considerable support and care from his uncle.  The question  is
    whether that was sufficient to  entitle  him  to  decide  that  he  met
    paragraph 8(3).

23.  One has to note that the word "serious" is in sub-paragraph (3) and  it
    is not merely  health  grounds  and  equally  the  word  "strictly"  is
    included, that is to say he strictly required the personal care of  the
    uncle.  We are bound to say that, in  our  judgment,  the  decision  of
    Judge Martins on this point is marginal in the sense that it  seems  to
    us that there is some doubt as to  whether  he  really  does  meet  the
    strict requirements of 8(3) but we do not need to reach a conclusion on
    that because, as we have said, we are satisfied that the decision  that
    he met 8(2) was correct.  So we are not persuaded by  the  argument  of
    the Secretary of State that the judge was not entitled to find  on  the
    evidence that 8(3) was met  but  we  think  that  it  might  have  been
    necessary were we to have to decide that issue to have  gone  into  the
    medical evidence in somewhat  greater  detail  than  we  have  had  the
    opportunity to do but, as we say, in the circumstances that  is  not  a
    vital decision so far as this appeal is concerned.  As it is,  for  the
    reasons we have given this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds and on EEA grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.




[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 25th February 2016


Mr Justice Collins


