
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07962/2013
                                                               AA/07963/3012
                                                               AA/07964/2013
                                                               AA/07965/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|on 23rd May 2014                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    SATJ
                                     AJ
                                     MTK
                                     JJJ
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Fenney of NLS Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Richards - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Page promulgated following  a  hearing  at  Newport  on  21st
        October 2013 in which he dismissed the appeals of this family group
        against the removal  direction  to  Gambia  which  accompanied  the
        refusal of their claims for asylum.


     2. Having considered the evidence the Judge set  out  his  conclusions
        from paragraph 30 of the determination, the key points of which can
        be summarised as follows:


     i.   That FGM is practised in Gambia [30].


     ii.  The determinative issue in the appeal is the  credibility  of  the
   first          appellant.  His  wife,  the  second  appellant,  has  been
   conspicuously           absent in the appeal with there being no  witness
   statement from her           either, notwithstanding the claimed risk  to
   their daughter [30].


     iii. Having considered all the evidence  it  was  found:  "that  I  can
   safely              discount any possibility of the appellant's  evidence
   being true" [32].


     iv.  The appellant is not a credible witness. He did not  claim  asylum
     because he feared return but to regularise his  status  in  the  United
     Kingdom and obtain an immigration status for his family [33].


     v.   The appellants evidence he has a brother and sister-in-law in  the
          United Kingdom who  have  been  granted  refugee  status  was  not
   accepted for the reasons set out in paragraph 34  of  the  determination.
     Evidence of such relatives may  have  been  crucial  but  the  decision
   was not made to  call  them  and  no  witness  statements  were  obtained
   from them [35].


     vi.  There has been no witness  statement  from  the  appellant's  wife
   which          was found conspicuous given the claimed risk of FGM was to
   her            daughter J born in February 2012 [36].


     vii. The evidence regarding the appellant's brother  and  sister-in-law
   and            their refugee status has  been  invented  to  bolster  the
   asylum claim            [37].


     viii.    The Judge was not satisfied that the appellant has  more  than
   12                  sisters in the Gambia as a result of a  contradiction
   in his evidence              [38].


     ix.  The Judge was not satisfied the appellant had come from  a  family
   in             a tribe where his daughter will be at  risk  of  FGM  upon
   return [39].


     x.   The appellant showed a lack of knowledge about the Fula  tribe  in
   his             asylum  interview  yet  there  has  been  a   conspicuous
   improvement in               his knowledge demonstrated  in  his  witness
   statements since the             asylum claim was refused on the  grounds
   that he showed this                   conspicuous lack of  knowledge.  It
   was found the appellant must              have researched the Fula  tribe
   in order to give more  informed                 evidence  in  his  appeal
   [40].


     xi.  The first appellant claimed asylum to obtain lawful working status
              after 12 years in the UK working illegally.  The claim did not
   take           place until long after the birth of his  daughter.  If  he
   had been so             aware of the practice of FGM in the Gambia, as he
   claimed,  he  would             have  immediately  been  aware  that  his
   daughter faced a risk should              they be returned and  he  would
   have claimed asylum earlier [41].


     xii. The Judge was not satisfied the appellant comes from a tribe where
              either his wife or daughter will be at  risk  upon  return  of
   FGM. His            father had been a  company  director  in  the  Gambia
   before he retired            and the likelihood  is  the  appellant  came
   from a family in the upper            echelons of society in the  Gambia.
   He came to the United Kingdom              as  a  student  but  chose  to
   remain and worked illegally [42].


     xiii.    The appellant has put forward an invented story against a true
                  objective background about the  practice  of  FGM  in  the
   Gambia with             a view to obtaining an  immigration  status,  and
   claiming asylum on           this basis [42].


     xiv. The appellant has not discharged the burden of proof upon  him  to
     show that he faces a genuine  risk  of  persecution.   He  has  falsely
     claimed asylum as a means of obtaining an  immigration  status  in  the
     United  Kingdom.  There  is  no  alternative  ground  for  finding  any
   entitlement to a grant of humanitarian protection [43].


     xv.  The appellant has not discharged the burden of proof upon  him  to
     show a real risk or that his removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
     cause a breach of his protected human rights [44].


     3. Permission to appeal was sought and eventually granted on a renewed
        application to the Upper Tribunal.



Discussion



     4. The grounds of appeal assert legal error on  the  basis  the  Judge
        failed to find that the appellants are members of  the  Fula  tribe
        which practices FGM in the Gambia. It is stated to be of importance
        that the surname of the appellants is [J] which is  said  to  be  a
        Fula name. The grounds allege that  notwithstanding  the  fact  the
        appellants have a less than perfect immigration history  this  must
        not be allowed to detract from the fact there is a  real  risk  for
        the female children should the family be returned to Gambia.


     5. I accept that the surname of the appellants is  as  stated  in  the
        appeal  papers  which  I  shall  not  set  out  in  full   in   the
        determination as a result of the anonymity direction to protect the
        identity of the two minor children.


     6. It is submitted on the appellant's behalf that the material  before
        the Judge showed that the surname is a Fula surname  and  therefore
        persons with that name will be identified as such. In paragraph  18
        of the determination it is claimed such a finding is made,  but  if
        one looks at paragraph 18 it  is  in  fact  an  assessment  of  the
        evidence given by the appellant in which the Judge states:


              18. He showed more knowledge about the Fula tribe  during  his
   evidence                and  accepted,  in  answer  to  questions  by  Mr
   Edwards, that he had                  ample time  to  research  the  Fula
   tribe since the respondent's refusal                letter  on  5  August
   2013. The appellant  had  showed  a  conspicuous                 lack  of
   knowledge  about  the  Fula  tribe   when   interviewed.   He   said   he
   is Fulani by birth. His name is a clear indication of his ethnicity.  [J]
   is                  one of the  most  common  Fulani  surname.   This  is
   supported by the                 objective evidence of  page  11  of  the
   appellants bundle in an article               entitled "Behind the Name".


     7. There are two references to the  name  in  the  appellant's  appeal
        bundle the first of which is at page 11 and the second at page  28.
        The latter referring to common Fula surnames while the document  at
        page 11 is from a website dealing with the etymology and history of
        surnames and refers to the surname [J], which is  said  to  be  the
        surname one of the four main branches of the Fula people.


     8. The Judge  does  not  challenge  the  assertion  contained  in  the
        objective material and indeed refers  to  it  in  paragraph  18  as
        supporting the appellant's submission. The issue the  grounds  fail
        to properly deal with, however,  is  that  the  material  does  not
        suggest that anybody with the surname [J] is of Fula ethnicity.  In
        addition, the appellant's material does  not  support  an  argument
        that anybody with this surname belongs to  a  branch  of  the  Fula
        tribe who practise FGM. In the  country  guidance  case  of  K  and
        others [2013] UKUT 62  there  is  a  statistical  analysis  of  the
        prevalence of FGM in the Gambia as follows:


     Mandinka FGM may be as high as 80-100%
     Fula (Overall)    FGM prevalence 30%
     Hobobehs (sub group of Fula)   FGM prevalence 0%
     Jama (sub group of Fula)   FGM prevalence 0%
     Toranks, Peuls, Futas,
     Tukuleurs, Jawarinkas, Lorbehs,
     Ngalunkas and Daliankos
     (sub groups of Fula)  FGM practiced: prevalence N/K
     FGM prevalence 0% FGM may be as high as 80-100%
     Njefenjefe (within the Serehule
     ethnic grouping)  FGM practiced: prevalence N/K
     Jola & Karonikas  FGM prevalence 80-100%
     Jola Funi    FGM practiced: prevalence N/K
     Jola Casa    FGM prevalence 0%
     Others   Variable
     Wolof - those who migrated
     from Senegal Oriental FGM prevalence 0%
     Wolof - those who migrated
     from Sine Saloum  FGM practiced: prevalence N/K


     9. The material demonstrates a variation of practice between different
        tribal groups within the Gambia and a 30% of prevalence amongst the
        Fula tribe. The case sets out guidance on the correct  approach  to
        be taken by judges when assessing such questions and  in  paragraph
        30  of  the  determination  the  Judge  acknowledges  the  guidance
        provided  in  this  case  as  being  his  starting  point  for  his
        assessment of the merits of the claim. The evidence, as at November
        2012, fell short of demonstrating that intact females in The Gambia
        are, as such, at real risk of FGM. The assessment of risk of FGM is
        a fact sensitive exercise, which is likely to involve ethnic group,
        (whether parental or marital), the attitudes  of  parents,  husband
        and wider family and socio-economic milieu.


    10. As with all similar matters, the burden  of  proof  lies  upon  the
        appellant and the Judge found for the sustainable reasons that  the
        appellant had not proved that he was from  the  Fula  tribe  as  he
        alleged.  It was his case that as a result of  his  affiliation  to
        this tribe group his daughters were risk of FGM on return.


    11. It also appears to be the case in relation to this matter that both
        parents appear to be  in  opposition  to  FGM  although  the  Judge
        properly noted the absence of  the  children's  mother,  the  first
        appellant's wife, in support of the appeal and made  a  sustainable
        adverse inference from this.


    12. I find the grounds fail to establish any arguable  legal  error  in
        the Judge's determination as the evidence does not established that
        all those with the surname [J] are from the Fula tribe or  even  if
        they were, that they are from a subdivision  of  that  tribe  which
        would give rise to a real risk of FGM for the children on return. I
        find the Judge considered all the evidence with the required degree
        of anxious scrutiny, including the background material relied  upon
        by the appellants, and made findings that are properly open to  him
        on the evidence and which are adequately reasoned.


    13. Having considered the submissions made to the Tribunal  with  care,
        in light of the fact that the alleged risk is only to the children,
        and accepting that the surname [J] may indicate a  connection  with
        the Gambia, I do not find  it  substantiated  that  the  Judge  has
        committed legal error material  to  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal.




Decision

    14. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17th July 2014












