
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07836/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2016                      |On 8 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                    [M N]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bundock, Counsel instructed by CK Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated 16 November 2015 refusing an appeal against  the  Secretary
    of State's decision of 19 March  2005  which  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum.

2.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on  [  -  ].   He  claims
    under the Qualification Directive to be a refugee with  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Sri Lanka.  He also claims refugee status  under
    the Convention.  His says that he is suspected of association with LTTE
    members in Sri Lanka in 2009 and 2010 and, if returned  to  Sri  Lanka,
    would be persecuted for that association.

3.   The appellant maintained that he assisted a Tamil called  [D]  in  2009
    in purchasing for him phone cards and other items.  That person and the
    appellant's uncle were subsequently arrested by  the  police.   He  was
    informed by his aunt that he would be arrested  and  he  spent  six  to
    twelve months hiding  in  Colombo  thereafter.   His  aunt  then  again
    contacted him  to  inform  him  that  [D]  had  given  the  appellant's
    photograph and details to the army and that, since [D] was a member  of
    the LTTE, the appellant was  likely  to  be  arrested.   The  appellant
    obtained a student visa and flew out of Sri Lanka  on  12  March  2011.
    That visa expired on 31 May 2012.  He  claimed  he  did  not  apply  to
    extend that visa but claimed asylum on 5 June  2013.   That  claim  was
    refused by the respondent by a decision letter dated 19 March 2015.

4.   Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant gave evidence.  The  judge
    was concerned about the way in which the appellant conducted himself in
    giving that evidence and states at  paragraph  20  that  the  appellant
    clearly had difficulty comprehending questions asked of  him.   At  one
    stage he started crying and it was apparent that he had been prescribed
    medication for depression in 2011.  Furthermore, it was  apparent  that
    the appellant forgot answers he had  given  very  shortly  before  when
    answering further questions.  Those matters raised concern in the  mind
    of the judge about the appellant's mental state.

5.   The judge did not find the appellant to be credible.  He did  not  find
    it  credible  that  helping  someone  to  obtain  SIM  cards  would  be
    considered to be pro-LTTE activities.  At paragraph 33 the judge states
    that a warrant for arrest of the appellant dated 22 June 2010  predated
    the issue of the appellant's passport and further that he was  able  to
    leave Sri Lanka despite a warrant being enforced for his arrest.

6.   He finds at paragraph 38 that the appellant could not have  known  that
    [D] gave  the  appellant's  details  to  the  police  since  the  aunt,
    according to information advanced, had had no  way  of  obtaining  that
    information in order to pass it on to the appellant.  The judge felt he
    could not attach weight to the arrest warrant  documents  because  they
    did not read like court documents.

7.   In the light of these findings the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal.   He
    also considered briefly the appellant's Article 8 claim in the  context
    of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules but did  not  accept  that
    significant obstacles existed in respect of his return  to  Sri  Lanka.
    In considering Article 8 outside  the  Rules  he  considered  that  the
    appellant had a minimal period of residence in the United  Kingdom  and
    what little private life he had was developed in part as an overstayer.
     His mental health  difficulties  were  described  in  the  psychiatric
    report as symptoms of minor depression.   In  those  circumstances  the
    judge was not satisfied that these considerations would expose  him  to
    risk of particular problems on return to Sri Lanka.

8.   Before this  Tribunal  Mr  Bundock  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had
    materially erred in law.  He submitted first that  the  respondent  had
    conceded in her refusal letter that any association with  LTTE  members
    around 2009 and 2010 was a reason for arrest.  In  the  light  of  that
    concession there was no adequate reasoning for the  Tribunal's  finding
    at paragraph  32  that  no  sensible  reason  had  been  given  by  the
    respondent for the authorities to have any interest in him.

9.   Secondly, the Tribunal erred in failing to give  adequate  reasons  for
    its finding that the appellant's safe departure from Sri Lanka  was  of
    significance.  Standing the country guidance advice  on  Sri  Lanka  GJ
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) at paragraph 170 that a finding that  a  person
    has travelled out of Sri Lanka unhindered is not in itself a reason  to
    reject an account as incredible,  the  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to
    explain its contrary view.

10.  Thirdly, the explanation in relation to  the  appellant  learning  from
    his aunt about [D]'s arrest came from the evidence before the  Tribunal
    that the appellant had said at interview that the army had visited  the
    aunt  and  shown  her  the  photograph  which  [D]  had  given  to  the
    authorities.   The  Tribunal  failed  to  have  regard  to  that  clear
    explanation.  On the contrary, the Tribunal  founded  on  the  apparent
    lack of credible explanation as to  how  the  appellant  came  by  that
    information.

11.  Fourthly, Mr Bundock criticised the approach of  the  Tribunal  to  the
    documentary material produced.  The Tribunal had equiparated  what  was
    in fact a police report to  the  Magistrate  with  the  arrest  warrant
    itself at paragraphs 40 and 41.

12.  In relation to the Tribunal's treatment of the appellant's claim  under
    Article 33, Mr Bundock submitted that  the  Tribunal  had  applied  the
    wrong test.  The judge states at paragraph 45 that he was not satisfied
    that there was evidence before him that the appellant is a current  and
    significant risk of suicide.  The correct test set  out  in  J  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 629 was whether there was a real risk of  mistreatment.
    The use of the word significant suggested that the Tribunal had applied
    a higher threshold than was applicable.

13.  In relation to his Article 8 claim the Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
    consideration the respondent's lengthy delay of two years in  making  a
    decision on the appellant's asylum claim during which time  his  mental
    health had deteriorated and he had developed further private life.   It
    was a matter which was of materiality to  the  proportionality  of  his
    removal.

14.  Mr Whitwell accepted that the Tribunal erred in failing to have  regard
    to the respondent's concession in relation to the  departure  from  Sri
    Lanka of the appellant  not  being  probative  of  a  lack  of  adverse
    interest in an individual.  He also  accepted  that  the  Tribunal  had
    misdirected itself in respect of the arrest warrant document.  However,
    he submitted that there were three matters in the appellant's  evidence
    in which the Tribunal had identified a discrepancy which justified  the
    finding that he was not a credible witness.  In  paragraph  20  of  the
    determination the Tribunal had pointed out that the appellant had  been
    unclear as to when his mother had died and whether it was  in  2002  or
    2007.  At paragraph 26 the Tribunal had been unclear as to when he  had
    first met [D], at one stage stating that he had been 19 and at  another
    that he was 11.  Lastly at paragraph 34 the appellant was unclear as to
    whether he had been in hiding for six months or one year.

15.  In respect of Article 3 Mr Whitwell pointed out that Mr Bundock at  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not submit that mental health on its own  would
    constitute risk on return.  Accordingly, the Tribunal was  entitled  to
    have regard to the evidence as a whole on this matter and conclude that
    there was no real risk on return.

16.  In relation to the Article 8 claim the delay of two  years  was  not  a
    material factor.  It had not apparently been argued that there had been
    any adverse change in that intervening period which  should  have  been
    taken into account.

Decision

17.  We consider that the Tribunal materially erred in law in  a  number  of
    respects as  submitted  by  Mr  Bundock.   We  consider  Mr  Whitwell's
    concession in relation to the assistance given by the appellant to  the
    LTTE to have been properly made.   That concession  was  noted  by  the
    Tribunal at paragraph 6 of its determination.  No reasons are given for
    a contrary finding.   We agree also that no adequate reasons are  given
    for the finding at paragraph 33 in relation to the appellant's  ability
    to leave Sri Lanka in the face of  the  country  guidance  case  quoted
    above.

18.  The Tribunal also appears to us to have erred in its  approach  to  the
    source of the information which the appellant gave about [D] having the
    appellant's photograph  and  having  given  that  and  the  appellant's
    details to the  police.   There  was  a  patent  explanation  for  that
    advanced in the evidence which the Tribunal appears  not  to  have  had
    regard to.  In relation  to  the  Tribunal's  approach  to  the  arrest
    warrant documents, the judge appears to have failed to  recognise  that
    the appellant produced a translation not only of the police  report  to
    the Magistrate seeking a warrant for  arrest  but  the  arrest  warrant
    itself.  Indeed, at paragraph  40  in  the  first  sentence  the  judge
    appears to proceed upon the basis that the police report itself was the
    arrest warrant.  That is incorrect and it is not  surprising  that  the
    police report did not read like a court document since it  was  not  of
    that character.

19.  We are not convinced that the Tribunal's description of there  being  a
    significant risk of suicide is of  material  significance  nor  are  we
    satisfied that the failure to mention the delay between the application
    for asylum and the decision falls to be considered a material error.

20.  However, in the  light  of  our  findings  in  relation  to  the  other
    criticisms advanced by Mr Bundock, we are of the view that, taking  all
    these matters into account, the Tribunal materially erred in law in its
    assessment of the credibility of the  appellant's  claim  and  we  will
    accordingly allow this appeal.

21.  We will remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 4 March 2016

Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

