
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07380/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 March 2014                           |                           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR T P
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr G Saunders a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel instructed by Jein
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the
      Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was
      born on 5 November 1970 ("the claimant)". The Secretary of  State  has
      been given  permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Sullivan ("the FTTJ") who allowed  his  appeal  against
      the Secretary of State's decision to give directions for  his  removal
      from the UK following the refusal of leave  to  enter  on  asylum  and
      human rights grounds.


   2. The claimant first came to the UK in August 2001. Since  then  he  has
      been back to Sri Lanka and returned to the UK. The Secretary of  State
      has made a number of decisions and the claimant has made  two  appeals
      to an Adjudicator/Immigration Judge. There have been  judicial  review
      proceedings. The full history is set out between paragraphs 2 and 9 in
      the determination of the FTTJ.


   3. The appellant claimed to fear persecution from the authorities in  Sri
      Lanka because of his Tamil ethnicity and his past involvement with the
      LTTE. He fought for the LTTE between 1990 and  1993.  He  was  injured
      during shelling, hospitalised and discharged from the LTTE. He did not
      assist the LTTE between 1993 and 1999.  In  1999  he  was  called  for
      compulsory training by the LTTE and  in  2000  was  involved  in  some
      combat action as a border guard. Later the same year he was  asked  to
      take part in similar activities but managed to put these off until the
      end of the year when he was sent a summons to return to serve with the
      LTTE which he  did  not  answer.  In  2001  the  LTTE  discovered  his
      whereabouts and took him  into  custody  because  of  his  failure  to
      report. He was released against a promise to return and  went  to  the
      police to obtain a pass in order to leave the area.  He  was  arrested
      and interrogated. He was taken in for  further  questioning  by  TELO,
      detained beaten and tortured over three days. He was  handed  back  to
      the police who questioned and tortured him  again.  Subsequently,  his
      uncle secured his release by paying a bribe and the claimant  fled  to
      the UK.


   4. The claimant said that on his return to Sri Lanka in 2004  he  entered
      the country without difficulty. He experienced no problems until  2007
      when he received an anonymous demand for money. His brother  was  shot
      and killed but he managed to escape. As a result he  feared  both  the
      authorities and Tamil militant  related  organisations.  He  fled  Sri
      Lanka and returned to the UK claiming that  after  his  departure  his
      wife  had  been  arrested  by  the  EPDP  and  questioned  as  to  his
      whereabouts. He also feared persecution from the  authorities  because
      of his LTTE /Tamil separatist related activities in this  country.  He
      suffered from severe mental ill-health.


   5. The FTTJ heard the appeal  on  14  October  2013.  Both  parties  were
      represented, the claimant by  Ms  Jegarajah  who  appears  before  me.
      Whilst the claimant was present during most of the hearing he did  not
      give evidence. It was said that his mental health was such that he was
      not able to do so.  Oral  evidence  was  given  by  a  friend  of  the
      claimant, Mr SN and psychiatrist Dr S Dhumad.


   6. The FTTJ did not draw any adverse inference from  the  fact  that  the
      claimant  did  not  give  evidence  as  there  was  medical   evidence
      supporting his decision not to do so. She took as her  starting  point
      the findings of the Adjudicator/ Immigration  Judge  in  the  previous
      appeals. This evidence, largely accepted by the FTTJ, is summarised in
      paragraphs 77 and 79 of the determination.


   7. The FTTJ went on to consider the written evidence from the  claimant's
      wife and the family lawyer in Sri  Lanka.  After  assessing  this  she
      concluded that the evidence was not "indicative of  the  current  risk
      to, or official interest in, the appellant".


   8. The FTTJ went on  to  consider  the  evidence  as  to  the  claimant's
      politically related activities in this country. Whilst she found  that
      he had not organised events, been a  speaker,  raised  funds  for  the
      Tamil cause or made witness statements for use in proceedings  against
      the Sri Lankan government he had from about September 2011 started  to
      take an interest in Tamil diaspora activities in the UK and to  attend
      demonstrations and meetings. They were publicly available  photographs
      of him at Tamil protests and sitting at a meeting close to the  leader
      of the British Tamil Forum.


   9. The FTTJ went on to consider the evidence in the light of the  country
      information and Tribunal Country Guidance. I will need  to  return  to
      her reasoning and conclusions in more detail. She allowed  the  appeal
      on asylum and Article 3 human rights grounds but dismissed  the  claim
      for humanitarian protection.


  10. The FTTJ granted the appellant anonymity. I  consider  it  appropriate
      and necessary to continue her direction.


  11. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to the  appellant
      and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
      lead to contempt of court proceedings.


  12. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal. It is submitted that the FTTJ erred in law by failing to  give
      adequate reasons why the claimant would be at risk in his  home  area,
      the findings in paragraphs 91 and 100 were inconsistent and there were
      indications that the FTTJ applied the wrong standard of  proof.  There
      is no Rule 24 response from the claimant's representatives


  13. Mr Saunders submitted that the conclusion that the claimant  would  be
      monitored by the authorities in the last sentence of paragraph 91  was
      inconsistent with what was said elsewhere in that paragraph.  The  use
      of the words "might well" and "might" in paragraph 100 indicated  that
      the FTTJ applied an incorrect standard of proof. I was asked  to  find
      that the determination contained errors  of  law,  to  set  aside  the
      decision and to remake it on the evidence before the FTTJ.


  14. Ms Jegarajah submitted that  the  FTTJ  took  a  correct  and  nuanced
      approach. I was referred to what were  said  to  be  key  findings  in
      paragraphs 80, 81, 83, 88  and  90.  I  queried  the  submission  that
      paragraph 310 of GJ (post-Civil War: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
      UKUT 319 (IAC) indicated that all returnees  were  questioned  by  the
      authorities  when  they  returned  to  their  home  areas  and,  after
      examination of this paragraph Ms Jegarajah, withdrew  the  submission.
      She also accepted that the finding in paragraph 91 that  the  claimant
      would be monitored on return to his home area did not on its own  give
      rise to the risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment. However, she
      submitted that the claimant had a sur place profile which  would  come
      to the attention of the authorities and give rise to  risk.  Paragraph
      324 of GJ indicated that the Sri Lankan authorities had  sophisticated
      intelligence gathering facilities concerning the Tamil diaspora  which
      included monitoring of activities online, on mobile phones and in  the
      diaspora in the four hotspots which included London. Photographs  were
      taken of demonstrations and image recognition was used.


  15. Ms Jegarajah submitted that the problem for the  claimant,  which  the
      FTTJ had recognised, was his vulnerability because of his mental  ill-
      health. When he was questioned he would not  be  able  to  do  himself
      justice which would strengthen the suspicions  in  the  minds  of  the
      authorities.


  16. It was argued that the FTTJ applied the correct burden and standard of
      proof. This was set out in paragraph 17. The words; "might" and "might
      well" in  paragraph  100  did  not  indicate  the  application  of  an
      incorrect standard of proof and the FTTJ applied the correct  test  in
      the last sentence of the same paragraph which  he  referred  to  "real
      risk". I was asked to find that the FTTJ had not erred in law  and  to
      uphold the determination.


  17. In his reply Mr Saunders submitted that whilst the  FTTJ  referred  to
      "real risk" at the end of paragraph 100 she reached this conclusion by
      applying  an  incorrect  test.  It  was  clear  that  the  authorities
      considered that they were well aware of those who were  a  threat  and
      the claimant was not one of them.


  18. I reserved my determination.

  19. In paragraph 90 the FTTJ said that if the claimant was at risk in  Sri
      Lanka would be under the risk category listed in paragraph 356 (7) (a)
      of GJ. Those that fall within this category are; "Individuals who are,
      or who are perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as
      a  single  state  because  they  are,  or  are  perceived  to  have  a
      significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism  within
      the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka".


  20. The assessment of the situation in paragraph 91 is  contained  in  the
      last eight lines in which the FTTJ said; "Given the  intelligence  led
      approach now used by the Sri Lankan authorities  and  the  appellant's
      comparatively  recent  and  limited  involvement   in   Tamil   linked
      activities in the United  Kingdom  I  am  not  satisfied  that  he  is
      regarded by the Sri Lankan government as a threat to the integrity  of
      the Sri Lankan state or as a  person  having  a  significant  role  in
      relation to either post-conflict Tamil  separatism  or  a  renewal  of
      hostilities in Sri Lanka. However the profile he has built for himself
      in the last two years is such that there is a risk that  he  would  be
      monitored on return to his home area."


  21. In paragraph 100 she said; "The profile the appellant has created  for
      himself with Tamil groups in the United Kingdom between 2011 and 2013,
      the publicly available photographs of him at Tamil  protests  and  (in
      one case) sitting at the meeting close to the leader  of  the  British
      Tamil Forum are circumstances which might have come to  the  attention
      of the Sri Lankan  authorities  through  their  use  of  intelligence,
      informers and the monitoring of photographs. I find that the appellant
      would be able to leave the airport on return to Sri Lanka but that  he
      would be monitored in his home area and at that stage  might  well  be
      asked about his activities in the United  Kingdom.  Dr  Jalal  and  Dr
      Dhumad agree that he could not manage such questioning. Given his fear
      of authorities, the militarisation of his home area and the difficulty
      which he would, by reason of his mental  health,  have  in  giving  an
      account of himself it is my view that there is a  real  risk  that  he
      would be detained at that stage and a real risk that he would then  be
      persecuted in detention."


  22. I find that the determination does not contain errors of law. The FTTJ
      was correct to conclude that if the appellant was at risk on return to
      Sri Lanka it would be under the first of the risk categories listed in
      paragraph 356 (7) (a)  of  GJ.  This  risk  category  is  defined  as;
      "Individuals who are, or who are perceived to  be,  a  threat  to  the
      integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state  because  they  are,  or  are
      perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict
      Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal  of  hostilities
      within Sri Lanka". I accept that in paragraph 91 the FTTJ  found  that
      the claimant did  not  fulfil  these  criteria.  It  is  not  easy  to
      reconcile this with the conclusion in the  last  paragraph  that  "the
      profile he has built for himself in the last two years  is  such  that
      there is a risk that he would be  monitored  on  return  to  his  home
      area". Paragraph 356 (9) of GJ states that an  individual  whose  name
      appears on a "watch" list will be monitored by the  security  services
      on return to his home area. In paragraph 90 the FTTJ  found  that  the
      claimant was not on any stop or  watch  list  in  Sri  Lanka.  However
      paragraph 356 (9) of GJ does not state that  only  those  whose  names
      appear on a watch list are reasonably likely to be monitored on return
      to their home areas. The same paragraph makes it clear  that  how  the
      authorities regard an individual; "will be a question of fact in  each
      case, dependent on any diaspora activities  carried  out  by  such  an
      individual."


  23. The FTTJ assessed and made findings as to  the  claimant's  sur  place
      activities in paragraph 100 concluding that they would  be  sufficient
      to excite sufficient interest for the authorities to wish to  question
      the appellant when he reached his home area in which case  his  mental
      ill-health would be such that he would not be  able  to  give  a  good
      account  of  himself  leading  to  a  real  risk  of   detention   and
      persecution. I find that on all the  evidence  including  the  country
      evidence  and  the  country  guidance  contained  in  GJ  this  was  a
      conclusion open to her.


  24. As to the second ground of appeal, that the FTTJ applied an  incorrect
      standard of proof, I find that the correct burden and standard was set
      out in paragraph 17 and that the words used in paragraph  100  do  not
      indicate that the FTTJ departed from  this  self-direction.  It  would
      have been better if the  words  "might  have"  and  "might"  had  been
      avoided. However, I find that the reference to the  test  of  a  "real
      risk" in the last sentence supports the conclusion  that  the  correct
      standard of proof was applied.


  25. I find that the determination does not contain errors  of  law  and  I
      uphold the decisions of the FTTJ to allow the appeal
















      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 17
      March 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

