
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07101/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2016                    |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     S A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Bellara, instructed by AH Law Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan,  born  on  4  June  1982.  He
first entered the United Kingdom as a  student  on  14  September  2008.  He
subsequently extended his leave to remain as a student and as a  post  study
worker until 19 December 2013. On 17 December 2013, he made  an  application
for asylum. The basis of his claim is that is a gay  man  who  had  suffered
persecution in Pakistan and feared  persecution  if  returned.  On  7  April
2015, the Respondent refused to grant the  Appellant  asylum  on  the  basis
that he did not find his account  of  persecution  credible.  The  Appellant
appealed against this decision but indicated that he wished  his  appeal  to
be determined on the papers.  He  submitted  documents  in  support  of  his
appeal, including witness statements from himself  and  his  civil  partner,
Manzoor Ahmed, a copy of his civil partner certificate  and  photographs  of
the Appellant and his partner.

2.    His appeal was, however, listed for hearing before Judge Whitcombe  of
the First-tier Tribunal on 16 September  2015.  The  Appellant  was  neither
present nor represented but the Respondent was represented by  a  Presenting
Officer.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  23  September  2015,  the  Judge
dismissed the appeal on all  grounds,  finding  at  [66]  that  he  was  not
satisfied that: (i) the Appellant is a gay man; (ii) he is  currently  in  a
genuine and subsisting relationship with Manzoor Ahmed;  (iii)  he  suffered
persecution in Pakistan, whether because of his  sexual  orientation  or  at
all; (iv) he would face a real risk of persecution for a Refugee  Convention
reason if he were now to be returned to Pakistan.

3.    An application for permission to appeal was made in-time on 5  October
2015. The grounds in support of the application  contended  that  the  Judge
failed to address the Appellant's Article 8 claim and in particular did  not
give adequate reasons for finding that there  was  no  family  life  in  the
United Kingdom and failed to give detailed reasons as to why  the  documents
submitted by the Appellant could  be  held  to  be  false;  that  the  civil
marriage certificate and photographs of the Appellant and his  partner  were
before the Judge, were not in dispute and had not  been  challenged  by  the
Respondent but in finding at [66] that the Appellant is not a  gay  man  the
Judge failed to give proper reasons and failed to give this  aspect  of  the
case proper consideration and similarly in respect of his  finding  at  [70]
that the Appellant is not in a genuine relationship with his partner.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
Hutchison on 27 October 2015 on the basis that it  was  "arguable  that  the
Judge gave no proper assessment to and has not given  adequate  reasons  for
finding (a) why the Appellant's father's death  certificate  was  false  and
(b) why the Appellant is not a gay man and is not in a genuine  relationship
with his partner when their marriage  certificate  dated  18  October  2013,
photographs of their wedding and  evidence  that  their  relationship  began
about 7 months after they met in 2011 was detailed at paragraph  33  of  the
Decision & Reasons."

5.    The Respondent filed a rule 24 response in which it is  asserted  that
there was a plethora of negative credibility findings at  [58]-[65]  of  the
determination; documentary evidence was  considered  in  the  round  as  per
Tanveer Ahmed and having concluded that the Appellant was  neither  gay  nor
has a genuine and subsisting relationship there can  be  no  doubt  that  he
does not satisfy the Article 8 Rules and there was no reason for  the  Judge
to venture into a  proportionality  assessment  as  there  were  clearly  no
compelling circumstances.

Hearing

6.    At the hearing, Mr Bellara sought to rely on the  grounds  of  appeal,
in particular the second ground and the absence of  reasons  in  respect  of
the Judge's findings regarding the Appellant's relationship. He  noted  that
the Judge had before him the civil  partnership  certificate.  I  sought  Mr
Whitwell's views on the civil partnership certificate  and  he  stated  that
the  Respondent  has  always  challenged  the  Appellant's  sexuality;   the
Appellant and  his  partner  did  not  attend  the  hearing  and  the  civil
partnership certificate was not sufficient  in  itself  to  prove  that  the
Appellant is gay. Mr Bellara submitted that the fact a civil  marriage  took
place between the Appellant and his partner was an important issue and  that
when making adverse findings on the asylum claim there is  a  leap  in  that
the Judge overlooks the fact that there is  a  certificate  and  photographs
and this is not properly dealt with as part of the Article 8 assessment  and
is simply not referred to as part  of  the  proportionality  assessment.  In
respect of the other ground of appeal regarding  the  death  certificate  of
the Appellant's father, the Judge does  not  give  any  reasons  as  to  why
certificate itself is impugned and does not assess the  certificate  in  the
round at [63]. He invited me to find a material error of law  and  submitted
that the matter needed to be  heard  afresh  by  the  Tribunal  because  the
Appellant's relationship needs to be carefully  assessed  by  the  Tribunal,
given that the Respondent has not expressly disputed the  civil  partnership
or the photographs.

7.    In response, Mr Whitwell submitted that in respect  of  [63]  and  the
issue of the Appellant's father's death certificate  no  more  needs  to  be
said about this. There is a death certificate for the Appellant's father  at
F2 of the Respondent's bundle and the date of death is 11.12.10. At  A11  of
the Respondent's bundle,  Q  16,  the  Appellant  says  that  his  uncle  is
sponsoring him as his father is dead. The date given  at  the  interview  is
5.3.05 which  is  clearly  prior  to  the  date  of  death  certificate.  He
submitted that the FIR was also false and that the Appellant has  a  history
of submitting false documents. In respect of the Judge's  findings  at  [69]
onwards in respect of article 8, he submitted that these were  parasitic  on
his earlier findings. Mr Whitwell submitted that there was no  challenge  to
the findings in  respect  of  the  asylum  claim  and  this  is  clear  from
paragraph 2 of the grounds of appeal and that the  grounds  of  appeal  were
little more than a disagreement with findings which were open to the  Judge.
He submitted that an assessment of the relationship could  not  be  made  in
the absence of  findings  and  the  Appellant's  sexuality  was  clearly  in
dispute in the refusal at [29].

8.    By way of reply, Mr Bellara accepted that a challenge to the  findings
on asylum had, although not expressly raised in the grounds  was  hinted  at
[2] of the grounds of appeal and the  Judge  has  not  gone  far  enough  in
respect of his assessment of the documentary  evidence  and  the  Respondent
has not discharged the burden of  proving  that  the  documents  are  false.
Although there is a DVR the Judge  should  have  made  clearer  findings  on
this. He submitted that the Judge should have trodden with caution in  terms
of  finding  that  because  he  found  there  were  false   documents,   the
relationship is also false. Mr Bellara submitted that the fact of the  civil
partnership was not challenged: the parties are legally  together  and  that
is not in dispute. He  submitted  that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself  in
applying his findings on the asylum claim to the civil partnership.

Findings on error of law

9.    I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons. I find  that
the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in failing  to  give  reasons
for material  findings  viz  the  Appellant's  sexual  orientation  and  his
relationship with Manzoor Ahmed, in light of the evidence before  him  which
comprised witness  statements,  a  certificate  of  civil  partnership  with
Manzoor Ahmed and photographs of the two men. Whilst the Judge  was  clearly
not assisted by the fact that the Appellant and his partner did  not  attend
the hearing and so did not give evidence and could  not  be  cross-examined,
it is not clear to me why, since the Appellant requested that his appeal  be
determined on the papers, it was listed for an oral hearing at  all.  It  is
also not clear whether or not the Appellant was informed or aware  that  his
appeal was listed for an oral hearing. Mr Bellara was not able to assist  on
this point as his solicitors were only instructed on 2 October  2015,  after
the promulgation of the decision and  reasons  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge on  23  September  2015.  It  is  the  case  that  the  Appellant  was
unrepresented at the time of his appeal.

10.   Be that as it may, in light of the fact  that  there  was  before  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge prima facie evidence that the Appellant is  a  gay
man in a subsisting civil partnership with Mr Ahmed, I find  that  more  was
required by way of reasoning to justify his conclusions  at  [66]  that  the
Appellant is not a gay man nor  that  he  is  currently  in  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship with Mr Manzoor Ahmed. This evidence was simply  not
addressed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  at  all,  who  appears  to  have
reached his findings based  solely  on  his  negative  credibility  findings
regarding the Appellant's asylum claim. As a consequence  of  his  findings,
the Judge then proceeded to find that his removal would be proportionate.

11.   I find the First-tier Tribunal Judge further erred in  his  Article  8
assessment  in  that  he  failed  to  consider  whether  or  not  there  are
exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  that  justify  consideration  of
Article 8 outside the Rules on  the  basis  that  removal  would  result  in
unjustifiably harsh consequences cf. Singh  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74.  Further,
whilst neither party raised this issue, on the basis of the evidence  before
the First-tier Tribunal Judge it would appear that Mr Ahmed is  not  settled
in the United Kingdom but had on 18 December 2014 succeeded  in  winning  an
appeal against a decision by the Respondent refusing to vary  his  leave  to
remain as a Tier 4 student. Mr Ahmed's status at the  date  of  hearing  was
simply not considered as part of the Article 8  assessment  although  it  is
clearly a material consideration.

12.   In respect of the consideration by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  of
the documents submitted by the Appellant in support  of  his  asylum  claim,
the grounds of appeal at [5] challenge the Judge's findings  in  respect  of
the Appellant's father's death certificate. I do not find  that  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge made a material error of law  in  this  respect.  As  Mr
Whitwell correctly submitted, there was a clear  contradiction  between  the
Appellant's previous account given at  an  entry  clearance  interview  that
took place on 5 March 2005 that he was sponsored by his  uncle  because  his
father had died [A11 of the Respondent's bundle at  Q  16]  and  F2  of  the
Respondent's bundle which is a copy of his father's death certificate  where
the date of death is given as 11 December 2010.  I  find  that,  absent  any
explanation by the Appellant of this discrepancy, it was open to the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge at [63] to reject the Appellant's  evidence  as  to  the
date of his father's death and not to accept the death certificate  at  face
value. This finding is preserved.

13.   Mr Whitwell pointed out that there  is  no  direct  challenge  to  the
findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  the  asylum  claim  in  the
grounds of appeal, aside from the  challenge  to  the  Judge's  findings  in
respect of the documents submitted in support of his claim. However, at  [7]
the point is made in respect of the finding that the Appellant is not a  gay
man at all, that the findings on credibility "may well be  relevant  to  the
asylum claim." I find that this is the case in that the  Appellant's  sexual
orientation is essentially the basis of his asylum claim. Even if the  issue
were not raised in the grounds of appeal, it is a  Robinson  obvious  point,
given my finding that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred materially in  law
in finding that the Appellant is not a gay man, this necessarily impacts  on
the safety of his finding in respect of the asylum  claim,  in  addition  to
Articles 3 and 8 of ECHR.

Decision

14.   Therefore, for the reasons set out above, I find that  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge materially erred in law and the appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal  for  a  re-hearing,  not  to  be  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Whitwell.

Directions

15.1. The finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  as  to  the  Appellant's
father's death certificate is preserved.

15.2. The hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  focus  upon  the
following issues:

    (i)    whether or not the Appellant is a gay man;

    (ii)   if so, whether he would face persecution or treatment in  breach
    of Article 3 of ECHR if returned to Pakistan,

    (iii)  whether the Appellant is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  civil
    partnership with Manzoor Ahmed;

    (iv)   if so, whether there are exceptional circumstances that  justify
    consideration of Article 8 of ECHR outside the Rules;

    (v)    if so, whether his removal to Pakistan would be proportionate.

16.   Whilst the Appellant and his partner were not present at  the  hearing
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Whitcombe they were in  attendance  at  the
hearing before me on 7 January 2016. Whilst I cannot and do not direct  that
they attend the remitted hearing of the Appellant's appeal before the First-
tier, given the Appellant's credibility is  very  much  in  issue  it  would
clearly be in his interests for both of them to attend that hearing  and  to
make themselves available for cross-examination by the Respondent.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

18 February 2016
