
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: aa/07574/2013
     aa/07575/2013
     aa/07576/2013
     aa/07577/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                          mrs e a (First Appellant)
                          mr t q (Second Appellant)
                          d n d q (Third Appellant)
                        m j n d q (fourth appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Eaton (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellants are citizens of Ghana.  The first and  second  are  wife
    and husband and the third and fourth are their daughters, born  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2008 and 2009.  On 25th July 2013, the  Secretary  of
    State decided  to  remove  the  appellants  from  the  United  Kingdom,
    following rejection of an asylum claim in  which  the  first  appellant
    claimed to be at risk on return to Ghana, in the light of the belief of
    her family members that she is a witch.

2.   The appeals  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Seelhoff  ("the
    judge") on 10th September 2013.  In a determination promulgated on 26th
    September that year, the appeals were dismissed.  The judge found  that
    the core claims made by the first and second appellants, including  the
    date the first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom, were not to  be
    believed.  He concluded that the first  and  second  appellants  had  a
    history of deceiving the authorities of the United Kingdom  and  lacked
    credibility.  He went on to make an assessment under Article 8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.  He found  that  they  could  not  succeed  in
    showing that their private life ties here met the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the rules").  He made an  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the third and fourth appellants,  noting  that  they  were
    born in the United Kingdom and were in school and at nursery.   In  the
    light of his finding that the first  and  second  appellants  had  been
    present here for no more than six years, rather than  the  considerably
    longer period claimed, he found that the removal of all the  appellants
    as a family unit was a proportionate response.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

3.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    judge erred in law in several respects.  In dismissing the appeals,  he
    gave weight to the delay in the claim for asylum and to the evidence of
    Mr A, a witness, in relation to the first appellant's  claim  that  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2003.

4.   So far as delay was concerned, the judge failed to  take  into  account
    SM [2005] UKIAT 00116, behaviour falling within scope of section  8  of
    the 2004 Act being not determinative of credibility.   So  far  as  the
    weight given to Mr A's evidence was  concerned,  the  judge  failed  to
    refer to and properly take into account the first  appellant's  witness
    statement and her oral evidence.  Mr A, who claimed that he was told by
    the first appellant's mother in Ghana in 2007 that she was  present  in
    that  country  at  the  time  and  living  at  home,  was  relating   a
    conversation he understood he had.  Too much weight was given  to  this
    evidence.  Moreover, the judge failed to give due weight to a visa  and
    entry clearance stamp which formed part of  the  evidence  before  him,
    showing that the first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  26th
    December 2003.  The judge also failed to consider  a  letter  from  the
    Reverend Steven Peprah, of the Glory and  Hope  Ministries  in  Kumasi,
    Ghana, confirming that the first appellant took refuge when fleeing the
    family of her stepfather in August 2003.  This evidence was also before
    the judge.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 17th October 2013.  In  a  rule  24
    response from the Secretary of State made on  31st  October  2013,  the
    appeal was  opposed.   The  respondent  would  submit  that  the  judge
    directed himself appropriately.  The  appellant's  case  was  based  on
    events claimed to have occurred immediately prior to her journey to the
    United Kingdom in 2003.  The evidence of Mr A indicated  that  she  was
    present in Ghana in 2007.  Having accepted this evidence, the judge was
    entitled to conclude that the appellant's core claims were not true.

6.   In directions made by the principal resident judge,  the  parties  were
    advised to prepare for the forthcoming hearing on  the  basis  that  it
    would be confined  to  whether  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside for legal error and, if  so,  whether  the
    decision could be remade without having to hear oral evidence; in which
    eventuality the Tribunal would be  likely  to  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Mr  Eaton  said  that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  give  proper
    consideration  to  the  appellants'  case.   Broadly,  the  appeal  was
    dismissed on the basis of adverse credibility findings.  One aspect was
    the delay in making the asylum claim, and the appellants  accepted  the
    judge's assessment on this.  The fundamental reason concerned  evidence
    given by the first appellant's friend, Mr A.  The judge found that this
    evidence showed that the first appellant did not  leave  Ghana  at  the
    time claimed.   However,  important  parts  of  the  evidence  was  not
    considered by the judge at all.  At page 39 in the  appellants'  bundle
    was a letter from the Glory and Hope Ministries in Ghana.  The  account
    of events in 2003 corroborated the first appellant's claims.  The judge
    appeared not  to  have  taken  this  evidence  into  account.   Another
    important part of the evidence was the copy visa stamp which  suggested
    that the first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 26th December
    2003.  This was within the grant of leave shown in the visa, which  was
    valid between December 2003 and June 2004.  The Secretary of State  did
    not assert that this document was a forgery.  Taking  into  account  SA
    (Kuwait), if no weight was to be given to  document  from  an  official
    source, on the basis that it was not reliable, what  was  required  was
    evidence to show how it had been tampered with or amended.  If the copy
    document had weight, because it genuinely reflected a  grant  of  entry
    clearance or leave to  enter,  it  was  difficult  to  construe  it  as
    evidence not showing that the  first  appellant  arrived  on  the  date
    claimed.

8.   Both pieces of evidence  supported  the  first  appellant's  case  but,
    submitted Mr Eaton, one had not been considered at all  and  the  other
    was not given due weight.

9.   In response, Mr Jack said  that  the  determination  was  reasoned  and
    showed the  basis  for  the  judge's  dismissal  of  the  appeals.   At
    paragraph 14, the judge expressly referred to the bundles of  documents
    and the documents adduced by the  parties  and,  at  paragraph  16,  he
    recorded that the first appellant gave evidence and was  cross-examined
    at length.  Mr A was recorded as having given evidence and as  adopting
    the letter which appeared in the appellant's bundle.  It was clear that
    the oral evidence was fully taken into account.  There was  nothing  to
    indicate that the evidence from Mr A was confused.   He  gave  evidence
    about a conversation with the first appellant's mother and it was  open
    to the judge to give weight to that evidence.

10.  It was open to the first appellant to produce the documentary  evidence
    she sought to rely on, regarding her  presence  here.   The  judge  was
    entitled to make the findings he did, in  the  light  of  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal.  At paragraph 22, the judge rejected the photocopy
    of the visa and gave reasons for accepting the evidence  given  by  the
    witnesses.  The judge noted that the visa was  produced  only  in  copy
    form and after the appellant had said  that  she  could  not  find  the
    original passport.  There was no bio-data page  available.   The  judge
    was entitled to give the copy visa little weight.

11.  At paragraph  24  of  the  determination,  the  judge  noted  that  the
    earliest undisputed evidence regarding the first  appellant's  presence
    showed that she was here in 2008 and he was entitled to  conclude  that
    it was unlikely that she arrived earlier than about mid 2007.   Adverse
    features of the appellants' case were properly taken into  account,  at
    paragraph 25 of the determination.  The  second  appellant  had  relied
    upon a false identity, when arrested.  The judge was entitled  to  find
    that he and his wife were willing to deceive  the  authorities  of  the
    United Kingdom.  Into the balance was  put  the  delay  in  making  the
    claim, as was clear from paragraph 26.

12.  The letter from the church in Ghana was not  referred  to  specifically
    but the determination showed that the judge did  not  accept  that  the
    first appellant was in Ghana at the time and so the account she gave of
    events there was not accepted.  The letter had little  weight,  in  any
    event.  There was nothing to  indicate  the  sources  accessed  by  the
    author of it and the letter did not show which parts  of  the  contents
    were within his own knowledge.  There was  no  material  error  in  the
    judge's failure to refer specifically to it.

13.  In a brief response, Mr Eaton  said  that  the  judge  dealt  with  the
    appeals only on the basis of the adverse credibility  findings.   There
    was, for example, no consideration of relocation.  The letter from  the
    Glory and Hope Ministries could not properly be assessed as  having  no
    relevance or weight because of the adverse credibility findings made on
    the judge's assessment of the oral evidence.  This would be to put  the
    cart before the horse as all the evidence should  be  weighed,  in  the
    round.  The letter was pertinent and it  was  clear  that  the  sources
    reflected the firsthand experience of the  author.   At  paragraph  25,
    where the judge dealt with an EEA Regulations application by the  first
    appellant, it appeared that this too was part of  the  assessment  that
    she  had  a  history  of  deceiving  the  United  Kingdom  authorities.
    However, all that happened was that the appellant made her  application
    and it was rejected.

14.  Mr A's evidence consisted only  of  his  account  of  the  conversation
    about the family, having met the first appellant's mother at  a  market
    in Ghana.  The judge gave  very  substantial  weight  to  this  account
    without taking into account documentary evidence that  gave  weight  to
    the first appellant's account of her arrival  here.   Mr  A's  evidence
    certainly fell to be weighed in the balance but, overall, the weight to
    be given was slight.  At the very least, it had to be set  against  the
    documentary  evidence  which  the  judge  did  not  properly  consider,
    although he mentioned it in paragraph 22 of the determination.

Conclusions on Error of Law

15.  I am grateful to the two representatives for the careful way  in  which
    they presented their cases.

16.  The documentary evidence before  the  judge  included  the  photocopied
    visa (at page 34 of the appellants' bundle) in  the  first  appellant's
    name, showing the grant of leave as a  visitor  between  22nd  December
    2003 and 22nd June 2004.  The visa includes a stamp apparently  showing
    entry at Heathrow Airport on 26th December 2003, within the currency of
    the visa.  The first appellant's name appears  in  the  document.   The
    bundle also included a letter from the Glory and Hope Ministries Church
    (at page 39), sent to the appellants in June 2013.

17.  The judge summarised the evidence before him,  including  the  damaging
    evidence from Mr A.  This witness gave an account of travelling  on  an
    uncertain date but after he obtained a British passport in 2007 and  of
    meeting the first appellant's mother at a market in Ghana  and  talking
    about the family with her.  This relative told  Mr  A  that  the  first
    appellant was still  living  at  home  with  her  and  was  a  student.
    Paragraph 22 contains the judge's assessment and he  noted  there  that
    the Home Office had been unable to verify the first appellant's claimed
    date of arrival.  So far as the copy of  the  visa  is  concerned,  the
    judge noted that the original passport was said to have been  lost  and
    continued: "I am unwilling to attach significant  weight  to  the  visa
    copy in all the circumstances of this case."

18.  It seems clear that the  judge  was  referring  here  to  the  conflict
    between the first appellant's account and Mr A's  oral  evidence  of  a
    conversation with  her  mother.   With  great  respect  to  the  judge,
    however, "all the circumstances" of the case included the  letter  from
    the Glory and Hope Ministries International.  As  Mr  Eaton  submitted,
    the account given in that  document  supported  the  appellant's  claim
    regarding events in 2003 leading to her  decision  to  leave  Ghana  in
    December  that  year.   That  evidence  was  not   mentioned   in   the
    determination but it was before the judge and relevant.

19.  So far as the copy visa is concerned, the judge  again  properly  noted
    the outcome of a search made by the Home Office, revealing no trace  of
    a visa issued in the first appellant's name at the time.  However,  the
    Secretary of State's case does not appear to have been put on the basis
    that the copy document was false.  The judge's unwillingness to  attach
    significant weight to the document may have been open to him, following
    an assessment of all the evidence, including the letter from the  Glory
    and Hope Ministries.  That item and the visa were capable of supporting
    the appellant's account.

20.  That the judge gave determinative weight to the evidence of Mr  A,  and
    appears not to have put the letter into the balance is  also  shown  at
    paragraph 27 of the determination, where  the  incompatibility  between
    the account given by the appellants and the  witness's  evidence  leads
    directly to the conclusion that the first  and  second  appellants  are
    totally lacking in credibility.  Again, the conclusion  may  have  been
    open to the judge, but only after  a  careful  assessment  of  all  the
    evidence tending to support the first appellant's  account  of  events.
    The letter from the Glory and  Hope  Ministries  cannot  rationally  be
    dismissed as peripheral.

21.  Notwithstanding Mr Jack's very able presentation of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case, I conclude that the judge did err materially  in  law  in
    failing to take into account  part  of  the  evidence  adduced  on  the
    appellant's behalf which was relevant and  capable  of  supporting  her
    account, notwithstanding the brief mention of the bundles of  documents
    before the Tribunal in paragraph 14, for example.  The  decision  falls
    to be set aside and remade.

22.  There was a brief discussion on the appropriate venue for the  remaking
    of the decision.  Mr Eaton submitted (and Mr  Jack  did  not  disagree)
    that the decision should  be  remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    extensive fact-finding would be required, if an error of law were shown
    in relation to the adverse credibility findings.   I  agree  with  that
    submission,  taking  into  account  the  Senior  President's   Practice
    Direction at paragraph 7.2.

23.  The decision shall be remade in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  at  Hatton
    Cross, before a judge other than First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Seelhoff.
    It is appropriate for case management to take place at the Hatton Cross
    Hearing Centre and the parties are invited to submit draft  directions,
    so that a substantive hearing may be listed in early course.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The decision will  be
remade in the First-tier Tribunal, at Hatton Cross, before judge other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff.

ANONYMITY

As the third and fourth appellants are minor children I grant  anonymity  to
all throughout these proceedings, unless and until this Tribunal or a  court
orders  otherwise.   No  report  of  the  proceedings  shall   directly   or
indirectly identify any of the appellants.  This direction applies  to  both
parties and failure to comply with it may amount to a contempt of court.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


