

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/07446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |     Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 15 April 2016                      |     On 26 April 2016           |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between


                                     H S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr J Martin (counsel) instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mr D Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving  the  anonymity  direction  made  by  the
First Tier Tribunal.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Howard, promulgated on 28 January 2016, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 13 November 1984  and  is  a  national  of  Sri
Lanka. On 29 April 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Howard ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  26  February  2016  Judge
Parkes gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "2. The Judge found that the Appellant had not been  targeted  by  the
      Sri Lankan  authorities  and  did  not  fall  into  any  of  the  risk
      categories set out in the country guidance. Her sur place evidence was
      limited and conflicting. It was found that her mental health  did  not
      engage ECHR,


      "3. The grounds argue that given  the  positive  credibility  findings
      made, the Judge erred in the assessment of the risks she faced  having
      been arrested and also erred in relation to her mental health and  the
      risks to her on return on that account.


      "4. As most of  the  Appellant's  case  had  been  accepted  as  being
      reliable, including the disappearance of others including her  brother
      and her own arrests, it is arguable that the Judge did err in relation
      to the dangers that she might face. All the grounds are arguable."



The Hearing

5. (a) Mr Martin, for the appellant, adopted the terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. He reminded me that the Judge made a number of positive  credibility
findings, accepting the majority of the appellant's  account,  but  told  me
that at [25] the Judge was wrong to find that the  treatment  the  appellant
suffered amounts to "harassment", and that the Judge was wrong to find  that
the interest the authorities have in the appellant is  attributable  to  her
brother.

(b) Mr Martin took me  to  the  case  of  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and reminded me of the  risk
categories identified there, and then referred me to the  case  of  MP  (Sri
Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829.  He  argued  that  the
appellant falls within a risk category because  she  demonstrates  that  she
has been of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities, and it  is  likely  that
she continues to be of interest to the Sri  Lankan  authorities;  he  argued
that it is likely that she features on a "Stop" list.

(c) Mr Martin turned to the second ground of  appeal  and  argued  that  the
appellant's appeal should succeed on article 3 ECHR grounds because  she  is
at risk of suicide. He relied on the case of Y & Z (Sri Lanka)  [2009]  EWCA
Civ 362, and argued that the appellant has a  subjectively  held  fear,  and
has previously attempted suicide. He told me that the Judge  was  manifestly
wrong to disregard the appellant's belief. He told me that at  [35]  of  the
decision the Judge makes a material error of law  when  he  found  that  Sri
Lanka is  "a  safe  environment  for  the  appellant,  irrespective  of  her
beliefs".

(d) Mr Martin urged me to allow the appeal, to set the decision  aside,  and
substitute my own decision allowing  the  asylum  appeal  and  allowing  the
appeal on article 3 ECHR Grounds.

6. (a) Mr Clark, for the respondent, told me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain any errors of law, material or otherwise. He took me to GJ &  others
and reminded me of the risk categories identified there. He told me that  it
is not disputed that the appellant  has  been  arrested  in  the  past,  but
emphasised that each time she was arrested, she was  released.  He  told  me
that the Judge had carried out a  fact  finding  exercise  which  is  beyond
criticism, that the Judge had properly  directed  himself  by  reference  to
relevant country guidance, and then reached a decision which is well  within
the range of decisions available to the Judge.

(b) Mr Clark turned to the second ground of appeal, and  told  me  that  the
evidence of an overwhelming subjective fear (as  described  in  Y  &  Z)  is
absent from the  appellant's  case.  He  told  me  the  appellant  has  been
assessed as at moderate risk of  suicide,  and  that  more  is  required  to
engage article 3 ECHR. He asked me to dismiss the appeal.



Analysis

7. In MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829,  the
Court of Appeal upheld the Country Guidance case of  GJ  and  Others  (post-
civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)  and  found  that
there was no legal error in the Upper Tier's country guidance on  Sri  Lanka
despite the fact that it had narrowed the risk categories from those in  the
Eligibility  Guidelines  of  the  United  Nations  High   Commissioner   for
Refugees. It was stated however that  the  Upper  Tier  had  not  prescribed
"that diaspora activism is the only basis on which a returning  Tamil  might
be regarded as posing" a future threat and thus of being at risk on return.
"There may, though untypically, be other  cases  where  the  evidence  shows
particular grounds for concluding  that  the  Government  might  regard  the
applicant as posing a current threat to the integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
single state even in the absence  of  evidence  that  he  or  she  has  been
involved in diaspora activism".

8. At [24] the Judge accepts that the appellant  has  been  the  subject  of
significant abuses at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities. At  [25]  the
Judge  finds  that  the  appellant's  brother  has  either   been   detained
incommunicado by the authorities, or "remains someone  who  the  authorities
seek". At [26] the Judge considers country guidance case-law, but  does  not
consider the case of MP & NT. At [25] the Judge  makes  it  clear  that  his
consideration of the case relies solely on for  risk  categories  identified
in the case of  GJ.  The  Judge  has  not  considered  whether  or  not  the
appellant's profile, borne out by an acceptance of the account given by  the
appellant, establishes a reasonable likelihood that the  appellant  requires
international protection.

9. In PP (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]
EWCA Civ 1828 it was held  that  in  finding  that  a  female  Tamil  asylum
seeker, who had been raped  whilst  detained  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,
would not be at risk if returned to Sri Lanka, the Upper Tribunal had  erred
in giving insufficient consideration  to  the  issue  of  whether  women  in
certain circumstances should be treated as falling within a particular  risk
category in addition  to  the  risk  categories  identified  in  the  latest
country guidance case. In PP (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2014] EWCA Civ it was held that the Upper  Tribunal's  decision,
following GJ,  that there was no evidence that Tamil  women  might  form  an
additional category of risk was an error of law, because it conflicted  with
the UNHCR guidelines.

10. The Judge restricted his consideration of the almost undisputed  account
given by the appellant to consideration of the  risk  categories  identified
in the case of GJ. The cases of MP and NT and the case of PP make  it  clear
that the case of GJ does not provide  a  prohibitively  restricted  list  of
risk categories, and that  there  are  cases  were  other  factors  must  be
considered.

11. In reaching his conclusion at [30] that the appellant is not a  refugee,
the Judge has not taken account of the fact that the appellant has  suffered
(what the Judge finds at [24] to be) significant abuses by  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities in the past. He has not  given  adequate  consideration  to  the
appellant's profile as  a  Tamil  woman  who  has  been  detained  on  three
separate occasions, whose family are viewed as LTTE activists.  I  therefore
find that the decision is tainted by a material error of  law  and  must  be
set aside.

12. Paragraph 339 K of the Immigration rules provides

      "339K. The fact that a person has already been subject to  persecution
      or serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
      harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the  person's  well-
      founded fear of persecution or real risk of  suffering  serious  harm,
      unless there are good reasons to consider  that  such  persecution  or
      serious harm will not be repeated."

13. There is nothing wrong with  the  Judge's  fact  finding  exercise.  The
Judge found that the appellant has been arrested 3  times,  and  subject  to
"significant  abuses"  during  those  arrests.  The  Judge  found  that  the
appellant's brother was involved  in  LTTE  activity  and  has  either  been
arrested or is still sought by the Sri Lankan authorities. It is argued  for
the  respondent  that  the  sequence  of  arrests  has  no   relevance   (or
significance) because the appellant was  released  through  normal  channels
each time. That is not entirely correct. It  is  the  appellant's  evidence,
accepted by the Judge, that the appellant was  released  because  she  could
rely on the influence of the  Red  Cross,  for  whom  she  worked.   If  the
appellant returns she can no longer rely on  the  intervention  of  the  Red
Cross, because she is no longer one of their employees.

14. The undisputed  evidence  indicates  that  the  appellant  has  suffered
previous harm  when  summarily  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.
Paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules tells me that I must therefore  find
that she has a well-founded fear  of  future  harm  unless  there  are  good
reasons which show it will not be repeated. There is no evidence  before  me
that the situation in Sri Lanka has changed in any  material  respect  since
2013 when the appellant was summarily detained & significantly abused.

15. If the Sri Lankan authorities had in  some  way  acknowledged  that  the
appellant was not a political opponent and had been detained in  error  then
it would have been possible to conclude, this was a "chance incident" and  a
case of "wrong time, wrong place". However there is  no  evidence  of  this:
she was not released on the will of the authorities because she  was  of  no
interest to them. She was released because of the significant  influence  of
the Red Cross.

16. If the appellant were returned to Sri Lanka it  would  appear  that  for
exactly the same reasons that she might be identified  and  detained  again,
along with potential additional interest in her generated by the  fact  that
he has been in the UK for the last 3 years. As GJ identifies, the  focus  of
the  Sri  Lankan  government  is  currently  on  preventing  diaspora  Tamil
separatist destabilising the Sri Lankan states (see (3) of the headnote).  I
appreciate however  that  the  Tribunal  also  found  that  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities had  sophisticated  intelligence  to  identify  those  who  were
intent on reviving Tamil separatism and the appellant has made no  realistic
case that she is involved in any such activities. It is hard to tell if  the
appellant is on a "watch list". GJ tells me that she  would  only  be  on  a
watch list if an arrest warrant had been  issued  (see  paragraph  16).  The
country guidance (at  (9  of  the  headnote)  suggests  that  generally  the
appellant would only be detained if on such a  watch  list  if  surveillance
suggested she is involved with Tamil activism.

17. The appellant has credibly set out that she has  only  a  historic  low-
level involvement with the  LTTE  prior  to  2009.  The  country  of  origin
materials reviewed in GJ find that such a person does not have a  real  risk
of serious harm in Sri Lanka today. However, this appellant was  persecuted,
as she was detained and abused for her imputed political opinions  on  three
occasions, and only escaped because of the influence of her employers.  This
leads me to conclude that she must have been perceived as someone who has  a
significant role in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  by  the
authorities (risk factor 7(a) in GJ). The appellant's flight form Sri  Lanka
soon after detention; spending time in London  (a  known  diaspora  centre);
and the lingering interest the authorities have in her brother  are  factors
which are more likely to enforce rather than diminish the political  opinion
imputed to the appellant. I find that the  appellant  is  at  real  risk  of
being detained for reason of her imputed political  opinions  on  return  to
Sri Lanka as a result.

18. GJ tells me that if a person is detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
services that they remain at real risk of ill-treatment and harm,  and  that
internal relocation is not  an  option  for  a  person  at  real  risk  (see
paragraphs (4) and (5) of the headnote).

19. I find, applying the lower civil level of  proof  applicable  in  asylum
cases, that the appellant therefore has a well-founded fear  of  persecution
in accordance with 7(a) of the country guidance set out in  GJ.  Her  appeal
is allowed in accordance with the UK's obligations under Article 3  ECHR  on
the same grounds.

20. The appellant argues that article 3 is also engaged because  her  mental
health is so fragile that there is a risk that return  will  result  in  her
own suicide.
21. In AA (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 23  the  Court  of  Appeal  acknowledged  a
distinction between "domestic" cases, where the risk is of suicide  in  this
country on being told  of  the  decision  or  of  suicide  in  transit,  and
"foreign" cases, where the risk relates to the situation  after  arrival  in
the receiving country. The Court of Appeal said "Any  Immigration  Judge  is
entitled to take the view that the risk of suicide in the UK  upon  learning
of a final decision to remove  her  would  be  adequately  managed  in  this
country by  the  relevant  authorities:  see  J,  ante,  paragraph  57.  ...
Moreover, the Immigration Judge would be entitled to assume  that  the  Home
Secretary would take appropriate  measures  to  guard  against  any  suicide
attempt during the  relatively  brief  transit  to  Belgium,  including  the
provision of appropriately qualified escorts: see J, paragraphs 61 and 62."

22. In Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ 362 the  Court  of  Appeal
said that even where there was no objective risk on  return,  there  came  a
point at which the undisturbed finding that an appellant had  been  tortured
and raped in captivity had to be conscientiously  related  to  credible  and
uncontradicted expert evidence that the likely effect of  the  psychological
trauma, if return was enforced, was suicide.

23. The evidence indicates that the appellant's mood is so  low  that  there
is a moderate risk that she will  attempt  to  take  her  own  life  if  she
abandons hope of remaining in the UK. The case of AA (Iraq)  tells  me  that
the risk created by the appellant's suicidal ideation is outweighed  by  the
protections offered by the respondent. I have sympathy  for  the  appellant,
and I am concerned for her welfare, but I am reassured that  the  respondent
has both the resources and the  will  to  protect  the  appellant  from  her
instinct to compromise  her  own  life.  In  this  respect,  the  respondent
honours her duty to protect the appellant's article 3 rights.

24. But, as I have found the appellant has established a  well-founded  fear
of persecution, by analogy I find that her claim engages article  3  of  the
Human Rights Convention because she would face a real  risk  of  inhuman  or
degrading treatment if she were returned to her country of origin.


25. The Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal is based on a material  error
of law and must be set aside. I substitute  my  own  decision  allowing  the
appeal on asylum and article 3 ECHR grounds.



Decision

26.   The determination of First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  promulgated
on 31 December 2015 contains a material error of law.  I  set  the  decision
aside. I substitute the following decision.

27. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

28. The appeal is allowed on article 3 ECHR grounds.

Signed                                                              Date 18
April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
