
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07207/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 29th October 2015                |On: 3rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    N M D
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Andrew Joseph, Albany Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant
continues to be granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant for  the  purposes  of
    the application before me I refer to the parties as they  were  in  the
    first tier for convenience.

 2. The Respondent appeals the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Rourke promulgated on 15th January 2015 in which  the  judge  allowed
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of his claim for international
    protection.  The Appellant had  argued  that  he  was  an  undocumented
    Bidoon and it was common between the parties  that  if  he  established
    that to the low standard of real risk his claim would succeed.

 3. The grounds upon which permission has been granted in the appeal before
    me deals in essence with two parts of the judge's findings of fact.

 4. The first is whether or not the judge has adequately  reasoned  why  he
    accepted the evidence of the Appellant's witness whom it  was  asserted
    was his relative and able to provide information as to  his  status  in
    Kuwait.  The judge found that he could be  confident  in  that  witness
    evidence.  I note the basis of the contest on credibility is accurately
    set out in the judge's decision at paragraph 14  headed  "submissions".
    The first point taken is  that  the  Appellant  did  not  provide  full
    details of the relatives when he was interviewed, the  second  that  he
    did not provide DNA evidence, the third  that  witnesses  with  similar
    surnames in fact spelt their names differently.  Further in respect  of
    the witnesses who did not attend the hearing it was argued  that  their
    statements should carry little weight.

 5. I find no merit the ground.  The judge had the benefit  of  seeing  and
    hearing the witness give his evidence and it is quite  clear  that  the
    judge has dealt with the  relevant  points  that  were  raised  in  the
    submission, in particular at 17(a)(3), where the  judge  explained   he
    found nothing adverse in the failure of the Appellant to be cautious in
    interview in providing full details of his  relatives  already  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. In terms of the generally expressed concern that the Appellant had  not
    provided  DNA  evidence,  the  absence  of   such   evidence   is   not
    determinative of the point. The Respondent could of course have  sought
    it, as, certainly in terms of  the  witness  who  attended  before  the
    court, the detail of that person was available to the Respondent at  an
    early stage.  In those circumstances it  is  not  surprising  that  the
    judge did not find that the absence of DNA evidence was  a  significant
    factor. Whilst it might have been better for him to  have  specifically
    said so no error arises.  It is not incumbent upon a judge to deal with
    every contention, particularly where on its face it  is  not  a  strong
    point.  Similar considerations apply in the submission  made  that  the
    spelling of the witnesses with  similar  surnames  are  different  from
    those used by the Appellant in respect of his own name.

 7. Mr Richards made the point before me  that  the  fact  that  the  judge
    generally found the Appellant credible did not excuse  the  judge  from
    having  to  give  proper  reasons  in  respect  of  the  assessment  of
    credibility of the witness.  I find that this is not a case  where  the
    judge has found an Appellant generally credible and then used that as a
    basis to assess the credibility of a witness.  The judge clearly  noted
    that the witness he heard had  been  cross-examined,  and  reading  the
    decision in the  round  it  is  clear  that  his  performance  did  not
    undermine his credibility.

 8. The second part of the challenge asserts inadequate  dealing  with  the
    inconsistent evidence of the Appellant:

      i) in respect of his date of  arrest.  The  Appellant's  evidence  was
         consistent in saying that that he had been arrested on  the  second
         demonstration which he had attended, but he  gave  different  dates
         for the date of it.  His evidence to the judge was that he  made  a
         mistake when he gave the date initially.  The Record of Proceedings
         reveals that the Appellant said that the second demonstration, i.e.
         the one which had led to his arrest, had lasted over  a  number  of
         days.  The judge in finding that the  Appellant's  confusion  about
         dates may have arisen from the evidence that the demonstration  had
         run over several days is therefore not a matter of  speculation  by
         the judge that the demonstration may have run over days, but rooted
         in the evidence that he heard.  The standard of proof is the  lower
         standard of proof and in those circumstances the judge's acceptance
         of the explanation was open to him on his overall assessment of the
         evidence.

     ii) in respect of the discrepant evidence as  to  whether  or  not  the
         Appellant lived in the desert  or  in  the  city:  the  Appellant's
         evidence to the judge was that he lived in the city  which  was  on
         the edge of the desert.  The judge does not specifically deal  with
         the issue in terms of the reconciliation of that evidence with  the
         evidence in his asylum interview that he lived in the desert.  I am
         satisfied that the failure to do so does not amount to  a  material
         error.  There is no evidence that the explanation offered,  and  by
         inference, in terms of the assessment of  the  credibility  of  the
         Appellant, accepted by the judge, is in fact erroneous, and, in the
         overall context of the case, there was sufficient positive evidence
         that  it  was  not  a  matter  upon  which  significant  issues  of
         credibility hinged.

 9. The finding that the Appellant is an undocumented Bidoon is made on the
    evidence, is in the round, and is adequately reasoned.

10. The decision allowing the appeal reveals no error of law and stands.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
