
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/07789/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 March 2016                       |On 4 July 2016                  |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                              ALI REZA NEAMATI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Nicholson instructed by Bolton CAB
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This was an appeal by the Appellant against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Heynes promulgated on 17 August 2015 which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against a refusal of asylum on all grounds.
4. In a decision dated 4 March 2015 I set aside the decision in  so  far  as
   it related to the  Appellants  claimed  conversion  to  Christianity  and
   because there was no assessment of the Appellant's risk on  return  as  a
   failed asylum seeker.
5. The matter was adjourned for those matters to be reheard before  me  with
   the Reverend Binns to give evidence again.

The Appellant's Case

6. It was accepted by Mr  Harrison  that  if  I  were  to  accept  that  the
   Appellant was a genuine convert to Christianity in the light of the  most
   recent  COI  report  on  Christians  and  Christian  Converts  that  such
   conversion alone would put the Appellant at risk.

7. The Appellant gave evidence before me. This can  be  summarised  in  this
   way:


   a) He adopted the contents of his witness statement at pages 2-4  of  the
      bundle dated 2.6.2016.


   b) He had now been a Christian for 18 months and intended to continue  as
      a Christian.


   Cross Examination


   c) He confirmed that while he  lived  in  Iran  he  had  no  interest  in
      Christianity. His family  were  very  religious  Muslims  and  he  had
      attended Mosque with his father up to the age of  17/18  and  then  he
      avoided attending as he had no interest in going as  he  had  no  deep
      feelings about the practise of Islam.


   d) He confirmed that he was still in regular contact with his family. His
      father was very angry about his conversion to Islam but  he  had  told
      his father that he had found the right path for him and was at peace.


   e) He confirmed that converts were considered apostates in Iran  and  the
      punishment was death.  He thinks his dad wants him dead but  he  would
      try and bring them along the path he had chosen.


   f) He stated that the problem in Iran was that  if  born  into  a  Muslim
      family you have to go along with it, it was  compulsory.  Christianity
      was different in that you were not made to be afraid of God.


   g) He was baptised on 26 June 2015. His life had changed as he had  found
      the right path.


   h) In re-examination he confirmed that since he had become a Christian he
      looked at people differently:  he  stated  that  he  had  a  different
      attitude to women in that  now  he  viewed  men  and  women  as  equal
      contrary to what was taught in Islam.


8. I then heard evidence from The  Reverend  Elizabeth  Binns  Vicar  of  St
   Thomas and St John with St Philip  in  Radcliffe.  Her  evidence  can  be
   summarised as follows:


   a) She adopted the contents of her witness statement of 19 July 2015 and9
      June 2016.


   b) She was absolutely sure that the Appellant was a  genuine  convert  to
      Christianity.


   c) She felt that  from  the  beginning  the  Appellant  was  looking  for
      something and she described the nature  of  his  conversion  as  quite
      dramatic, reminiscent of her own. He was lit up with joy and even  the
      Bishop remarked on it at his confirmation. She stated that  he  rarely
      missed Church, helped others in the Church. She had a large  community
      of Iranian Christians in her Church. She felt  he  had  a  very  clear
      understanding that God had called him and he was walking with Jesus.


   d) She had perceived changes in him since they first met noting  that  he
      had become more reflective about his faith and life. He wanted  to  be
      part  of  the  community:  she  volunteered  that  he  treated   women
      differently and saw them as brothers and sisters. He felt able to  hug
      and kiss them in Church and remarked that this would not be  the  norm
      for a Muslim with a female non family member.


   e) She accepted that his claim about the circumstances in which  he  left
      Iran had been rejected as untruthful but said it made no difference to
      her assessment of the genuine nature of his conversion. She noted that
      everyone made mistakes and told lies but this did not  impact  on  the
      depth of his faith or the genuineness of his conversion.


   Cross Examination


   f) She reaffirmed that everyone falls  into  sin  and  she  believed  his
      conversion was genuine. She knew how she had felt when she  turned  to
      faith and saw similarities in the Appellants response. She believed he
      was genuine.


   g) Out of her congregation of approximately 120 people 25 were  Iranians.
      More than half had been accepted as refugees and were still  attending
      the Church. Two who had been relocated by the  Respondent  were  still
      attending Church in their new home area.


   h) Hers was a Church of England Church and they did not  target  converts
      but those who came were made very welcome.


   i) When asked what checks and balances there were in  the  assessment  of
      those who had converted she stated that such people were supported  by
      a number of groups within the Church.  There  was  discussion  but  no
      interrogation. She had when she felt it necessary  advised  those  who
      were not ready for baptism to wait but had not felt that was necessary
      with the Appellant.


   j) She confirmed that she had never been 'duped' by  anyone  claiming  to
      have converted and  she  felt  that  she  had  never  made  a  mistake
      regarding baptism.


   k) She based her assessment on prayer, thinking and her  confidence  that
      God would let her know if she was wrong.


Findings


9. I have looked at the evidence in the round taking  into  account  all  of
   the evidence both oral and written whether I refer to it specifically  or
   not.


10. The issue for me to determine is  whether  the  Appellant  has  met  the
   evidential burden of establishing that since his arrival in the UK he has
   converted to Christianity and that his conversion is genuine  and  not  a
   device in order to be granted refugee status given  that  the  Respondent
   accepts in the December 2015 that for an  Iranian  Muslim  conversion  to
   Christianity without more would put him at risk of persecution on return.


11. Any assessment of the genuine nature of  his  conversion  cannot  ignore
   the fact that he gave an account of the reasons why  he  fled  from  Iran
   which were rejected by the First -tier Tribunal and those findings stand.
   These findings that he has been untruthful weigh heavily upon  me  but  I
   accept that even findings that he has been untruthful about why  he  left
   Iran do not inevitably mean that his conversion cannot  be  genuine:  the
   Reverend Binns gave very persuasive evidence (and I will  deal  with  her
   evidence in more detail later) about many of those who find  faith  being
   sinners or people who have reached  a  cross  roads  in  their  lives.  I
   therefore keep those other findings in mind although I am satisfied  that
   they are not determinative  of  the  genuine  nature  of  the  Appellants
   claimed conversion since he arrived in the UK.


12. The Appellant has given a credible account of his  disillusionment  with
   the religion that he was born into, Islam, and the feeling of unhappiness
   with the fact that following the religion was compulsory.


13. I accept that the Appellant arrived in the UK on  1  November  2014  and
   very soon after he began attending Reverend Binns Church invited there he
   says by a friend Mr Esfandyari who found  him  upset  and  depressed  and
   suggested that attending Church with him might help  given  that  it  had
   brought him comfort and support. Just as Reverent Binns asserts he  found
   the congregation to be very welcoming and he describes finding  'kindness
   and calmness' there. I found this account to be credible.


14. Since November 2014 the Appellant has attended Church  weekly  and  this
   culminated in his baptism on 28 June 2015 and his confirmation on 29 June
   2015 by the Bishop of Bolton. His attendance has persisted and he attends
   the Pilgrim Course at St Marys  Church  in  Radcliffe  and  other  social
   events at St Phillips Community Centre in Radcliffe. There are  a  number
   of letters of support from members of  the  Church  congregation  in  the
   bundle. I therefore find that he continues to be a  regular  church  goer
   and is engaged in the Church community beyond Sunday attendance.


15. Therefore on the face of it the  Appellant  has  done  what  he  can  to
   become a Christian. He has given a credible account of  a  long  standing
   disillusionment with the  faith  he  was  born  into  and  why  therefore
   Christianity was of interest to him. He has also described ways in  which
   he asserts he has changed for  the  better,  an  important  indicator  of
   genuine faith according to Reverend Binns, in that  he  feels  he  has  a
   better relationship with a God he does not fear that has  brought  him  a
   calm and certainty that he is on the right path. I  found  it  persuasive
   that when asked by me whether his new  faith  made  him  behave  or  view
   people differently he stated that he now  viewed  women  in  a  different
   light, as equals. Interestingly when asked the same question, whether she
   had noticed any  change  in  the  way  he  behaved  that  she  considered
   attributable to his conversion Reverend  Binns  stated  that  he  treated
   women differently and recognised that they were brothers and sisters  and
   was able to participate in the kiss of peace in Church.


16. Central to  my  assessment  of  whether  the  Appellants  conversion  is
   genuine is of course the evidence of Reverend Binns as she is  an  expert
   witness as to the Christian  religion  and  someone  who  has  known  the
   Appellant since November 2014 and seen how he behaved in Church and  been
   privy to any views that others have formed of him. I found her to  be  an
   impressive and persuasive witness: thoughtful,  articulate,  prepared  to
   make concessions. She has been an ordained priest for 11  years  and  was
   more recently appointed the Vicar of her  Church.  She  has  in  my  view
   considerable life experience in addition to her work  within  the  Church
   and this was reflected in the way she gave her evidence.


17. Reverend Binns was absolutely clear that she believed the Appellant  has
   genuinely found faith and become a committed Christian. It  is  her  view
   that faith is not simply demonstrated  by  an  ability  to  recite  Bible
   knowledge although she accepts that  the  Appellant  has  taken  part  in
   Christian education courses but it is a 'far more demanding test  of  how
   we develop as a human being and how we  demonstrate  God's  love  in  our
   lives.' It is her believe having observed and  spoken  to  the  Appellant
   over a regular period of time that that he has  accepted  that  challenge
   and is demonstrating Christ's love in his life.


18. Reverend Binns as I have  indicated  above  was  quite  clear  that  her
   absolute confidence in the genuine nature of  the  Appellants  conversion
   was unaffected by her knowledge that the Appellants account of events  in
   Iran had been rejected. She asserted that sinners can become  Christians,
   which must be true, and she gave a credible account of recognising in the
   Appellant the sort of sudden and crisis driven finding of faith that  she
   had had herself gone through and she states that the reality is that most
   Christians truly find God when they  feel  that  they  have  run  out  of
   options and when their life seems at the lowest point. She noted a joy in
   him that she attributed to his finding faith and stated that  the  Bishop
   of Bolton who carried out his confirmation recognised the  same  look  in
   the Appellant and remarked upon it. These are  observations  relevant  to
   the issue of genuine conversion from experienced people and I accept them
   as credible.


19. I note that the Reverend Binns was not  someone  who  accepted  people's
   desire to be baptised unhesitatingly and she confirmed that in  the  past
   she had told people that they were not ready. This in my view  makes  her
   evidence more persuasive. I also note  that  among  her  congregation  of
   Iranian converts half have been granted asylum but  none  have  abandoned
   the Church so her judgement of them has not been misconceived:  indeed  I
   note that the  Appellants  friend  Mr  Esfandyari's  appeal  against  the
   refusal of asylum was allowed last  July  and  he  still  attends  Church
   together with the Appellant.


20.  Taking the that evidence in the round, I therefore find, based  on  the
   lower standard of proof and  even  allowing  for  the  findings  made  in
   respect of events in Iran, that the Appellant has proved those facts upon
   which he relies in relation to his conversion to Christianity.


21. Having made that finding I do not propose to address the issue  of  risk
   on return as a failed asylum seeker.


Conclusions on Asylum


22. I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof on  him  to
   show that he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  reason
   recognised by the Geneva Convention. Accordingly, the Appellant's removal
   would cause the UK to be in breach of its obligations  under  the  Geneva
   Convention.


Conclusions on ECHR


23. On the facts as  established  in  this  appeal,  there  are  substantial
   grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
   treatment in breach of ECHR.


Decision


24. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


25. The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian grounds


26. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


27. No anonymity direction is made


Signed                                                              Date
2.7.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

