
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07057/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th March 2016                           |On 15th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                                     SP
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pickering (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with
    permission, against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Birkby, hereinafter, "the judge")  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent of 31st March 2015  refusing  to  grant  her
    asylum or any other form of international protection but  granting  her
    limited discretionary leave outside the Immigration Rules, for a period
    of one year, in accordance with a published policy.

 2. The judge made an anonymity direction.  Nothing was said at the hearing
    before me regarding this direction but, given the nature  of  the  case
    and the sensitive information it discloses, I have decided to  continue
    that direction so the Appellant remains the beneficiary of anonymity.

 3. By way of background, the Appellant, who was born on [  ]  1992,  is  a
    national of Albania.  She left that country on 5th November 2013.   She
    has explained that, prior to  doing  so,  she  resided  in  Shkodra  in
    Albania with her parents and two younger brothers.  She said  that  her
    mother is a teacher, her father is a builder and that she  herself  has
    qualified as a midwife.  She said that her parents had  wanted  her  to
    enter into an arranged marriage but that she  did  not  want  this  and
    that, having met a man I shall refer to as AK in a caf� in Albania, she
    formed a relationship with him and decided to go to Italy where he  was
    based.  Her parents, according to her, told her  that  she  should  not
    continue the relationship with AK but she disregarded  that.   However,
    having gone to Italy with him, he forced her into  prostitution  though
    she was later assisted in escaping by a client and  was  then  brought,
    seemingly with the continued assistance  of  that  client,  to  England
    where she made her  asylum  claim.  Since  arriving  she  has  received
    counselling as a result of mental health difficulties  consequent  upon
    her  experiences  including  assistance,  in  this  regard,   from   an
    organisation called Solace.  She claimed asylum on the basis of a  fear
    of being re-trafficked by AK and also said that she was estranged  from
    her parents, would have no protection in Albania and would not be  able
    to  safely  relocate  to  a  different  part  of  that  country.    She
    subsequently added, although she had not said this initially, that  her
    father had threatened to kill her and she believed that threat might be
    carried out.

 4. The Respondent did accept that the Appellant was an  Albanian  national
    with  a  history  of  having  been  trafficked  for  the  purposes   of
    prostitution.  However, the Respondent did not accept the  entirety  of
    her account, noting that her credibility was  damaged  by  a  delay  in
    claiming asylum and by inconsistencies as to how she had exited  Italy.
    The Respondent also decided that the Appellant would not  face  a  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm upon  return,  that  in  any  event
    there was a sufficiency protection for her and that, further, she could
    internally relocate, perhaps to Tirana, where she could receive support
    from non-governmental organisations.

 5. The judge, in a careful and  lengthy  determination,  referred  to  and
    summarised what had been said in the country guidance case of AM and BM
    (trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC).  He expressed  some
    concerns about the evidence of the Appellant and thought that  she  had
    been vague, implausible and inconsistent as to  a  number  of  matters.
    She had, he said, previously indicated she would be willing to  contact
    friends upon return to  Albania  but  had  subsequently  said,  at  the
    hearing, that she would not do so.  She had denied the availability  of
    assistance from agencies in  Albania  even  though  background  country
    material  suggested  there  were  such  agencies  albeit   that   their
    effectiveness might be  "questionable".   She  had  not  been  able  to
    explain her view that people would find out about her  history  if  she
    were to relocate  away  from  her  home  area.   She  had  provided  an
    implausible account  of  her  escape  from  effective  captivity  as  a
    prostitute.  She had been inconsistent as to whether  or  not  she  had
    qualified as a midwife.  She had raised  the  claim  regarding  threats
    from her father at a  very  late  stage.   This  caused  the  judge  to
    disbelieve the account of her escape and her contention that her father
    had threatened her.  The judge did accept that  she  had  "had  a  very
    difficult relationship with her parents when she was  in  Albania"  but
    was not satisfied she had ever been the recipient of threats  from  her
    family.  He did not find that she would be at risk at the hands of  AK,
    pointing out that there was no reason to think  that  he  was  even  in
    Albania.  In any event, even if he were to return to  Albania  to  look
    for her he would not be able to find her if, for example, she relocated
    to Tirana.  The judge was not satisfied that the  Appellant  would,  in
    fact, be at risk upon return to her home area but thought, even if  she
    was, it would not be unduly harsh to expect her to internally  relocate
    and that, if she did so, she would be safe.   He  considered  that  her
    ability to work as a midwife (his having accepted that she was in  fact
    so qualified) would assist her in relocating and he  also  pointed  out
    that there were psychiatric services available in  Albania  should  she
    require them.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Originally, there were  five  grounds  of  application  but  the  fifth
    ground, based upon the judge's refusal to adjourn the  proceedings,  is
    now abandoned.  In summary, the remaining four were to the effect that;

      a) The judge had erred in  failing  to  correctly  apply  the  country
         guidance decision of AM and BM in relation to the issue of  whether
         her history as a previously trafficked woman  might  be  discovered
         and in relation to whether she would be able to find employment  as
         a lone woman in Albania.

      b)  The  judge  had  erred  in  failing  to  adequately  consider  the
         psychological impact of the Appellant having been trafficked.

      c) The judge had erred in stating that the effectiveness  of  agencies
         in place to assist previously trafficked women  was  "questionable"
         whilst inconsistently rejecting the Appellant's own  evidence  that
         such agencies could not help her.  Linked to  this  was  a  claimed
         error in his failing to adequately consider  Country  Guidance  and
         the background country material when assessing the effectiveness of
         agencies.

      d) The judge had failed to adequately explain why he was rejecting the
         conclusions  in  the  expert  report  of  Dr  Korovilas  which  was
         supportive of the Appellant's contentions regarding her safety upon
         return.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on all of the above grounds by a Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly, the matter came before me for
    a consideration as to whether the judge had erred in law  and,  if  so,
    what should follow from that.  Representation, at that hearing, was  as
    indicated above. I am grateful to each representative.

 8. Ms Pickering, for the Appellant, accepted that the  judge  had  made  a
    finding that the Appellant could safely return to  her  home  area  and
    then an alternative finding that, if that were not correct,  she  could
    safely relocate.  Whilst some of the grounds seemed to relate  only  to
    the internal flight issue, Ms Pickering contended that  there  was,  in
    fact, an overlap between the question of safety in the  home  area  and
    the question of internal flight  such  that  all  of  the  grounds  was
    relevant to both.  As to the first of her grounds, she  said  that  the
    judge had merely  reproduced  the  headnote  of  the  country  guidance
    decision in AM and BM without undertaking a proper consideration of the
    guidance and without properly applying it.  Whilst it may be  that  the
    judge had dealt with risk from AK  his  current  whereabouts  were  not
    known.  The judge had effectively found that she was estranged from her
    family.  The decision in AM and BM  did  suggest  that  women  formerly
    trafficked were vulnerable  to  re-trafficking  and,  accordingly,  the
    Appellant would be at risk even if the risk did not stem from AK.   The
    mere fact that she has qualifications did not mean she was not at  risk
    or that she could relocate.  As to ground 2,  although  the  judge  had
    referred to the letters written by  Solace,  that  was  not  sufficient
    because he had not taken account of the information contained  therein.
    It was clear from what was said in AM and BM that a  proper  assessment
    as to the Appellant's mental health situation was  required.   Nor  had
    the judge  said  enough  about  mental  health  facilities  which  were
    available in Albania.  As to the third ground,  the  judge  might  have
    been referring to wider agencies rather than shelters but, even if that
    were right, it was not  sufficient  for  him  to  simply  observe  that
    agencies in Albania exist.  As to the  fourth  ground,  the  judge  had
    appeared to reject the expert report because he thought the expert  had
    not  considered  the  Appellant's  family  background,   her   previous
    education and her qualification as  a  midwife  which  he  (the  judge)
    thought would prevent her falling into destitution but that  could  not
    realistically be said because the expert had material provided to  him,
    for the purposes of the preparation of the report, which contained  all
    of that information.  Thus, it could not have been overlooked.

 9. Mr Diwyncz, in a brief submission in  response,  contended  that,  when
    taking an overview, what had been said in the  grounds  and  orally  on
    behalf of the Appellant amounted to "eloquent  disagreement"  with  the
    judge's findings but no more than that.  The judge had dealt  with  all
    relevant issues in light of country guidance and was entitled  to  take
    account of the fact that the Appellant was very well educated.

10. I have concluded that the making of the decision by the judge  did  not
    involve the making of  an  error  of  law  and  that,  therefore,  that
    decision should  stand.   I  set  out  my  reasons  for  reaching  that
    conclusion below.

11. In general terms, as indicated, the judge's determination is a  careful
    and thorough one.  Whilst it is contended that he has failed  to  apply
    relevant country guidance, as contained in the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AM and BM, it is apparent that he did have  what  was  said
    therein firmly in mind.  He  referred  to  that  case  specifically  at
    paragraph 49 of  the  judgment  and  he  summarised  the  bulk  of  the
    headnote.  I appreciate that  the  detail  and  nuances  of  a  country
    guidance decision are not always properly reflected in a headnote  but,
    in this case, it does seem to me that the headnote  serves  as  a  good
    summary of what is said in the body of the decision and  that,  in  any
    event, the reference to it does show that the judge was taking  account
    of that decision.  The mere fact that he only chose  to  reproduce  the
    headnote in his decision does not mean that he did not have in mind the
    overall content of that country guidance determination.

12. As to the contention that the judge  had  not  properly  addressed  the
    matter of whether the history of the Appellant's trafficking might come
    to light upon return, the judge did not think (see paragraph 50(iv)  of
    the determination) that she had been open  about  how  such  a  history
    would be discovered albeit that he accepted people would be inquisitive
    about her situation.  The real point about risk on return to  the  home
    area, though, was one of whether she  would  be  persecuted  either  by
    being killed or harmed by her father or being  trafficked  once  again.
    The judge rejected the contention that her  father  had  threatened  to
    kill her and it was entirely open to him to do so bearing in  mind  the
    very late stage at which that aspect of the account was introduced.  He
    rejected any risk from her former trafficker noting that there  was  no
    evidence to suggest or reason to suppose that he was in Albania at all.
     He clearly did not find that  the  Appellant  was,  despite  her  most
    unfortunate history, vulnerable to  being  re-trafficked  by  different
    traffickers bearing in mind her education and  qualifications  and  the
    absence of psychiatric evidence in the form of  a  psychiatric  report.
    If the point being made in the grounds was that the judge had failed to
    properly consider the history of trafficking in  the  context  of  risk
    upon return to the home area then I would conclude  that  that  is  not
    made out.  It is further said, as part of  ground  1,  that  the  judge
    failed to adequately consider whether the Appellant would  be  able  to
    obtain employment as a lone woman in Albania.  That seems to me to be a
    point more relevant to internal flight than to risk in the home area so
    does not assist the Appellant so long as the finding regarding the lack
    of risk in the home area is sound.  In any event, though, the judge did
    address the issue at paragraph  53  of  his  determination  noting  her
    education and the lack of psychiatric evidence to  suggest  that  there
    had been an adverse impact which would prevent her  obtaining  work  in
    Tirana and the fact that she is a qualified  midwife.   For  all  these
    reasons I conclude that ground 1 is not made out.

13. Turning, then, to ground 2, that too appears to  me to be  a  challenge
    more relevant to internal flight and its viability than to risk in  the
    home area.  In any event, the judge had  before  him  written  evidence
    prepared by persons involved with an organisation called  Solace  which
    provides a specialised therapeutic  service  for  refugees  and  asylum
    seekers.  At paragraph 30 of the determination he  noted  part  of  the
    content of a report by a lead therapist at Solace and, at paragraph 31,
    noted, in summary form,  the  content  of  a  further  letter  from  an
    employee of Solace.  He noted what was said about her health  and  mood
    having been in decline at the time  the  lead  therapist's  report  was
    provided and what was said by the  employee  of  Solace  regarding  the
    Appellant being treated for depression, stress, anxiety, nightmares and
    lack of sleep.  It is  possible  that  a  different  judge  might  have
    attached greater weight to those documents but I cannot  say  that  the
    judge did not attach some weight to them (in general terms weight being
    a matter for him) or take them into account in his  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's ability to successfully relocate, should such a  course  of
    action be necessary (though of course the judge had  concluded  it  was
    not given the lack of risk in the home  area).   For  these  reasons  I
    conclude that ground 2 is not made out.

14. As to the third ground, it is clear that the judge did  not  think  the
    Appellant was being frank with him as to the availability  of  agencies
    to assist previously trafficked women in Albania, making the point,  at
    paragraph 50(iii) that she had been "dismissive of the  help  that  she
    could get and somewhat simplistic and dogmatic in  the  responses  that
    she gave".  Ms Pickering, I think, sees an inconsistency on the part of
    the judge in his view as to what the Appellant had  to  say  about  the
    availability  of  such  assistance  and  his  own  comment   that   the
    effectiveness of such agencies in Albania is "questionable".  I do  not
    see the inconsistency. In saying that the assistance was "questionable"
    the judge was not saying that there were no available agencies or  that
    they were entirely ineffective.  However, he noted that she had gone so
    far as to say "The government did not offer help"  and  that  she  knew
    that because "That is how the government is".  Clearly what  the  judge
    thought was that whilst the agencies  were  not  wholly  effective  the
    Appellant was being less than wholly truthful in seeming to go  so  far
    as to deny the existence of such help at all and,  insofar  as  it  was
    relevant to the outcome of the appeal, the judge was entitled  to  draw
    adverse inferences with respect to her credibility from that.

15. There is then a criticism of  the  judge  for  an  alleged  failure  to
    consider, in light of the country guidance decision in AM and  BM,  and
    in light of background country material, the effectiveness of  agencies
    which support trafficked women in Albania.  It does  not  seem  to  me,
    though, that, in fact, the judge relied upon the effectiveness of  such
    agencies for his key conclusion that the Appellant was not at  risk  in
    her home area at all.  That conclusion was  based  upon  his  disbelief
    that she had received threats from her family and his view,  which  was
    open to him and which is not the subject of  specific  challenge,  that
    her former trafficker is not likely to be in Albania and so  would  not
    be in a position to cause her future harm.  However, his  overall  view
    in so far as it mattered on the point was clearly  that  such  agencies
    provide some assistance though not of a wholly  effective  nature,  his
    having used the term  "questionable".   That  seems  to  me  to  be  an
    entirely reasonable view to conclude  from  the  materials  before  him
    including the country guidance  determination  referred  to  above.   I
    might add, insofar as it may be relevant,  that  in  TD  and  AD,  more
    recent country guidance dealing with similar issues, it is  noted  that
    the Albanian government had made significant efforts in recent times to
    improve its response to trafficking and that there is now  in  place  a
    reception and reintegration programme  for  trafficking  victims  which
    includes, if necessary, the availability of places in a shelter  for  a
    period of up to two years.  For these reasons I find that  this  ground
    is not made out.

16. Ground 4 is a short ground relating to the judge's view of the  content
    of an expert report relied upon by the Appellant  and  prepared  by  Dr
    James Korovilas.  It was Dr Korovilas' view that the  Appellant  should
    not have to return to Albania and that she would face a  real  risk  of
    destitution if she did so.  This was on the basis that she would be  in
    a particularly vulnerable position having been rejected by  her  family
    (though the judge's findings did not go so far as to say she  had  been
    so rejected) and her being a  former  trafficking  victim.   The  judge
    quoted from  part  of  Dr  Korovilas'  conclusions  but  explained,  at
    paragraph 50(ix) that he was concerned about them  because  the  expert
    did not appear, in reaching them, to consider  that  the  Appellant  is
    from a family where her mother is a teacher and her father  a  builder,
    that she had studied for three years at university  and  that  she  had
    obtained a qualification as a midwife.  He commented that the  omission
    of a  consideration  of  such  matters  "significantly  undermines  the
    credibility of the assertions made in the report".  Ms Pickering argues
    that Dr Korovilas can be assumed to have taken  those  various  factors
    into  account  because  material  provided  to  him  made  all  of  the
    background facts clear.  That is one way of looking at it I suppose but
    it does seem to me that, bearing in mind the absence of  any  reasoning
    as to those factors in the conclusion, the judge was entitled  to  take
    the view he did.  He did not, in my judgment, err in law in so doing.

17. Accordingly, therefore, my decision is that the  judge's  decision  did
    not involve the making of an error of law.  Accordingly, that  decision
    shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.  That decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
