
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
AA/07074/2014

                                                AA/06722/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport Upper Tribunal IAC      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 February 2016                      | On 29 April 2016                   |
|Prepared 10 February 2016                |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                   Ms D K
                                                                         Mr
D K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Neale, Counsel instructed by Migrant Law Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  Appellants,  nationals   of   Georgia,   appealed   against   the
    Respondent's decision dated 21 August 2014 to refuse their claims based
    on asylum, human  rights  and  Humanitarian  Protection  grounds.   The
    matter came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Troup(the  judge)  who  on  7
    September 2015, dismissed their appeals with reference to  the  Refugee
    Convention, Articles 2 and  3  ECHR  and  in  respect  of  Humanitarian
    Protection.  He also dismissed their appeals with reference to  Article
    8 ECHR.

2.   It is clear that when this matter came before the judge he  received  a
    range of evidence concerning amongst other things the Yazidi an  ethnic
    and religious group found in Georgia.  The complication was  that  part
    of the  Appellants'  respective  families  were  either  supporters  of
    Jehovah's Witnesses  (JW)  or  else  were  opponents  of  JW.   In  the
    circumstances what then arose from the  facts  became  something  of  a
    confusion of issues as to what extent the first Appellant, as a  Yazidi
    woman and a JW, would come  into  difficulties  because  of  her  being
    pregnant by a relationship with a non-Yazidi and non-JW  partner.  This
    situation might bring trouble down upon  the  Second  Appellant's  head
    through the First Appellant's brother and for  him  failing  to  ensure
    that she did not act outside of the Yazidi faith and  or  have  such  a
    relationship leading to the pregnancy.

3.   The matter was to a degree  further  complicated  by  a  somewhat   old
    dispute over money arising between the first Appellants' elder  brother
    M who it was said had been in difficulties with local  police  officers
    over the purchase of a motor car and the return of the monies  provided
    to effect the purchase.  This conflation of events  over  a  period  of
    time led the Appellants to come to the United Kingdom; having been sent
    or it was intended to send them on for some reason to Barbados  in  the
    West Indies.

4.       Permission to appeal was given by F-t Tribunal judge Ransley  on  1
    October 2015.

5.   The judge made a number of findings upon their ethnic  group  and  upon
    many of the factual issues raised.  There was  really  not  significant
    challenge to a lot of the findings of fact but what was complained  was
    that the judge, perhaps in the circumstances in which the  matter  came
    before him and the paperwork as provided, confused issues  and  or  did
    not determine them correctly by reference to the evidence  before  him.
    It was certainly possible individually they  might  be  disregarded  or
    discounted in terms of the overall outcome but in this  case  what  was
    said was that they are cumulatively sufficient to show that  the  judge
    failed to properly consider the evidence.  In particular and  in  short
    it was said that at  paragraph  42  of  the  decision   the  judge  had
    misunderstood an answer, given in interview, by the first Appellant  as
    to what impact these events might have upon  her  family,  whoever  her
    family were included within the meaning of that word.  In  other  words
    close blood relations or more distant relations and it  was  said  that
    the judge misconstrued answers given so as to demonstrate  he  accepted
    that there was no wider family who posed a risk to  the  Appellants  in
    Georgia.

6.   Secondly, it is said that the  judge  having  accepted  the  Appellants
    were Yazidi in background and family had really failed to  address  the
    significance of  the  Appellants  being  Jehovah's  Witnesses  and  had
    wrongly assumed the wider family were also Jehovah's  Witnesses.   Thus
    such activities as had happened faced the  greater  prospect  of  being
    tolerated or accepted or certainly not forming the basis of  risk.   At
    paragraph 43 of the decision the judge having made  findings  in  these
    matters did not appear to appreciate the potential  difference  between
    conduct which might otherwise have been subject  to  criticism  carried
    out by Yazidi men might face different treatment and outcomes if it was
    carried out by a Yazidi woman.  In this sense it was said having regard
    to the expert evidence that the judge had simply not got to grips  with
    the potential issues associated with dishonour or bringing shame on the
    family. In this respect again it was said, as I have  already  adverted
    to, the judge failed to appreciate the potential difference between the
    treatment likely to be faced by the first  as  opposed  to  the  second
    Appellant arising from her pregnancy. It was argued  before  the  judge
    that the second Appellant for different  reasons  faced  risk  of  harm
    associated with the same events.

7.   Finally it was said that at paragraph 45 of the decision the judge  had
    simply not understood the extent to which threats  were  posed  by  the
    wider family both in the UK and elsewhere as to  pose  a  risk  to  the
    Appellants  as  claimed.   Of   themselves,   despite   the   trenchant
    submissions made, I could have taken the view that any other  Tribunal,
    if these matters were highlighted, might well  have  reached  the  same
    decision:   However I do not have confidence in that  outcome.  I  find
    the Original Tribunal's reasoning fell  short  and  was  inadequate  in
    terms of properly addressing the basis of assessment of risk on return,
    its sources and likely consequences. The decision's lack of reasons was
    an error of law.   This was not to say that if the matter  was  re-made
    the same result would not be achieved but it seemed to me the  gravamen
    of the complaint was essentially one of an error of law which took away
    the reasonable certainty that  the  outcome  has  been  arrived  at  by
    properly addressing the key elements of the claim and the key fears  of
    risks on return.

8.   A further point of attack without addressing all of Mr Neale's  grounds
    was that the judge speculated on why the Appellants' father, bearing in
    mind they were children at the time would have  spent  money  on  their
    travel to Barbados and the later travel of the Appellants'  mother  and
    elder sister to London when such costs could have met what was  assumed
    to be the basis of the financial civil dispute in being  at  the  time.
    It seemed to me the judge's consideration of that  undoubtedly  had  an
    element of speculation but on the other hand  it  is  clear  that  that
    issue was not going to the centrepiece of the claim of fear on  return.
    In those circumstances I find, whilst it  might  have  been  unwise  to
    speculate to the extent that he did, that of itself and by itself would
    not have demonstrated a material error of law.

9.   For these reasons I find that the Original Tribunal  cannot  stand  and
    the Appeals are allowed to the extent and the decisions will have to be
    re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

In this matter the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made an anonymity order  in
respect of both of the Appellants and in the  circumstances  I  consider  it
necessary and appropriate for that anonymity order to be continued.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 27 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey





