
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07379/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2015                         |On 18th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                          Mr Yogachandran Rajadurai
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lingajothy
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Yogachandran Rajadurai date of  birth  10th  February
    1967 is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  The Appellant is appealing against the
    decision of Judge Lambert promulgated on 13th November 2014.   By  that
    decision  the  judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent to remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom after refusing him asylum or other relief by which he would  be
    entitled to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. By decision taken  on  1st  December  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish granted permission to appeal.

 3. On the date of  the  hearing  of  27th  October  2014  the  Appellant's
    representative  failed  to   attend.    There   was   at   that   stage
    correspondence indicating  that  the  representative  by  reason  of  a
    medical emergency was unable to attend the hearing.  The  judge  having
    considered that determined to proceed  with  the  hearing  without  the
    Appellant being represented.

 4. My attention has been drawn to the case of Nwaigwe  [2014]  UKUT  00418
    IAC.  That decision makes  clear  that  where  a  Tribunal  refuses  an
    adjournment request such a decision could in principle be erroneous  in
    law in several respects, one of those respects is with  regard  to  the
    issue of fairness.  Fairness arises in a number of aspects and that  is
    set out within the headnote of the case itself.  Fairness may not  only
    be an issue as to whether or not  a  party  has  been  deprived  of  an
    effective right to a hearing but where the perception is that  a  party
    feels prejudice because of a failure to adjourn the case.

 5. In this case it is a very simple matter that the  judge  determined  to
    proceed despite the  fact  that  a  representative  instructed  by  the
    Appellant was not in attendance.  Documentation has now been  submitted
    which indicated indeed that the  representative  had  been  taken  into
    hospital albeit on the day after the date of the hearing.  The  medical
    note from  St  George's  hospital  indicates  that  the  representative
    presented on 28th October  at  11.30  with  a  history  of  having  had
    diarrhoea  for  some  four  days.   The  representative  was  extremely
    dehydrated and the note from the hospital indicates that he was not fit
    to work for a further period of at least 24 hours or 48 hours after his
    diarrhoea had ceased.  He was provided with medication by the  hospital
    to deal with the symptoms that he was suffering.

 6. Taking those factors into account clearly the Appellant expected to  be
    represented and may feel, whether or not it was a right to  feel  such,
    that he had been prejudiced  by  the  fact  that  he  did  not  have  a
    representative in  attendance  at  his  hearing.   Such  would  give  a
    perception to a bystander that the Appellant felt  prejudice  and  that
    there was a degree of unfairness in proceeding with the hearing without
    the Appellant being represented.

 7. Such unfairness would I find lead to an error of law on the part of the
    judge.  The judge on the basis of the information  provided  determined
    to proceed with the hearing and I find that that may expose  the  whole
    proceedings to an issue of unfairness such as to be an error of law.

 8. In those circumstances I find that there is an  error  of  law  in  the
    judge proceeding with the hearing without the representative  being  in
    attendance.  I canvassed with the parties what the  appropriate  course
    was once it had been determined that there was an error of law and  the
    parties agreed that the appropriate course was for this  matter  to  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a full hearing without any
    of the findings of fact made by Judge Lambert being preserved.

 9. I do note that there had been a previous determination by Judge  Irvine
    in a previous appeal in respect of this  Appellant.   The  findings  of
    fact by Judge Irvine are to stand and  clearly  the  principles  within
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 do apply.

10. However it is appropriate for this matter to be remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.

Notice of Decision

There is an error of law within the decision and I remit the matter back  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a full hearing afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date: 13th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
