
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07883/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination       Reasons  |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 30th March 2016                            |On 19th April 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     MOM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter  "the  judge")  dismissing  his
    appeal, in a determination promulgated on 19th August 2015, against the
    Respondent's decision of 20th April 2015 refusing to grant  him  asylum
    or any other form of international protection.

 2. The Appellant was granted anonymity by the judge.  Although nothing was
    said to me about that, since such was granted and since no attempt  was
    made to persuade me not to continue  that  grant,  I  have  decided  to
    continue  it.   Accordingly,  the  Appellant  is  not  named  in   this
    determination.

 3. By way of background, the Appellant was born on 1st September 1996  and
    is a national  of  Iran.   The  Respondent  has  accepted  his  claimed
    nationality, his Kurdish ethnicity and his claim to be a Sunni  Muslim.
    He entered the UK, in a clandestine manner, on 23rd November 2014  and,
    it appears, claimed asylum at the first opportunity.

 4. In seeking asylum, the Appellant said  that  he  was  detained  by  the
    Iranian authorities on 21st July 2014 and was,  initially,  kept  in  a
    small cell before being transferred  to  a  different  cell  which  was
    located in the same detention centre.  He says that the reason for  his
    detention was that it was thought, by the authorities, that  he  was  a
    member of an oppositionist religious group.  He further  says  that  he
    was held in detention for a total of  some  three  and  a  half  months
    albeit that he was not interrogated nor beaten  nor  subjected  to  any
    other form of significant ill-treatment in addition to  the  detention.
    He says there came a time when he was taken from his cell, put  into  a
    vehicle with another detainee, driven away from  the  detention  centre
    and then permitted to run  away.   During  the  course  of  his  asylum
    interview he suggested that the person who had taken him from the  cell
    and driven him away was seeking to help him escape (see  his  reply  to
    question 123 of the asylum interview).  He claims that, thereafter,  he
    fled Iran, exiting illegally, and eventually made his way  to  the  UK.
    He says that the Iranian authorities  have  issued  an  arrest  warrant
    which he thinks might have been issued in consequence  of  the  way  in
    which he departed detention.   It has been asserted by  him  and/or  on
    his behalf that if he is to be returned to Iran he will  be  persecuted
    by the authorities for the above reasons and that, in the  alternative,
    even if his account is untrue, he will, nevertheless, be at risk  as  a
    returned failed asylum seeker who has exited Iran illegally.

 5. The judge did not find the Appellant's account of events in Iran to  be
    credible.  In explaining why he said this

         "20. In assessing the credibility of the  Appellant's  evidence,  I
             find that his account in general terms is not supported by the
             background materials showing the treatment and modus  operandi
             of  state  agents  when  dealing  with  suspected  members  of
             oppositionist groups.  These materials show that in many cases
             suspects are harshly treated, are subject  to  interrogations,
             involving  the   infliction   of   serious   harm   and   that
             investigations  extend  to  searching  suspects'   homes   for
             incriminating material.  In the present  case  none  of  those
             matters are features of the Appellant's claim.  Whilst I  note
             that as a matter of logic there will be a number of  cases  in
             which the modus operandi of state agents does not  follow  the
             typical pattern set out in the materials,  nevertheless  their
             absence in the present case is a factor which does not support
             the Appellant's claim; and as such is a  matter  that  I  take
             into account when considering the evidence as a whole.

         21.  Turning next to the detail of the Appellant's account, I  find
             that there are a number of other features of  the  Appellant's
             evidence which tend to undermine his account.  I find that the
             Appellant's account in  many  respects  lacks  detail  and  is
             implausible as explained further below.

         22.  The Appellant claims that he  was  detained  on  suspicion  of
             being a religious activist or an opponent  of  the  state  and
             that he remains of adverse  interest  to  the  authorities  as
             demonstrated by their visits to his home since  the  Appellant
             has been in the United Kingdom and the issuing  of  an  arrest
             warrant in his name.  However, the Appellant has also given an
             account  of  being  released,  relatively  unharmed   by   the
             authorities, by being driven away from his place of  detention
             and told  to  run  away.   I  find  it  implausible  that  the
             Appellant would be of  interest  to  the  authorities  if  his
             claimed detention ended in the manner described.   The  ending
             of the  Appellant's  detention  is  not  consistent  with  the
             authorities having an adverse interest in  the  Appellant  and
             not consistent with the Appellant's subsequent claim that  the
             authorities have issued an arrest warrant against him.  I find
             that these are matters that tend to undermine the  credibility
             of the Appellant's account.

         23.  In addition, many aspects  of  the  Appellant's  account  lack
             detail.  The Appellant has not given  a  detailed  account  of
             what discussions he had with members of his family about  what
             to do following his detention and release; how he came to  the
             decision to flee the country; nor how he was able to walk  out
             of Iran into Turkey and obtain funding for his journey,  other
             than by saying that it was at the direction of his uncle.  The
             Appellant's  account  of  his  family  being  visited  by  the
             authorities is vague, with no indication of when  such  visits
             took  place,  who  was  present  on  each  occasion  nor  what
             specifically was said and by whom."

 6. So, the judge rejected the Appellant's account, essentially, for  three
    reasons  being  that,  first  of  all,  his  account   of   not   being
    significantly ill-treated in detention was inconsistent with background
    country material; secondly that his account of having  been  "released"
    was inconsistent with his claim that the authorities had  any  interest
    in him and thirdly; that his account lacked detail.

 7. The judge went on to consider the submission that, even if the  account
    were not true, he would be at risk as a consequence of his illegal exit
    coupled with his status as a failed  asylum  seeker  but  rejected  it.
    Because  of  the  view  I  have  taken  with  respect  to  the  judge's
    credibility assessment, it is not necessary  for  me  to  say  anything
    further about that aspect of the case.

 8. The Appellant, through his representatives, sought permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  There were only two grounds.  The first was  to
    the effect  that  the  judge  had  misunderstood  or  misconstrued  the
    Appellant's evidence as to  how  he  became  free  from  detention  his
    wrongly characterising  his  account  as  indicating  his  having  been
    released rather than having escaped.  It was said  that  that  rendered
    the credibility assessment unsafe.  Secondly, it was submitted that the
    judge had failed to adequately consider risk  on  return  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker who had illegally exited Iran.

 9. On 12th October 2015 the Appellant was granted permission to appeal  by
    a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge who commented as follows;

         "The adverse credibility findings are brief and it is arguable that
         the judge has failed to give adequate reasons for finding that  the
         Appellant was released rather than that he escaped or to adequately
         consider the risks to the Appellant as a  suspected  oppositionist.
         I find that it is also arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
         adequate consideration to risk on return as a failed asylum  seeker
         who is a Sunni Kurd.  Permission is granted on all grounds."

10. Accordingly, there was a hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before  me)
    so that it could be decided whether the judge had erred in law and,  if
    so, what should flow from that.  Representation, at that  hearing,  was
    as indicated above and I received submissions from each  representative
    for which I am grateful.

11. I have decided to set aside the judge's determination on the basis that
    the adverse credibility finding involved  legal  error  of  a  material
    nature.

12. In this context, as indicated, the Appellant's account when the  asylum
    interview is read as a whole along with his witness statement  of  30th
    July 2015, is to the effect that he believes a man acting  without  the
    approval of the authorities saw to it that he and another prisoner were
    able to escape.  My initial  view  was  that  the  judge  had  probably
    appreciated, fully, what the Appellant was claiming but had simply used
    the term "release" rather than "escape" as  a  way  of  describing  the
    actual physical way in which the Appellant was set  free.   If  it  was
    simply  a  matter  of  choice  of  words,  without  the  judge   having
    misunderstood the substance of that aspect of the Appellant's  account,
    that  would  not  result  in  legal  error.   However,  the  judge  did
    specifically say, at  paragraph  22  of  the  determination,  that  the
    Appellant had given an  account  of  his  "being  released,  relatively
    unharmed by the authorities"(my underlining).  That does  suggest  that
    the judge probably erroneously thought that the  Appellant  was  saying
    that a decision had been taken on the part of the  Iranian  authorities
    to simply release him.  It may be the judge did not intend to give that
    impression but that is the consequence of the words he  used.   So,  it
    appears to me likely that the judge did,  in  that  sense,  misconstrue
    what the Appellant was saying about the way in which  he  regained  his
    liberty.  Since the judge had said he regarded the  way  in  which  the
    Appellant says he reacquired his liberty as being inconsistent with the
    claim that the authorities had an adverse interest in  him,  then  this
    does  remove  one  of  the  three  bases  the  judge  relied  upon   in
    disbelieving  the  Appellant.   Of  course,  the   judge   could   have
    disbelieved the account as to how he came to reacquire his liberty and,
    indeed, could have disbelieved the claim that he had ever been detained
    at all but, if he was to do that, he had to do it on  the  basis  of  a
    correct understanding of what  the  Appellant's  account  amounted  to.
    Once that plank of the judge's reasoning is removed it does not seem to
    me that the remaining two planks, of themselves, would not or  may  not
    have  justified  the  adverse   credibility   finding   without   more.
    Accordingly, I conclude that the judge's error was a material  one  and
    that, in consequence, the decision has  to  be  set  aside.   In  these
    circumstances I do not, and was not  urged  to,  preserve  any  of  the
    judge's findings or conclusions.

13. There was then some discussion as to what should follow, Mr Schwenk, in
    particular, urging me to remit to a  new  and  differently  constituted
    First-tier Tribunal so that the  decision  could  be  re-made  in  that
    forum.  That is the course of action I have decided to follow.  That is
    because, given that I have set the whole of the decision  aside,  there
    will need to be further extensive fact-finding, a task which  it  seems
    to me is best undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal as an expert  fact-
    finding body.  I would also add that  Mr  Diwncyz  did  not  oppose  Mr
    Schwenk's suggestion in that regard.  I have,  therefore,  issued  some
    directions, set out below, relevant to  the  future  re-making  of  the
    decision by the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Before I set out the directions  I  would  just  like  to  make  a  few
    additional observations.  First of all, I am not saying  that  the  new
    First-tier Tribunal has to make  a  positive  credibility  finding  but
    neither am I saying  otherwise.   Matters,  in  that  regard,  will  be
    entirely at large for the new First-tier Tribunal.   It  will  have  to
    consider the evidence as  a  whole  and  reach  its  own  findings  and
    conclusions.  Secondly, with respect to the illegal exit aspect of  the
    argument, it does not seem to me that the  judge  did  make  any  clear
    finding, one way or the other, as to whether or not the  Appellant  did
    exit  Iran  illegally.   The  matter  does  not  appear  to  have  been
    specifically disputed by the Respondent  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter but neither does it appear that, unlike  other  aspects  of  the
    claim, the contention that he had left  Iran  illegally  was  accepted.
    So, absent any concession, it may  well  be  that  the  new  First-tier
    Tribunal will have to specifically  address  that  matter  and  it  may
    benefit from evidence and submissions about it.  Finally,  if  the  new
    FTT does not accept the Appellant's account it will  have  to  consider
    the arguments which have been made on behalf of the  Appellant  to  the
    effect that matters have  changed  since  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in SB (Risk on Return - Illegal Exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
    0053, was decided.  In this context the Appellant currently relies upon
    the decision in AB and Others (Internet Activity - State  of  Evidence)
    Iran [2015] UKUT 00257 (IAC).  I express no view one way or  the  other
    about the merits of that argument.

15. Directions for the First-tier Tribunal

      1) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  a
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge J Atkinson.

      2) The appeal shall, if practicable, be heard at the Bradford  Hearing
         Centre.  The services of a Kurdish Sorani speaking interpreter will
         be required.  The time estimate for  the  hearing  shall  be  three
         hours.

      3) The Appellant's representatives shall lodge with the  Tribunal  and
         send to the other party, a consolidated bundle of  documents  which
         shall include all documents to be relied upon at the  next  hearing
         even if previously served.   That  bundle  should  be  indexed  and
         paginated and should contain a schedule of essential  reading.   It
         should be lodged and sent in sufficient time for it to be  received
         at least five working days prior to the date which  will  be  fixed
         for the next hearing.

      4) If the Respondent wishes to serve any  further  documentation  that
         too should be in the form of an indexed and  paginated  bundle  and
         should be lodged with the Tribunal, with a copy being sent  to  the
         Appellant's representatives,  in  sufficient  time  for  it  to  be
         received at least five working days prior to the date to  be  fixed
         for the next hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law.  I set  the  decision  aside  and  remit  the  case  to  a  differently
constituted First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

