
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07603/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 16th April 2015                   |On 1st May 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD BANNATYNE
                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MS MARIAMA CIRE BARTLETT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Haywood (instructed by Southwark Law Centre)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State with regard to a Decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Afako) promulgated on 27th January 2015 by which he allowed  the
    Respondent's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
    her asylum.

 2.  Although the Secretary of State is  the  Appellant  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, for the sake of continuity and ease of understanding we shall
    continue to refer to the Secretary of State as the  Respondent  and  to
    Miss Bartlett as the Appellant in this decision.

 3. The grounds upon which the Secretary of State was granted permission to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal are five in number and were expanded  upon
    before us by Mr Bramble.

 4. Mr Bramble withdrew the first ground which had asserted that whilst the
    Tribunal allowed the appeal at the end of the Decision it did not state
    whether it did so on asylum, human rights  or  humanitarian  protection
    grounds. Mr Bramble  accepted  that  it  is  apparent  from  the  first
    paragraph of the Decision that this was an  appeal  on  asylum  grounds
    only and therefore it is clear that in allowing the appeal it was being
    allowed on asylum grounds.

 5. The second ground  is  that  throughout  the  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to state clearly who it was that the Appellant  was  at
    risk from and to what extent and why she could not relocate within  the
    country or seek the protection of the authorities.

 6. Thirdly it is asserted that while the Tribunal referred to  the  expert
    report of Dr Knorr about inadequate mental health services  in  Guinea,
    the Secretary of State points out that there is not a complete  absence
    of medical facilities or drugs  in  that  country  to  cross  the  high
    threshold set out in the case of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31.

 7. The fourth ground asserts that the Tribunal failed to provide  adequate
    reasons as to why the Appellant's conversion  from  Islam  to  being  a
    Jehovah's Witness would put her at risk  and  failed  to  identify  any
    reason why the Appellant could not  seek  support  from  the  Jehovah's
    Witness community in Guinea as she has in the UK.

 8. This ground asserts that the Tribunal failed to give  adequate  reasons
    as to why there is a risk to the Appellant from the  societal  response
    to her mental health problems or why any stigma and  risk  attached  to
    her mental health would be increased.

 9. Finally it is asserted that at paragraph 34 of the decision the finding
    that the Appellant will be subject to  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm
    arising from a "fundamentally discriminatory allocation  of  resources"
    is a material misdirection in law.

10. Mr Bramble relied primarily on the inadequate reasons and  misdirection
    in law grounds. The findings, he argued, were not adequately  reasoned;
    rather they were generic. The Judge referred to evidence  but  did  not
    indicate how he had applied it to the facts of the case. Similarly  the
    Judge relied on various  extracts  of  country  evidence  but  did  not
    indicate how that applied to  the  Appellant's  case.  With  regard  to
    internal relocation and the  Jehovah's  Witness  community,  while  the
    Judge mentions it in his decision, he does not deal with the issue.  As
    regards the misdirection in law Mr Bramble argued that at paragraph  34
    of the decision the First-tier Tribunal had set out very specifically a
    risk which does not engage the Refugee Convention and did not  set  out
    any factors which caused it to reach the conclusion that it did.

11. Mr Haywood put forward strenuous arguments in defence of the  Decision.
    He referred us to the skeleton argument he had provided to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  and to various pieces of evidence and the expert  report
    in addition to the Decision itself, arguing that the  Judge  had  dealt
    adequately with all matters required of  him  and  reached  sustainable
    conclusions and provided adequate reasons.  He argued that a Judge  did
    not need to make findings on each and every  matter  provided  he  made
    finding sufficient to support his conclusion.

12. We find that  this  Decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  wholly
    unsustainable and wholly inadequate. A reading of  the  document  as  a
    whole suggests that the Judge appears to have dressed  up  what  is  in
    reality a human rights case on asylum grounds. The Judge  has  made  no
    finding as to what the Convention reason is  and  has  made  no  proper
    findings on the real issues in the case.  The hackneyed phrase "anxious
    scrutiny" applies in this case and is noticeable by its absence.

13. It appears to have been accepted by the Secretary  of  State  that  the
    Appellant was trafficked to the UK. It is an unusual  trafficking  case
    in that the Appellant met and married a British citizen in  the  Gambia
    and moved to the UK to join him. He  was  however  an  abusive  husband
    leading to the couple separating very quickly. She is therefore not the
    usual "trafficked woman" that appears before this Tribunal. She claimed
    that her father, who  was  a  local  Imam,  required  her,  during  her
    upbringing, to conform to the strict Islamic code and he  beat  her  if
    she fell short of his expectations. The Appellant's case  is  that  she
    left her father's home a short time after she  had  given  birth  to  a
    daughter outside wedlock in  1992.  She  then  started  up  and  ran  a
    successful restaurant and then travelled Gambia on  holiday  where  she
    met her husband. She married her husband in Gambia in 2002 and  secured
    entry to the UK as a spouse that year. The marriage went  very  quickly
    wrong and from 2006 the Appellant was in the  UK  without  status.  She
    made an application for asylum which was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State and it was against that decision that she appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

14. By the  time  the  matter  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellant had been diagnosed with PTSD and depression. She had not been
    allowed to work since 2006 due to her lack of status. She had converted
    from Islam to being a Jehovah's Witness around 2001 in the Gambia.

15. The Judge set out at paragraph 11 and 12 the Appellant's claimed reason
    to be in need of international protection which she said was a risk  of
    persecution from extremists as well as from her father and  his  family
    because of her conversion from Islam.  She  claimed  that  converts  to
    Christianity from Islam are not safe in Guinea. Her faith would  become
    known as she is a member of the Fula which is an overwhelmingly  Muslim
    group and she believes her father is aware of her conversion. She  will
    be without support or protection on return to Guinea.

16. Despite setting out that the main plank of the  Appellant's  case;  her
    conversion to Christianity as a member of a predominantly Muslim group,
    the Judge seems to have set greater store to her mental health  issues.
    At paragraph 22 the Judge refers to her mental health  being  seriously
    compromised as a result of the treatment from her husband and refers to
    her being on "various forms of treatment."  The  Judge  says  that  the
    Appellant would thus be returning a far less robust adult than when she
    left. The Judge then goes on paragraph 26 to state that  in  a  context
    such  as  Guinea  where  mental  ill-health  attracts  ostracism,   the
    Appellant's mental ill-health is capable of sustaining,  by  itself,  a
    claim for asylum. That finding is unsustainable; it does not  represent
    a Convention reason and is unreasoned.

17. At paragraph 28 the Judge finds another  element  of  risk  to  be  the
    societal response to the Appellant's mental health  problems  and  that
    her gender would markedly worsen her plight arising from her mental ill-
    health.  The Judge does  not  identify  the  evidence  to  support  the
    societal response to mental  disorder.  He  is  not  entitled,  without
    identifying the supporting evidence,  to  say  that  Guinea  ostracises
    those with mental  health  problems.   He  does  not  assess  and  make
    findings as to the extent of her mental disorder and its affect on  her
    daily life or whether it would be apparent to society.

18. At paragraph 29 the Judge says that  "state  protection"  includes  the
    provision  of  mental  health  services.  Including  the  provision  of
    services as a requirement for adequate "state  protection"  is  a  very
    significant step away from case law thus far and  the  Judge  does  not
    give reasons or justify that conclusion.  It is noteworthy that such  a
    lack of resources would not permit success under Article 3 or 8 of  the
    ECHR and it is thus difficult to see  how  it  could  possibly  justify
    success on asylum grounds.  The Judge makes no effort to  justify  that
    conclusion.

19. At paragraph 34 the Judge refers to the Appellant being subjected to  a
    real risk of serious harm  on  return  arising  from  a  "fundamentally
    discriminatory  allocation  of  resources  with  reference  to   mental
    health". The Judge sets out no  evidence  to  support  the  finding  at
    paragraph 34 that there is a discriminatory  allocation  of  resources.
    There is certainly nothing to support the suggestion that the  precious
    few mental health services in Guinea are provided only to men.

20. The Judge makes various references to the position of women  in  Guinea
    without supporting it  with  evidence;  indeed  the  Judge  appears  to
    suggest that the fact that there are fewer women female police officers
    than male is an indication of societal  discrimination  against  women.
    That must then apply to most countries in the world.

21. The Judge notes at paragraph 32 that Guinea is a  patriarchal  society.
    That does not automatically equate to ill-treatment  of  women  however
    and the Judge gives no explanation for his finding that women in Guinea
    are seriously disadvantaged.

22. The Judge appears to suggest, but does not say so, that the  Convention
    reason may be the fact that the Appellant is female.  However,  without
    more that cannot be the basis of finding  her  to  be  a  member  of  a
    particular social group. There is a world  of  difference  between  the
    situations of the Appellant and women in  Guinea  in  general  in  this
    decision and the situation of women in Pakistan as found by  the  House
    of Lords in Shah & Islam [1999] UKHL 20 and Islam. The reason  for  the
    House of Lords  concluding  Pakistani  women  could  be  members  of  a
    particular social group was that the discrimination against  women  and
    ill  treatment  was  with  the  encouragement  and  approval   of   the
    government. There is no suggestion put forward in  this  Decision  that
    this is the case in Guinea.

23. It is quite clear from the Appellant's claim that until she came to the
    UK she was a well educated and remarkably  resourceful  woman  who  had
    commenced and run a successful business on her own. That was some years
    after she had become estranged from her family and the  Judge  has  not
    given any consideration as to why she would not be able to re-establish
    herself away from her family once more on return. The Judge  has  given
    no consideration as to  why  she  could  not  immerse  herself  in  the
    community of Jehovah's Witnesses in Guinea  and  live  safely  and  the
    Judge has given no consideration or made any findings as  to  why  this
    Appellant would be at risk from her family throughout Guinea given that
    she has been estranged from them, according to  her  own  claim,  since
    1992, 10 years before she came to the UK.

24. The Judge refers to the  expert's  report,  agrees  with  some  of  its
    conclusions but not others without engaging with the report or  setting
    out why.

25. Overall, we find the First-tier  Tribunal  Tribunal's  Decision  to  be
    wholly deficient in reasoning. The Judge has made vague  references  to
    evidence without setting it out: made findings  wholly  unsupported  by
    evidence or law and failed to specify how it is that the  Appellant  in
    this  case  meets  the  definition  of  a  refugee  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.

26. We find the Decision as a whole to be so inadequate that it must be set
    aside in its entirety. We believe that the  Appellant's  case  has  not
    been given adequate attention  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  thus
    should be remitted to that Tribunal to be reheard by a different  Judge
    in its entirety with no findings preserved.

27. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed   Date 29th April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
