
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/07705/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated |
|On 19 January 2018                  |On 24 January 2018                |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                    K K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr P Draycott counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction. The order previously made will continue.
2. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1996 and is a national of Afghanistan.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is a resumed hearing. At an error of law hearing on 16 October  2017
   I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer in so far as
   it related to  the  risk  on  return  to  the  Appellants  home  area  or
   relocation to Kabul and the assessment under Article 8. I  preserved  the
   findings based on a concession made by the Respondent that the Appellants
   father died while fighting for the Taliban and also those  findings  made
   in respect of the witnesses [SS], [BC] and Mrs Pinnock all of  whom  were
   found to be credible witnesses by the Judge.

Evidence

5. The Appellant adopted the contents of his  witness  statement  confirming
   that it was true. He was asked no questions in cross examination.

6. [SS] also gave evidence  adopting  the  contents  of  both  her  previous
   statement and her statement dated 16 January 2018 with its exhibit  which
   included a schedule of all of the training that she had  completed  as  a
   Foster Carer.

7. She confirmed that the Appellant in her  view  suffers  from  uncertainty
   about his future. She stated that she was still in regular  contact  with
   him albeit he no longer lives with her and her family: he is nevertheless
   included in all family occasions..

8. In her view his  anxiety  and  depression  were  getting  worse  and  she
   expressed concern about his emotional well being if he were to return  to
   Kabul without friends or family. She described her feeling that he  would
   be like 'a fish out of water' and felt that he would find it difficult to
   survive without the level of support he had in the uK.

9. There was no cross examination.



Final Submissions

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  McVitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

11. The starting point for my decision had to be the Respondents  concession
   that the Appellants  father  had  been  killed  while  fighting  for  the
   Taliban.

12. In relation to the risk on return to Rodat his  home  area  he  accepted
   that there was now a certain level of agreement that the Taliban forcibly
   recruited people in the area that he lived  in  and  they  still  operate
   there. He suggested that the real issue was whether the  Appellant  could
   relocate internally to Kabul and in respect of that he relied on what was
   said in the refusal letter.

13. He conceded that this would require an  assessment  of  whether  it  was
   reasonable for a young man with mental health problems, no family and the
   support of the views expressed in  the  experts  report  to  relocate  to
   Kabul. The Appellants circumstances he accepted were distinguishable from
   those of the Appellant in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT
   00163 (IAC) who was a fit and healthy young man.

14. He acknowledged that the background material relied on showed  that  the
   facilities for those with mental health problems in Afghanistan were very
   limited with one hospital with  mental  health  beds  for  the  whole  of
   Afghanistan, with 60 beds.

15. On behalf of the Appellant  Mr Draycott submitted that :

16. He would rely on his (22 page) skeleton argument.

17. In relation to the risk on return to Rodat he relied on  what  was  said
   by Mr Foxley. Rodat had been linked with the insurgency for decades.  The
   Appellant's account that the Taliban would approach his family  in  order
   to recruit him after his father's death was plausible.

18. Given the Appellants age on arrival (14) and the time that he had  taken
   to reach the UK his knowledge of Afghan society would be minimal and this
   would put him at risk.

19. The Appellant would therefore be at risk on  return  to  his  home  area
   both in having to travel there through contested areas as  a  westernized
   young man  and  in  Rodat  itself  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  f
   recruitment by insurgents or the authorities and by local militias.

20. In relation to relocation to Kabul he argued that  the  Appellant  would
   be at risk on arrival in Kabul and in relation to the detail of  this  he
   relied on page 200 of Mr Foxleys report.

21. If the Appellant managed to get beyond the airport  and  tried  to  find
   work or accommodation references would  be  required.  He  relied  on  RQ
   (Afghan National Army - Hizb-i-Islami - risk) Afghanistan CG [2008] UKAIT
   00013 to argue that his heritage might come to  light  in  Kabul  and  he
   could come to the risk of the authorities  as  the  child  of  a  Taliban
   fighter even if he did not do so at the airport.

22. In relation to the reasonableness of relocation  he  affirmed  what  was
   said by Mr Mc Vitie  that  the  country  guidance  cases  were  based  on
   applicants who were fit and  healthy  and  in  AA  (Unattended  children)
   Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) the Appellant had an uncle  living
   in Kabul: this Appellants case was light years from that. He  had  mental
   health issues and no family support.

23. He relied on Mr Foxleys report  in  relation  to  the  issues  with  the
   mental health treatment that was available in Kabul. He  also  relied  on
   the report of Dr Winton. He concluded that the Appellant could not  cope,
   there was no medication or support and there would be a real risk of harm
   as the Appellant would consider himself to  be  in  an  utterly  hopeless
   situation.

24. He argued that the risk of self harm was so serious that Article  3  was
   engaged.

25. He argued that Article 8  was  engaged  in  that  there  would  be  very
   significant obstacles to his reintegration and that given the  length  of
   time he had lived in the UK and the strength  of  his  private  life  and
   family life that removal would be disproportionate.

Findings

26. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round  before  reaching
   any findings.  I  have  done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
   compartmentalised my findings in some respects below,  I  must  emphasise
   the findings have only been made having taken account of the evidence  as
   a whole including the expert  reports,  witness  statements  and  caselaw
   relied on.

27. The factual matrix against which I assess the  Appellants  case  is  now
   largely undisputed. He is an Afghan national who is now 21 years old  but
   who entered the UK when he was 14 years old after taking some  12  months
   to arrive. Therefore it is some 8  years  since  he  has  last  lived  in
   Afghanistan. It is also common ground that the Appellants  father  was  a
   Taliban fighter in his home area of Rodat in  Nanghahar  and  was  killed
   while fighting against the Afghan authorities. Mr McVitie described Rodat
   as a Taliban stronghold where they continue to have a strong presence.

Risk on return to Rodat

28. I start by considering the risk on return to  Rodat  as  the  Appellants
   claim is that having previously approached his family after the death  of
   his father to recruit him and only  avoiding  such  forcible  recruitment
   with the help of his grandfather he would be  at  risk  of  the  same  on
   return. The refusal letter itself accepts, based on a  COIS  report  from
   2013, that such forced recruitment occurs in areas under Taliban control,
   or where there is a strong Taliban presence

29. Mr McVitie quite properly did not seek with  any  enthusiasm  to  pursue
   the  argument  that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  of  forced
   recruitment in Rodat . I am satisfied that the  concession  made  by  the
   Respondent taken together with the most recent up  dated  report  of  Tom
   Foxley dated 12.1.2018  (AB 1 P145-240. ) confirm that this risk is real.
   In a very detailed analysis of the country situation he  focuses  on  the
   Appellants personal circumstances, a father who  died  fighting  for  the
   Taliban which a close knit local community would be  likely  to  remember
   when his identity was revealed and return an area where Taliban  activity
   is significant. Having described  the  Appellants  account  as  plausible
   (page 185) the Taliban would plausibly view the Appellant  as  a  natural
   target (a young,  Pashtun  male  who  was  then  fatherless  and  without
   employment) and that their methods of recruitment varies according to the
   subject. Mr Foxley concludes that on return to Rodat , an area where  the
   Taliban are described as 'very active' the Appellant would face the  risk
   of being identified and challenged by insurgents  or  alternately   local
   security forces who would also know of his links to the Taliban.

30. The Appellants ability to face and negotiate his way past  any  kind  of
   challenge at a checkpoint has to be assessed against his lengthy  absence
   which creates a limited social, linguistic  and  cultural  awareness.  He
   would stand out as a westernized person. He also has been assessed on the
   basis that he is someone with a range of mental  health  issues  who  has
   been out of the country for an extended period of time.  I  am  satisfied
   that the Appellant would be at risk in Rodat.

Relocation to Kabul

31.  I  am  required  to  consider  the  reasonableness  of  the   Appellant
   relocating to Kabul based on his personal circumstances most of which are
   unchallenged. Mr Foxley addresses the challenges that the Appellant would
   face at page 205 of his report onwards. Some  of  those  factors  I  have
   addressed in relation to Rodat and these would  make  him  vulnerable  in
   Kabul also: the general lack of social, cultural and linguistic awareness
   after an absence of 8 years together with standing  out  as  a  Westerner
   which leads many to view such young men as 'tainted' (page 210).

32. The Appellant has no family or even  friends  in  Kabul  and  has  never
   lived there before. This would immediately create a lack  of  social  and
   emotional support that he has been so reliant on in the UK and has  found
   with friends but also and in particular with the  family  of  his  foster
   carer [SS]. The  importance  of  family  in  assisting  in  reintegration
   whether into an area that an Appellant has never lived and in  a  country
   from where he has been absent is hard to  overemphasise.  Without  family
   support the likelihood of him being able to find work or accommodation is
   limited and he would be vulnerable to 'exploitation' (page 208)

33. These are issues that face any young returnee  to  Afghanistan  who  has
   been absent for an extended period of time but I am  satisfied  that  the
   Appellants circumstances are significantly exacerbated by the  fact  that
   he has a number of mental health issues that would make him in every  way
   more vulnerable to the challenges that relocation presents.

34. Those issues are addressed  by  Dr  Winton  in  his  updated  report  of
   8.1.2018(AB1 246-289) all of which I have taken into  account  and  whose
   observations are  confirmed  by  [SS].  Dr  Winton  makes  the  following
   diagnoses at page 284: severe depression which is worse that the previous
   diagnosis of 'depression'; anxiety; subsyndromal PTSD that is he did  not
   quite qualify for a diagnosis of PTSD but has a number of symptoms of the
   condition. He confirmed that he had seen evidence of  self  harm  on  the
   Appellant. He also  confirmed  the  medication  that  the  Appellant  was
   taking:  citralopram  and  clearly  the  conditions  that  the  Appellant
   suffered from and the anxiety that had  improved  would  be  at  risk  of
   returning if such medication was withdrawn.  .

35. I am bound to take into account the cost and  availability  of  services
   in Afghanistan for those  with  mental  health  problems  and  these  are
   addressed by Mr Foxley at page  221  onwards.  He  confirms  that  mental
   health as a problem is poorly understood in the  country  and  carries  a
   high risk of stigma  even  with  family  support.  He  opines  that  such
   vulnerability would make the Appellant more at risk of approaches by  the
   Taliban. Mr McVitie agreed that  the  background  material  ,  an  Afghan
   Ministry of Public Health website,  revealed  that  there  was  only  one
   hospital in Kabul with mental health 'beds'  and  while  he  stated  that
   there were 60 Mr Draycott noted that of that 60 , 20  were  dedicated  to
   those with drug problems so the provision was even smaller. 'Elsewhere in
   the country there  is  virtually  nothing'  (page  224).  Other  problems
   include lack of personnel, no training and lack  of  maintenance  funding
   and medical supplies in very short supply.

36.  Having considered all of the circumstances that I set out  above  I  am
   satisfied  that  in  the  Appellants  circumstances  it  would  be   both
   unreasonable and unduly harsh for the Appellant to internally relocate to
   Kabul.




Conclusions on Asylum


37. I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof on  him  to
   show that he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  reason
   recognised by the Geneva Convention. Accordingly, the Appellant's removal
   would cause the UK to be in breach of its obligations  under  the  Geneva
   Convention.


Conclusions on ECHR


38. On the facts as  established  in  this  appeal,  there  are  substantial
   grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
   treatment in breach of ECHR.


Decision


39. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


40. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


41. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.


Signed                                                              Date
22.1.2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

