
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07110/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 September 2017                     |On 28 September 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     GS
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Holt, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. The appellant has appealed, with permission granted by me,  against
         a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge D Birrell dated 3  November
         2016, in which she dismissed his appeal against a decision refusing
         to grant him asylum or humanitarian protection.


      2. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, claims that he  was  targeted
         by the Taliban for reasons relating to his  social  work,  and  the
         police did not provide him with adequate  protection.   The  First-
         tier Tribunal did not regard much of the appellant's account to  be
         credible and dismissed his appeal on this basis.


      3. At the hearing before me Mr Holt  relied  upon  and  amplified  his
         grounds of appeal and Mr McVeety  relied  upon  and  amplified  the
         SSHD's rule 24 notice.  After hearing from both representatives,  I
         reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.


      4. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  comprehensive  and
         detailed (running to 18 pages).  The First-tier Tribunal has:


         a) directed itself to the correct lower standard of proof at [57].
         b) provided a full outline of the appellant's  account  leading  to
            his application for asylum at [12a)-dd)].
         c) accurately recorded the competing submissions [13-37]  and  took
            these into account when making findings.
         d) properly directed itself to the correct approach to  documentary
            evidence at  [38]  and  considered  the  documents  relied  upon
            thoroughly - see [40], [42] and [46-55].
         e) considered the evidence both individually and  as  a  whole,  as
            noted at [39] and set out in detail at [44-57].
         f)  paid  proper  regard  to  the   country   background   evidence
            demonstrating the plausibility of  aspects  of  the  appellant's
            account - see [41], [45], [46].


      5. The grounds of appeal  focus  upon  three  matters  the  First-tier
         Tribunal considered  to  reflect  adversely  upon  the  appellant's
         credibility from [55] onwards. I now turn to consider  each  ground
         of appeal relied upon in turn.


Ground 1 - delay


      6. Mr Holt submitted that the First-tier Tribunal overlooked  discrete
         threats to the appellant in 2015, which led him to believe  he  was
         at increased risk.  I am satisfied that the finding at [56(b)] that
         the appellant's failure to claim asylum when he came to the  UK  in
         November / December  2014  is  a  factor  undermining  his  general
         credibility, was open to the First-tier Tribunal for the  following
         reasons.

      i) The First-tier Tribunal was well-aware of the  relevant  chronology
         of events having set them out in detail at [12] - see in particular
         [12x) and y)].  In addition,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  explicitly
         addressed the claimed attack on  the  appellant's  house  at  [54].
         When decision is read as a whole, I am satisfied  that  the  First-
         tier Tribunal did not overlook any material  evidence  when  making
         the finding at [56a)].  The First-tier Tribunal was  aware  of  the
         evidence of the events in Pakistan in 2015  after  the  appellant's
         return from the  UK,  including  the  level  of  fear  said  to  be
         experienced, which he claims triggered him to apply for asylum.


     ii) The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to regard  the  situation  for
         the appellant as dire in Pakistan prior to November  2014  for  the
         reasons provided: the appellant was the victim of an  armed  attack
         in a car in August 2014 and was '100%' sure the attack was aimed at
         him and carried out by the Taliban (see  AIR  at  Q  229-230);  the
         police sought a bribe to  investigate  the  matter;  his  wife  was
         removed from their home  by  her  family  for  her  own  safety  in
         September 2014.


    iii) The appellant's evidence that he felt 'no need' (see AIR  at  Q271)
         to seek protection  in  light  of  these  events  is  difficult  to
         understand.


     iv) There was further delay as noted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
         [56(b)]. Mr Holt asked me to note  that  this  paragraph  does  not
         refer to or make any clear finding on the further threats in  2015.
         He asked me to note that although the FIR relating to these  events
         is addressed at [54] and [56], there  was  no  clear  finding  made
         regarding the 2015 attack on the house.  This fails  to  take  into
         account the finding at [57] in which the First-tier Tribunal  makes
         it clear that this aspect  of  the  account  is  not  accepted  for
         reasons already provided.


      7. In the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  draw
         adverse inferences from  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum  for  the
         reasons provided.  This was of course  only  one  matter  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal took into account in the  round  with  all  the
         relevant evidence.


Ground 2 - plausibility


      8. Mr Holt submitted that the First-tier Tribunal made a very specific
         finding that the Taliban would not be discouraged in the particular
         circumstances claimed and absent any background evidence to support
         it, this constitutes an error of law.


      9. The First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  be  concerned  at  the
         evidence that four members of the Taliban armed  with  guns  and  a
         Kalashnikhov, who had previously targeted the appellant, would flee
         in the circumstances described by  the  appellant  -  see  [56(c)].
         This was a concern entirely open to the First-tier Tribunal on  all
         the evidence available. The background evidence supports the First-
         tier Tribunal's assessment that the Taliban are well organised  and
         well known for effective intimidation.  The First-tier Tribunal has
         not taken judicial notice of any  matter.   Rather  the  First-tier
         Tribunal has outlined a concern that the claimed  reaction  of  the
         Taliban  did  not  appear  credible  or  plausible   in   all   the
         circumstances, particularly in relation to  what  is  not  disputed
         about the Taliban i.e. it  is  a  ruthless  organisation  that  has
         carried out numerous assassinations and bombings.


Ground 3 - requirement of corroboration


     10. Mr Holt asked me to note that the FIRs  were  found  to  have  been
         genuinely  issued  at  [54]  and  invited  me  to  find  that   the
         observation that there was nothing from the  police  to  suggest  a
         further observation constitutes a requirement of corroboration.


     11. The submission  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
         requiring  corroboration  at  [54]  is  not  well-founded.   In  my
         judgment, the First-tier Tribunal  has  accurately  commented  that
         there was no further evidence from the police.  That is an accurate
         summary of the evidence.  There is nothing  to  indicate  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal drew adverse inferences  from  the  absence  of
         such evidence.

Conclusion

     12. When the decision is read as a whole I am satisfied  that  none  of
         the grounds of appeal are  made  out  and  the  decision  does  not
         contain any error of law.

Decision

    24.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
         of a material error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
28 September 2017

