
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07301/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th January 2016                 |On 23rd February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                         MR Kossivi Anoumou Adonsou
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Johnrose instructed Broudie Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Kossivi Anoumou Adonsou, date of birth 17th  February
    1985 is a citizen of Togo.  Having considered all the  circumstances  I
    am satisfied that it is not necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holt promulgated on 20th March 2015, whereby  the  judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    to refuse him refugee status, humanitarian protection or relief on  the
    grounds of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 3. By a decision taken on 16th June  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Thus  the  matter
    appeared before me to determine in the first instance  whether  or  not
    there was an error in law in the original determination.

 4. The Grounds of Appeal assert:

      a) That the judge has failed to take account of evidence regarding the
         Appellant's membership of the UFC.  There is a letter at  pages  23
         to 25 of the bundle in which the Appellant's claim to have been the
         accounts commissioner for the UFC  was  allegedly  confirmed  by  a
         letter from the UFC sub-Section of Hedzranawoe.

      b) It is alleged that the judge has failed to take  into  account  the
         Appellant's mental state.

      c) It is further alleged that the judge failed  properly  to  consider
         the evidence of Dr Lord as  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
         Appellant's finger came to be cut  off  and  he  received  thirteen
         scars.

 5. The Appellant as stated is from Togo and claims that since 2003 he  has
    been involved  in  the  UFC  Political  Party,  a  party  that  was  in
    opposition to the government.  He had been a supporter since  2003  and
    became a member in 2005.   Thereafter  he  became  the  UFC's  accounts
    commissioner between 2005  and  2010.   However  he  only  referred  to
    attending two meetings during that time.  The Appellant claims that  in
    April 2005 he was arrested, severely  beaten  and  detained  for  three
    years, including having his finger cut off.  After his release  however
    he continued with his political activities.

 6. For a period of time the Appellant left  Togo  to  go  to  neighbouring
    Ghana.  However despite that he had escaped from Togo allegedly  having
    been beaten and fearing the government, the Appellant appears  to  have
    returned twice for visits to Togo.  The first  time  was  allegedly  to
    visit his wife and child.  The second time the Appellant  claimed  that
    he was attending a great ceremony because his father was  a  chief  and
    there was a large ceremony for his  father.   He  also  appears  to  be
    claiming that his father was killed by the authorities  [see  paragraph
    24].

 7. The Appellant had been arrested in April 2005 and he had been  detained
    for 3 years. He went to Ghana in 2008  for  at  least  18  months  [see
    paragraph 23] and visited Togo twice, the first time to  see  his  wife
    and the second time because of the ceremony for his father. Yet he  has
    said that his father died in 2005 [see paragraph 24].

 8. After at least 18 months in Ghana the Appellant returned to Togo.

 9. In 2010 the Appellant claims that he fled from a  meeting  of  the  UFC
    which had been disrupted by the armed men.  He claims that he had to go
    in hiding for a month and a half.  By September 2013 the appellant  was
    applying for and seeking to travel to the UK on a business visa.

10. The judge noted that in the Visa Application  Form  the  Appellant  had
    stated that he was married and had a child but that otherwise elsewhere
    in his evidence he had claimed that he  was  not  married  and  had  no
    children.

11. Having returned to Togo the Appellant claims that he was rearrested  in
    2013 but had managed to escape with the help  of  his  sister.   It  is
    alleged that the Appellant began to suffer, whilst he was arrested  and
    detained, from  diarrhoea  and  was  taken  by  the  prison  guards  to
    hospital.  Once in hospital he was able to escape from the hospital and
    made his way again to Ghana.  He came to the United Kingdom from Ghana.



12. The Appellant gave dates for his being in custody in 2013 and  for  his
    escape from the hospital but the judge pointed out that  the  Appellant
    was also claiming that he or persons taking details from had  completed
    the VAF form at a time when he was in prison. [see paragraph 46]

13. The Appellant appears to have applied initially to come to  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of a business visa and once  having  obtained  his
    visa he came to the United Kingdom. The Appellant only  claimed  asylum
    when he was arrested and detained by the police in the United Kingdom.

14. With regard to the mental health of the Appellant whilst  there  was  a
    suggestion that he was depressed there was nothing to indicate that any
    of the conditions that the Appellant had would affect  the  ability  of
    the Appellant to reasonably accurately remember dates and details.  The
    judge has carefully examined the account given by the Appellant and has
    carefully considered the medical report from Dr Lord and refers to  the
    report at appropriate points in the decision.  The judge was  perfectly
    entitled to approach the evidence of the Appellant on  the  basis  that
    she did.  There was no evidence to indicate that there was  any  reason
    that the Appellant could not accurately remember the facts.

15. The evidence appears to be inconsistent as to when the  Appellant  went
    to Ghana. I would note in paragraph 23 of the decision  it  is  pointed
    out that the Appellant claims to have stayed in Ghana for a  period  of
    one and a half years at some time about 2008 or at least prior to 2010.
    The evidence is also contradictory as to how  the  Appellant  completed
    the VAF.

16. Part of the criticism against the judge is that the judge has failed to
    take account of the letter from the UFC at page  23.   Whilst  to  some
    degree it indicates that the Appellant was arrested and detained in  or
    about June 2008 it then suggests that the Appellant came  out  of  jail
    but  does  not  refer  to  the  Appellant  doing  anything  within  the
    organisation between June 2008 and 2010.  According to the  letter  the
    Appellant went to Ghana  from  2010  to  2013,  a  period  longer  than
    eighteen months.  That evidence is not consistent with the  Appellant's
    account both with regard to the date the Appellant went  to  Ghana  but
    also with regard to the length of time that he spent there.

17. The letter from the UFC does refer to the fact that  the  Appellant  is
    suspected of being part of a gang of young people who set fire  to  the
    market in Lome.  It suggested that he was arrested but  he  managed  to
    escape  soon  after.  That  is  indicative  of  the  Appellant  fleeing
    prosecution not persecution.

18. The letter clearly contradicts  the  Appellant's  account  on  material
    dates and facts. Whilst it does support the Appellant's claim  to  have
    been the Accounts Commissioner, that has to be considered in  light  of
    the fact that the Appellant had been a member of  the  party  1  month,
    when he was appointed to the post and within three  months  he  was  in
    prison and he remained there for 3 years. On his release he went on his
    account to Ghana.

19. Given that the letter so materially contradicts the Appellant's account
    even if the judge has failed to consider the same I do  not  find  that
    the letter in material particulars supports the Appellant's account and
    as such would make no material difference to the outcome of the appeal.



20.  From  paragraph  34  onwards  the  judge  specifically  considers  the
    Appellant's membership of the UFC.   Whilst  the  judge  has  not  made
    specific reference to that letter the judge does  consider  whether  or
    not the Appellant's account of being involved with the UFC is credible.
     The judge noted such factors that  this  person  that  was  supposedly
    checking the membership list had given different numbers as to how many
    members of the organisation there were.   At  one  stage  initially  he
    stated he did not know but when asked before the judge was  talking  in
    terms of thousands.  The  judge  specifically  indicated  that  if  the
    Appellant had been collecting or checking contributions and membership,
    she would have expected him to know how many members there were in  the
    branch.

21. At paragraph 38 the judge notes that the Appellant had given  confusing
    and conflicting information about his membership  card.   It  was  also
    noted in paragraph 36 that when the Appellant claimed  that  he  was  a
    militant and that he had been accused of lots of things.  When  pressed
    with regard to being a militant the Appellant could not give any detail
    as to how he was a militant other than suggesting  he  worked  for  the
    branch dealing with the account and taking the monthly contributions.

22. The judge has given valid reasons for coming to  the  conclusions  that
    she did that  she  was  not  satisfied  with  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant.   The  judge  has  given  specific  examples  of  where  the
    Appellant's account is contradictory and inconsistent,  and  the  judge
    has given valid reasons to question details about the dates  and  times
    of specific events alleged not only by the Appellant  but  also  within
    the letter.  The letter is not consistent in parts with the Appellant's
    own chronology of events.

23. It is suggested that the judge has failed to take account of  the  fact
    that the Appellant was a member of a part of the UFC which  split  away
    from the UFC when  it  began  to  co-operate  and  become  involved  in
    government.   The  judge  has  specifically  considered   that   within
    paragraph 35.

24. The judge has specifically considered the medical report of Dr Lord  as
    is evident from paragraph 39 onwards.   The  judge  specifically  gives
    reasons for making findings with regard to the specific incident of the
    loss of the finger.  The judge carefully examined the report by Dr Lord
    and gives adequate reasons for coming to the conclusion that she did.

25. Having considered the Grounds  of  Appeal  and  having  considered  the
    decision by the judge the judge has given ample reasons for  coming  to
    the  conclusions  that  she  did.   The  judge   has   given   detailed
    consideration to the inconsistencies in the Appellant's account and was
    perfectly entitled to find that the account of the  Appellant  was  not
    credible.

26. In the circumstances the judge has given valid reasons  for  coming  to
    the conclusions that she has and there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

27. I dismiss the appeal by  the  Appellant  and  uphold  the  decision  to
    dismiss this appeal on all grounds.

28. No anonymity direction is made.

29. As the appeal has been dismissed I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

