
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07665/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 14 August 2015                             |On 19 August 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                    S E Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of  Morocco.  She  has  appealed  with  the
      permission of the Upper Tribunal against a decision of  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Callow, dated  24  January  2015,  dismissing  her
      appeal against a decision of the respondent to remove her to  Morocco,
      having refused her asylum application.


   2. The core of the appellant's asylum claim is that she was to be  forced
      into marriage by her father and, having left the country to escape the
      marriage, she fears that on return her  father  would  seriously  ill-
      treat her or even kill her by way of so-called "honour killing".  None
      of this was accepted by the respondent.  The  appellant's  appeal  was
      heard on 5 December 2014. The appellant  gave  evidence,  as  did  her
      brother and her former immigration advisor. The judge's  key  findings
      are set out in paragraph 29 as follows:


         "29. The appellant, despite the fact that  she  unduly  delayed  in
         making her claim for asylum, impressed  me  as  being  a  plausible
         witness. In the round it has been established that the  appellant's
         father agreed to her marriage to M without her consent.  Throughout
         the asylum process the appellant has given a consistent explanation
         of her claims. Her evidence as to having  to  undergo  an  unwanted
         marriage has been corroborated by her brother. Such a finding lends
         weight to the general credibility of her claim, the consequences of
         which  however  have  not  been  established.  It  has   not   been
         established that her refusal to marry M would result in  an  honour
         killing, an assault or other harm. No threats  have  been  made  to
         kill the appellant. While it  is  recognised  that  an  appellant's
         asylum  claim  does  not   require   corroboration,   the   country
         information  reports  in  this  appeal  and  the  opinion  of   the
         appellant's  expert,  Dr  Seddon  do  not  assist  the   appellant.
         Recognising that the reports relied on by the respondent are dated,
         it is noteworthy that Dr Seddon in  his  expert  report  with  many
         years of experience of life in Morocco is unable to  point  to  any
         evidence, beyond that of addressing honour killings in instances of
         adultery. As the father allowed the appellant to be educated and to
         proceed overseas when promised in marriage it has  not  been  shown
         that he is an autocratic Muslim with extreme views. On the contrary
         it might be said that he holds enlightened views consistent with  a
         slow emancipation of women. Accordingly it has not been shown  that
         her father would seek to kill or have her killed or subject her  to
         any persecutory treatment  founded  on  a  refusal  to  undergo  an
         arranged marriage. Accordingly the appellant would not be  at  risk
         in her home area. However if she was to be at risk the question  of
         internal relocation arises."


   3. The judge then considered  internal  flight  in  the  alternative  and
      concluded this was another reason the appellant could not  succeed  in
      her asylum claim.


   4. The appellant had raised a discrete ground of  appeal  concerning  her
      mental health problems and suicide risk if  removed  to  Morocco.  The
      judge  considered  the  medical  evidence  and  directed  himself   in
      accordance  with  the  leading  authorities  on  the  issue.  He  then
      concluded as follows:


         "40. The appellant's fear of ill treatment founded on  the  claimed
         risk of an honour killing or such other treatment does  not  amount
         to persecution. This is a foreign case and the Article 3  threshold
         in relation to the claimed suicide  risk  on  return  is  therefore
         high. As to  the  first  proposition  outlined  in  J  the  claimed
         severity of treatment has not been established. There is no  causal
         link  between  the  threatened  act  of  removal  and  the  inhuman
         treatment relied on as violating the appellant's Article  3  right.
         As the appellant's case is a foreign  case  the  particularly  high
         threshold has not been established. It has not been shown that  she
         is at risk of persecutory treatment founded on  a  claim  of  being
         forced by her father to marry a man. It has not been shown that she
         has a genuine fear creating a risk of suicide. Both Morocco and the
         UK, in answer to the sixth proposition, have  effective  mechanisms
         to reduce the risk of suicide. It has not been shown that she would
         be destitute on return.


         41.  While Morocco has mechanisms to reduce  the  risk  of  suicide
         (although not free) the Tribunal should assume that the  respondent
         will  provide  appropriately  qualified  escorts  on  return.   The
         appellant's fear is not so  extreme  as  to  lead  to  sufficiently
         adverse consequences for her mental health on removal."


   5. Permission to appeal was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
      renewed grounds of appeal suggested there were three  material  errors
      in Judge  Callow's  decision.  Firstly,  in  determining  whether  the
      appellant would be at risk of harm from  her  father,  the  judge  had
      failed to take into account the evidence of her brother regarding  the
      character of their father.  Secondly,  in  reaching  his  findings  on
      internal relocation, the judge had not taken into account the evidence
      of the expert. Thirdly, the judge had misdirected himself in  relation
      to his assessment of the risk of suicide.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein. He
      was persuaded the judge may have made an error of law  in  failing  to
      give adequate reasons for his findings on material matters. Permission
      to appeal was granted on all the grounds.

   7. The respondent filed a response opposing the appeal. This  argued  the
      judge  had  produced  a  detailed  and  comprehensive  decision  which
      assessed all the evidence in the round.


   8. I heard submissions on whether the judge made a material error of law.


   9. Mr Hawkin's submissions followed the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
      appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  On the first ground, he  suggested
      that paragraph 29 of  the  judge's  decision  contained  contradictory
      findings. The judge said he regarded  the  appellant  as  a  plausible
      witness and found her marriage had been agreed  without  her  consent.
      However, in concluding that it  had  not  been  established  that  the
      appellant was at risk on return, the judge had erred.  The  judge  did
      not appear to have given any weight to the appellant's  evidence  that
      her father had physically disciplined her and her siblings as children
      and she was afraid of him. She had given  an  example  of  this  when,
      having come home late from school, her father had beaten her. She  had
      also described her brother being beaten by her father with a belt. The
      appellant's brother had given evidence, which the  judge  appeared  to
      have found credible, that his father was a violent and that people  in
      the area were also afraid of him.


  10. The other error by the judge in relation  to  this  evidence  was  his
      treatment of the expert evidence. Dr Seddon had said that violence was
      common within  the  family  in  Morocco  and  that  it  was  not  well
      documented. The judge placed undue weight on the fact that  there  had
      not been  threats  to  kill  because  the  appellant's  father's  past
      behaviour,  coupled  with  the  expert  evidence,  should  have   been
      sufficient. The judge had failed to appreciate the distinction between
      allowing the appellant to study abroad and wanting her to  go  through
      with an arranged marriage.


  11. Mr Hawkin then argued that, if the risk had been shown,  his  findings
      on internal flight were also defective because the  issue  was  always
      fact-sensitive. In terms of the risk of suicide, the judge had  failed
      to deal with the issue properly because he had ignored  the  fact  the
      appellant had attempted suicide in Morocco.


  12. Ms Fijiwala argued the grounds were no  more  than  mere  disagreement
      with the outcome of the appeal. It was open to the judge to infer from
      the fact the appellant had been allowed to study in the  UK  that  her
      father was more liberal than described. The judge was correct to  note
      there had been no threats made to the appellant. The judge  had  fully
      taken into account Dr  Seddon's  report.  The  judge's  conclusion  on
      internal flight was also sustainable on  the  evidence.  In  terms  of
      suicide risk, this was not even mentioned  by  the  appellant  in  her
      statement. There was no error.


  13. Mr Hawkin replied that the judge's findings were not reconcilable with
      the evidence. In particular, he had  failed  to  consider  the  expert
      evidence properly.


  14. I reserved my decision on error of law.


  15. The first ground was considered the weakest by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Goldstein. However, Mr Hawkin placed emphasis on it because he  argued
      it affected the assessment  of  the  issues  of  internal  flight  and
      suicide risk as well. The Upper Tribunal will be slow to set  aside  a
      decision  unless  it  is   shown   the   First-tier   Tribunal   judge
      misunderstood, misapplied or ignored evidence which could have made  a
      difference to the outcome of the appeal. Decisions  will  not  be  set
      aside if the grounds are in  reality  a  mere  disagreement  with  the
      judge's findings.


  16. Judge Callow's  findings  are  condensed  into  paragraph  29.  In  my
      judgment,  it  is  critical  that  he  found  the  appellant  credible
      ("plausible") and he made no adverse findings in respect of any of her
      evidence. He simply found her fears  for  the  future  unfounded.  The
      judge noted the appellant had given  "consistent"  evidence  regarding
      her account of being force into marriage by her father  and  that  her
      evidence was "corroborated" by her brother. It is  then  difficult  to
      understand why he did not apparently take into account the appellant's
      evidence and also that of her brother regarding the violent nature  of
      the appellant's father.


  17. The judge relied on the absence from Dr Seddon's report of examples of
      honour killing. However, this does not accurately reflect the  report.
      In paragraph 4.11 of his report,  Dr  Seddon  said  there  was  little
      reliable information on the incidence of violence against women who go
      against their father's wishes with regard  to  marriage.  However,  he
      continued as follows:


         "This is, of course, not surprising, given the fact  that  violence
         against women in the family is generally in Morocco not regarded as
         a matter of concern except for  those  within  the  family  and  is
         generally not pursued actively by the police,  and  thus  not  well
         documented in  the  official  statistics.  Violence  against  women
         within  the  family  is,  however  extremely  common  in   Morocco,
         particularly in families where the father or  senior  male  members
         generally are more traditional, conservative and religious."


  18. Dr Seddon went on to note the absence of legal provisions  to  protect
      victims. At paragraph 4.12 he continued,


         "In the light of this it should not, in my opinion,  be  assumed  -
         just because 'no information on whether  women  who  refuse  to  go
         through with an arranged marriage may  be  subject  to  an  'honour
         killing'' could be found among the sources consulted' -  that  such
         instances do not occur. They may not be  common  but  the  risk  is
         always there."


  19. I do not think the judge was obliged to come  to  the  conclusion  the
      appellant was at risk based on this report. In fairness to the  judge,
      he set out the above passages  in  his  recitation  of  the  evidence.
      However, I do think the judge  erred  in  apparently  ignoring  expert
      evidence which cautioned against leaping to the conclusion  which  the
      judge reached. The judge was obliged to explain  why  he  reached  the
      conclusion he reached notwithstanding Dr Seddon's remarks. This is the
      failure to give adequate reasons which troubled Judge Goldstein.


  20. The judge inferred from the fact the appellant was permitted to  study
      abroad (he believed in France where she would  be  chaperoned  by  her
      brother) that her father was not an "autocratic  Muslim  with  extreme
      views." That inference might be entirely legitimately drawn.  However,
      the judge must deal with the  evidence  relied  on  by  the  appellant
      before so concluding. The appellant's  brother  had  dealt  with  this
      point in his evidence and had explained that  there  was  no  inherent
      contradiction in the father's outlook  as  education  was  acceptable.
      What was never acceptable was disobedience. The judge was entitled  to
      reject this evidence but he did not refer to it at all. He simply made
      a generally positive credibility finding with regard to the  brother's
      evidence.


  21. For these reasons I find there was a possibility that, had  the  judge
      paid closer attention to the evidence of the  appellant,  her  brother
      and Dr Seddon, he might have come to a different conclusion on risk on
      return. I therefore set aside his decision for material error of  law.




  22. It is not necessary to consider the other issues  of  internal  flight
      and suicide risk. The case will have to be re-heard in the  First-tier
      Tribunal by any judge other than Judge Callow. None  of  his  findings
      are preserved save that the appellant was required by  her  father  to
      enter into marriage with a  man  whom  she  did  not  wish  to  marry.
      Fairness to the appellant demands  that  this  finding  is  preserved.
      However, the judge hearing the appeal will have to consider  and  make
      findings on the  risk  to  the  appellant  on  return  to  Morocco  by
      reference to all the evidence.


NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.

     The appeal shall be heard in the First-tier  Tribunal  subject  to  the
    following directions:

         1)   The appeal will be heard at Taylor  House  on  a  date  to  be
             notified, not before Judge Callow;
         2)   If either party wishes to adduce additional evidence, it  must
             be filed and served no later than 10 days before the hearing.


                               Signed                 Date 17 August 2015




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
