

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA079152015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Stoke-on-Trent                      |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 17th May 2016                             |On: 25th May 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AMS
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Mensah, Counsel instructed by AJO Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Libya born in 1981. On the 24th  August
    2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lambert) allowed his appeal against
    a decision of the Secretary of State to reject  his  protection  claim.
    The Secretary of State  now  has  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision[1].


 2. The basis of the Respondent's protection claim was that he was  he  was
    being directly threatened by the militia known as 'Libya Dawn' and  the
    self styled 'Tripoli Military Council'. The reason  for  their  threats
    was a) his association with the previous regime and with Saif  al-Islam
    Gaddafi in particular and b) his  high  profile  role  within  a  US-UK
    sponsored human rights initiative.

 3. The Secretary of State did not accept that the Respondent was  at  risk
    for any of the reasons claimed. On appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    disagreed. Having had regard to the oral testimony  of  the  Respondent
    and the extensive documentary evidence Judge Lambert made the following
    findings of fact:

               . The Respondent had been the organiser of  'Tomorrow  Libya'
                 and a youth organisation known as  'National  Libyan  Youth
                 Organisation'. There was only one person above him  in  the
                 hierarchy, and that was Saif Gaddafi [9.5]
               . There were therefore very substantial grounds for believing
                 that he worked in a position amounting to association at  a
                 senior level with the Gaddafi regime [9.6]
               . This places him in a risk category in accordance  with  the
                 guidance in AT and Ors [2014] UKUT 00318 (IAC)
               . He  had  a  public  profile  as  a  journalist  and  editor
                 connected  with  his  work  for   the   'Peaceful   Change'
                 initiative [9.9] and human rights activity [9.13]
               . He worked for three years for the General National  Council
                 (GNC) [9.12]
               . He attended  an  anti-militia  protest  in   November  2013
                 [9.13]
               . Three arrest warrants issued against him are  found  to  be
                 credible [9.10]
               . These facts cumulatively lead to a finding that he would be
                 "at very significant risk" in  NSG/Libyan  Dawn  controlled
                 Tripoli
               . Internal flight was not argued by the  Secretary  of  State
                 and nothing before the Judge indicated that the risk  would
                 be limited to only certain parts of Libya


    The appeal was thereby allowed on asylum and human rights grounds.


 4. The Secretary of State appeals on two grounds.  First, it is  contended
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  misapprehended  the  country  background
    situation. The Secretary of State contends that the groups  alleged  to
    be threatening the Appellant  are  in  fact  aligned  with  his  former
    employers the GNC. In those circumstances the finding  of  risk  cannot
    stand. Secondly, complaint is made that the  Tribunal  failed  to  take
    account of, or properly apply, the guidance in AT to  the  effect  that
    many Libyans had some association with the Gaddafi regime but that  the
    vast majority are not at risk today.






    Findings on 'Error of Law'


    Ground (ii): Association with Gaddafi


 5. I deal with the second ground first.  There is  no  merit  in  it.  The
    determination expressly recognises the guidance in AT.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal had an abundance of evidence before it which led  it  to  find
    the Respondent to be a wholly credible witness. It  expressly  accepted
    that he  had  been  involved,  inter  alia,  at  a  high  level  in  an
    organisation fronted  by  Saif  al-Islam  Gaddafi.  He  had  known  him
    personally and there was no one between them in the chain  of  command.
    That led to the conclusion that this was a man who  was,  or  would  be
    perceived to be, involved at a senior  level  in  the  Gaddafi  regime.
    His case was therefore distinguished on its facts from  the  generality
    of Libyans who may at one time or another have been  employees  of  the
    government.  That finding was open to the Tribunal on the evidence that
    was before it and I see no reason to interfere with it.




    Ground (i): The Country Situation


 6. The first ground led Ms Mensah to conduct  an  impressive  and  erudite
    synopsis of the recent and  troubled  history  of  Libya.   Mr  McVeety
    maintained  that  the  Judge  had  got  it  wrong,  and  that  she  had
    misunderstood who was in control of Tripoli and how that  might  affect
    the risk  assessment.   The  respective  positions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the parties, insofar as I understood it, can be summarised
    as follows.

 7. The Tribunal noted the Respondent's claim that he had, between 2011 and
    2013 been employed by the  Interim  Government  in  the  Department  of
    Education.   The Secretary of State had, in  rejecting  the  protection
    claim, stated that there would be no risk  from  'Libya  Dawn'  because
    they were affiliated with the very same organisation. The  reasons  for
    refusal letter reads: "given that you claim  to  have  worked  for  the
    government for three years, it is considered inconsistent that you  are
    now a target for pro-government militias".  Of this the Tribunal found:

         "9.7 The [Secretary of State] concedes that there is  'overwhelming
         evidence' of his employment with what the  author  of  the  refusal
         describes as the 'current government'. There is, as  emphasised  by
         Mr Madubike, a fatal error here by the author of  the  letter,  who
         appears entirely to have overlooked events in Libya in 2014 leading
         to the overthrow - at least in Tripoli - of the Interim  Government
         with whom the Appellant was employed. That has now become the rival
         government, based in Tobruk. The authority in  control  of  Tripoli
         has since August 2014 been  the  self-declared  National  Salvation
         Government (NSG) with its military arm the Misrata-led Libyan  Dawn
         Alliance (Human Rights Watch report 2015, Appellant  p.30,  Amnesty
         International p.40). There is therefore  no  inconsistency  at  all
         between the  Appellant's  employment  record  from  2011  with  the
         internationally recognised  Interim  General  Congress  (GNC)  (now
         based in Tobruk) and his claim now to be a target  of  the  Militia
         run government in Tripoli."

 8. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal rely on the UNHCRs  Position
    on Returns to Libya of November 2014:


         "In February  2014,  protests  erupted  when  the  parliament,  the
         General National Congress (GNC) cited the need for drafting  a  new
         constitution and extended its mandate beyond 7 February 2014. On 16
         May 2014, the situation further deteriorated when a former General,
         Khalifa Haftar, launched a military offensive against armed  groups
         in Benghazi . Two days  later,  armed  groups  allied  with  former
         General Haftar stormed the parliament building in Tripoli  accusing
         the  then-elected  Prime  Minister  Ahmed  Maiteeq  of   supporting
         Islamist groups. A new parliament, the  House  of  Representatives,
         was  elected  in  June.  The  security   situation   continued   to
         deteriorate...


         In August 2014, the political crisis escalated  further,  when  the
         House of Representatives moved to Tobruk  while  a  number  of  its
         members  boycotted  its  proceedings  and  the  GNC  reconvened  in
         Tripoli. The  House  of  Representatives  reappointed  Abdullah  Al
         Thinni as Prime Minister, while the GNC appointed Omar Al Hassi  as
         Prime  Minister,  effectively  leaving   the   country   with   two
         governments."


         (emphasis in original)


    On the basis of this information,  the  Secretary  of  State  concludes
    that it was the House of Representatives who went  to  Tobruk,  leaving
    the GNC in charge in Tripoli. Since the GNC were  the  government  that
    the Respondent had worked for, he cannot rationally be thought to be at
    risk in the city today.


 9. Ms Mensah submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had (in substance) got
    it right, and that it was the Secretary of State who had got it  wrong.
    The confusion arose simply because of the various  names  used  by  the
    different groupings, and no doubt their  transliteration  into  English
    from Arabic.  For instance, it would appear that the Tribunal has  used
    the term 'interim' where  other  sources  use  'transitional'.  Further
    confusion arises from the fact that in the chaos that has characterised
    post-Gaddafi Libya, there have  been  frequent,  and  sometimes  swift,
    changes in allegiance. For instance, Islamists who had previously stood
    in opposition to any of the recognised governments subsequently  formed
    the 'new' GNC which aligned itself with the National Salvation Council.


10. With those points in mind I find as follows.

11. Between the summer of 2011 and August 2012 the government  in  Tripoli,
    recognised by the international community, was known  as  the  National
    Transitional Council.  In July 2012 an alliance known  as  the  General
    National Congress was elected; it assumed office in August.  These were
    the organisations in government during the period that  the  Respondent
    was working  as  a  civil  servant.   Both  were  plagued  by  internal
    division.  Although recognised as the official government by the US and
    UK, it became apparent that the GNC was riven by a  power  struggle  in
    which Islamist factions were increasingly dominant.

12.  In  March  2013  the  GNC  replaced  itself  with  a  new   'House  of
    Representatives'.   The group were due to stand down  in  January  2014
    but refused to do so, extending their mandate for a further year.  This
    led to unrest and in May 2014 the Libyan Army,  under  the  command  of
    General Haftar, attempted  an  assault  on  what  it  perceived  to  be
    Islamist influence by attacking the  parliament  building  in  Tripoli.
    This attack failed and in June further elections were  held.   A  group
    identified  as  the  'Council  of  Deputies'  was  elected.  They  were
    recognised by the international community but the turnout was low. This
    led to protest  by  pro-Islamist  factions  that  the  election  was  a
    nullity, a fix, or both.  Violence escalated until  in  July  2014  the
    Council of Deputies was forced to move to Tobruk, where it  remains.  I
    am satisfied that this  is  the  rump  of  the  organisation  that  the
    Respondent had previously worked for. To  that  extent  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was quite correct in finding that his erstwhile employers  are
    no longer in charge in Tripoli. It may be that the UNHCR have  confused
    matters  by  referring  to  this  organisation   as   the   'House   of
    Representatives' but I am satisfied that in this context they are  both
    the same thing.  The group that took over Tripoli in 2014 are  hardline
    Islamists.   They  are  known  variously  as  the  National   Salvation
    Government,  the  ('new')  GNC  or  in  some  sources  as  the  Misrati
    government (the militias that  back  it  having  their  strongholds  in
    Misrata).  These  groups  are  backed  by  Libya  Dawn  who   are   the
    organisation which has threatened the Respondent.  I am satisfied  that
    the First-tier Tribunal understood this to be the situation and it  was
    on that basis that the risk assessment was made. The second  ground  is
    not therefore made out.


13. I would add this. Ms Mensah recognised that  it  may  be  that  certain
    individuals  and militias have changed allegiances over the  course  of
    the five year  long  civil  war  in  Libya  (I  see  no  rationale  for
    separating the conflict into two distinct wars). The fact is  that  the
    Respondent  was  a  civil  servant  doing  his  job.  Whether  or   not
    individuals or certain militias sought him out then, or declared him to
    be 'safe' is not the point. The point is that there  is  a  finding  of
    fact that a ruthless Islamist militia known  as  Libya  Dawn  have  now
    issued threats against  him,  for  reasons  of  his  imputed  political
    opinion.  Whether or not the Respondent once worked under the political
    control of individuals who may or may not today be  aligned  with  that
    group is frankly immaterial. In the context  of  this  conflict  it  is
    unlikely in the extreme that any protection will be  available  to  the
    Respondent to  protect  himself  against  Libya  Dawn  or  the  Tripoli
    Military Council.


      Decisions

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.

15. Having regard to the nature  of  the  evidence  I  make  the  following
    direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Respondent is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Respondent  and  the
        Secretary of State.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could
        lead to contempt of court proceedings".





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    23rd
                                  May 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett
on the 29th September 2015

