
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07185/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 February 2015                          |On 23 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                 AMIR AGHAEI
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M
    A Khan promulgated on 8 December 2014 dismissing the appeal of Mr  Amir
    Aghaei against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department dated 4 September 2014 to remove him from the United Kingdom
    following rejection of his application for asylum.



Background

2.   The Appellant is a national of  Afghanistan.   Whilst  there  has  been
    some dispute as to his age, he has most recently been  age-assessed  by
    Kent Social Services in November 2010 when it was concluded that he had
    a date of birth of 28  March  1993.  That  date  of  birth  has,  since
    November 2010, been accepted by the Respondent.  It is germane to  note
    that there was an earlier age-assessment at the end of  June  2009,  in
    which Kent Social Services assessed the Appellant's date of birth to be
    27 March 1991 - that is to say  two  years  earlier,  thereby  on  that
    assessment creating the perception that he was two years older than  he
    is now considered to be.

3.   The Appellant's immigration history is summarised in  the  cover  sheet
    to the Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal and  is  also
    set out in the 'reasons for refusal' letter dated 4 September 2014.   I
    do not propose to rehearse in detail that immigration history,  suffice
    to say at this time that it has some quite unusual circumstances  which
    in some part were accepted by the Respondent.   In  particular  it  was
    accepted by the Respondent that  the  Appellant  had  effectively  been
    abducted at the age of 7 and from that time for a number of  years  had
    lived with a family, described as an 'adoptive family',  in  Iran.   It
    appears from the Appellant's account that that family  themselves  then
    experienced difficulties in Iran, and over time the Appellant made  his
    way across Europe before arriving in the  United  Kingdom  on  16  June
    2009.

4.   A screening interview was conducted on 3 July 2009 (when the  Appellant
    was 16) but it was not until February 2014 (when the Appellant was just
    short of 21) that a substantive asylum interview was carried out by the
    Respondent.

5.   The Respondent refused  the  Appellant's  application  for  asylum  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal'  letter  dated  4  September
    2014.  As I have already indicated that refusal accepts certain aspects
    of the Appellant's history: that in  itself  is  an  indicator  of  the
    manifest care and consideration  that  has  been  given  to  evaluating
    different aspects of the  Appellant's  case  within  the  body  of  the
    'reasons for  refusal'  letter.   Removal  directions  were  issued  in
    consequence of the refusal of asylum, and it is against  those  removal
    directions that the Appellant appealed to the IAC.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons set out in his decision.

7.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on 6 January
    2015.

Consideration

8.   At the core of the Appellant's claim for protection  is  his  assertion
    that he fears that he will be killed if returned to Afghanistan by  the
    same persons - unknown - who killed his  family.   This  assertion  was
    entirely based on  information  said  to  have  been  imparted  by  the
    Appellant's cousin, Mr Asmet Ibrahimi, whom the Appellant met after his
    arrival in the United Kingdom.

9.   The Respondent did not believe this aspect of the Appellant's  account:
    see in this context in particular paragraphs 27-32 of the 'reasons  for
    refusal' letter.  I note in this regard the contents  of  paragraph  28
    which is in these terms:

         "This aspect  of  your  account  is  considered  to  be  internally
         inconsistent.  You make no claim that your cousin was with you when
         you left Afghanistan for Iran.  Therefore your claim that you  were
         introduced because  your  stories  were  similar  is  inconsistent.
         Furthermore, you state that your cousin had been looking  for  you.
         Given that the last contact the family had with you  was  14  years
         ago in Iran, it is considered inconsistent  that  your  cousin  was
         looking for you in the United Kingdom."

10.  The first part of that paragraph  makes  reference  to  an  explanation
    offered by the Appellant as to how he had come to meet his cousin.   It
    was said by the Appellant that a  mutual  acquaintance  had  introduced
    them because the Appellant's story was similar to that of  his  cousin.
    As I have already indicated there is  a  distinct  peculiarity  to  the
    Appellant's particular back story.  There is nothing  in  the  evidence
    anywhere that remotely suggests that the Appellant's  cousin  ever  had
    such similar experiences.  It seems to me that  the  matter  raised  at
    paragraph 28 of the 'reasons for refusal'  letter  remained  unanswered
    across any of  the  witness  statements  provided  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or the oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

11.  Be that as it may, it is on the basis of the cousin's  account  of  the
    murder of the Appellant's family that the Appellant advances  the  core
    of his asylum claim.  In this regard the Appellant's cousin provided  a
    supporting witness statement and also attended the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  The witness statement was signed on 3 November 2014.

12.  At paragraph 10 of his witness statement (page  9  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal) the cousin says this:

         "In around 2002 while my family were still in Pakistan I heard news
         from my mother about the appellant's mother, my  aunt.   My  mother
         told me that her sister had been killed along with her husband  and
         children.  She did not say who had killed them but that it happened
         about six months before she had been told by  her  paternal  cousin
         who had travelled from Afghanistan.  This cousin  lived  in  Kabul.
         My aunt's neighbours had told my mother's cousins that my aunt, her
         husband and three children had been shot dead by unknown assailants
         in the night.  My mother has  never  told  me  anything  more  than
         this."

    So, on that evidence the information as to what  had  happened  to  the
    Appellant's family was known to the cousin in 2002.

13.  In sharp contrast to the contents of his witness statement Mr  Ibrahimi
    imparted different information to Kent  Social  Services  during  their
    conduct of the Appellant's age-assessment in November 2010.   The  age-
    assessment is included in the Respondent's bundle.   My  attention  has
    been directed to it by reason of  complaint  made  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal challenging the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not have due and proper regard to the age-
    assessment which contained considerable  information  relevant  to  the
    Appellant's claim, or at least indicated support in that much  of  what
    was supposedly recorded in the age-assessment chimed with the  core  of
    the Appellant's claim: ('Ground Four', paragraph 12,  "...the  FTJ  has
    also failed to consider the detailed report at all in terms of evidence
    concerning what  the  appellant  said  had  happened  to  him  and  his
    circumstances as relayed to Kent Social Services. At the very least the
    FTJ ought to have looked at and considered this report before  arriving
    at   sweeping   adverse   findings   concerning   any   vagueness    or
    inconsistencies in the appellant's account").   However  the  following
    appears at page 7 of the age-assessment  in  relation  to  a  telephone
    enquiry made by the assessor of the Appellant's cousin:

         "I spoke on the telephone to Amir's cousin,  Asmet  Ibrahime,  with
         whom he currently resides.  Amir stated that prior to  his  arrival
         in the UK he had not previously met Amir."

         (I interject to note that that in itself is not entirely consistent
         with materials that appear elsewhere in the documents).

         "He stated that he had been contacted by a friend who had met  Amir
         in Liverpool  and  subsequent  enquiries  with  Asmet's  family  in
         Afghanistan suggested that Amir was a maternal cousin. Asmet stated
         that his family told him that Amir's parents had  left  Afghanistan
         many years ago to travel to Iraq because of local tribal  conflict.
         He stated that his family had no knowledge of what  had  become  of
         Amir's parents or siblings."

14.  It may readily be seen that the complaint based on the Judge's  failure
    to have any or any more detailed consideration to the contents of  that
    age-assessment is  not  a  matter  that  would  have  resulted  in  any
    particular overall support for the Appellant's claim, but instead would
    have  reinforced  the  element  of  inconsistency  identified  by   the
    Secretary of State in the 'reasons for refusal' letter  in  respect  of
    the core element of the claim.

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the Appellant's evidence  from
    paragraphs 42 of the decision.  The primary complaint that is  made  in
    the  grounds  of  appeal  is  that  the   Judge   was   in   error   in
    misunderstanding the age of the Appellant as assessed in November 2010.
     Whilst it is the case that the Judge correctly stated the  Appellant's
    date of birth as 28 March 1993 at paragraph 1 of the decision, that  is
    to say entirely consistently with  the  November  2010  assessment,  at
    paragraph 43 the Judge  states  this,  having  had  regard  to  certain
    inconsistencies:

         "In coming to my decision on the appellant's credibility, I  remind
         myself that the appellant was  age  assessed  by  the  Kent  Social
         Services at the end of June 2009 and  he  was  assessed  to  be  an
         adult."

    Necessarily that assessment is the one that was subsequently overturned
    on the second assessment (which was made pursuant to a judicial  review
    application made by the Appellant).

16.  The Judge's comment quoted at paragraph 15 above, is, set as it  is  in
    the context of paragraph 44, in regard in particular to the  events  of
    the Appellant's journey to the United Kingdom.  Mr Nath  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State acknowledges the factual error on  the  part  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  as  to  age,  but  submits  that  the
    discrepancies identified elsewhere in the determination  by  the  Judge
    are such that ultimately this particular error cannot be, or should not
    be, considered material to the  overall  outcome  in  the  appeal.   Mr
    Hodson - notwithout some good  reason  -  says  that  this  matter  was
    material because the Judge made express reference to it.

17.  I have reached the conclusion that this error - which might  have  been
    relevant to a  consideration  of  the  screening  interview  which  was
    conducted at a time when the Appellant  was  a  little  past  his  16th
    birthday - was not a matter that was material to the Judge's  rejection
    of the Appellant's cousin's evidence.

18.  The Judge's  assessment  of  credibility  is  taken  forward  from  the
    erroneous observation with regard to the  age-assessment  at  paragraph
    44, to paragraphs 45 and 46.  The initial two sentences of paragraph 45
    do indeed relate to the screening interview.  However the remainder  of
    that paragraph are concerned with events  surrounding  the  Appellant's
    accommodation in Liverpool, the meeting of his cousin's friend, and  in
    due course the contact with the cousin.  These  are  not  matters  that
    were covered in the  screening  interview  and  therefore  the  Judge's
    misunderstanding as to the Appellant's age at the time of the screening
    interview is not directly relevant.  Whilst it may  be  said  that  the
    Appellant was only 16 at the  time  of  the  relevant  events  that  he
    subsequently recalled in relation to the circumstances of  meeting  his
    cousin, there is no reason to think that his age  would  have  affected
    his ability to recall such events, or that his age would have  affected
    his ability in presenting or recounting those events at a later stage.

19.  Paragraph 46 refers to an overt contradiction  in  the  testimonies  of
    the Appellant and his cousin.  The paragraph is in these terms:

         "There  are  contradictions   and   inconsistencies   between   the
         appellant's evidence and that of his cousin.   The  appellant  said
         that he has never spoken to his aunt (his  cousin's  mother).   The
         witness said that the appellant has recently spoken to his  mother,
         exchanging greetings.  I do not find the appellant or his  cousin's
         evidence credible or consistent."

20.  Mr Hodson properly accepts that it was open to the Judge to  make  that
    observation.

21.  Looked at in the round the conclusion at paragraph 49  -  "He  made  up
    his story with his cousin and has over exaggerated  his  claim"  -  was
    open to the Judge, and indeed realistically the only obvious conclusion
    in light of the various contradictions and inconsistencies.   In  those
    circumstances I find that there was no material error.

22.  For completeness I should observe that the judge in the alternative  in
    any event considered the case, at paragraph 48, on the basis that  even
    if the Appellant's account was to be accepted there was not  sufficient
    to identify a current risk to the Appellant based on  events  that  had
    happened to his family in or about 2002 in the circumstances  where  it
    was not possible for the Appellant to particularise those  events.   In
    effect there was insufficient reason to think that there would  be  any
    adverse interest in the Appellant in consequence of what  had  happened
    to his family bearing in mind that the Appellant could not actually put
    that in any particular context.

23.  It  may  well  be  that  the  level  of  reasoning  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision is not all that it could be,  but  in  my  judgment
    overall it was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  conclude  that
    the contradictions in the testimonies of the Appellant and  his  cousin
    were such that their evidence was not credible for the reasons given by
    the Judge.

24.  The necessary inference to be drawn was  that  the  Appellant's  claim,
    being based entirely on what his cousin had supposedly said, was to  be
    rejected.

Notice of Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law and stands.

26.  The appeal is dismissed.



    The above represents a corrected transcript of an  ex-tempore  decision
    given at the hearing on 18 February 2015.



Signed        Date: 23 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

