
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07131/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: IAC Birmingham             |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 31 January 2017                  |On: 02 February 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                Jane Makombe
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Acharya of Acharyas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Following a grant of permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appellant's   appeal   against   the
   respondent's decision refusing to vary her leave to remain, it was found,
   at an error of law hearing on 18 March 2016, that the First-tier Tribunal
   had made errors of law in its decision. The decision was accordingly  set
   aside and was to be re-made.

2. The appellant, a national of Zimbabwe born on 11 November  1974,  arrived
   in the UK on 27 March 1998 and was granted leave to enter for six  months
   as a visitor. She was subsequently granted further periods  of  leave  to
   remain as a student, until 27 December 2002.  On  30  December  2002  she
   applied for indefinite leave to remain on compassionate  grounds  outside
   the immigration rules, but her application was  refused  on  1  September
   2003. She then made an application for leave to remain  on  human  rights
   grounds on 17 December 2003. She did not  receive  a  decision  from  the
   respondent. On 20 May 2010 the appellant made an asylum claim  which  was
   refused on 5 July 2010. Her appeal against that decision was heard in the
   First-tier Tribunal on 18  August  2010  and  was  dismissed  on  asylum,
   humanitarian and Articles 2 and 3 human rights grounds, but  was  allowed
   on  Article  8  grounds.  As  a  result,  the   appellant   was   granted
   discretionary leave to remain by the respondent on  23  May  2011,  valid
   until 22 May 2014.


3. On  7  May  2014  the  appellant  applied  for  further  leave,  but  her
   application was refused on  9  April  2015.  She  appealed  against  that
   decision and her appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 11 August
   2015 and allowed in  a  decision  promulgated  on  25  August  2015.  The
   Secretary of State applied for, and was granted permission  to  challenge
   that decision in the Upper Tribunal, further to which  the  decision  was
   set aside.

The Appellant's Case

4. The appellant's asylum claim, as put to the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  18
   August 2010, was that she feared returning to Zimbabwe  as  a  result  of
   being unable to demonstrate loyalty to the regime. However  she  did  not
   claim to have, or to have had, any political involvement  and  the  judge
   found that she would be at no risk on return. It was on the basis of  the
   appellant's private and family life that  the  appeal  was  allowed.  The
   appellant's evidence before the Tribunal was that  she  had  developed  a
   rare form of mouth ulcer at the age of 12 and had  had  to  drop  out  of
   school and subsequently went to live with her aunt and uncle and  cousins
   in Harare, where she received medical treatment. Whilst living  with  her
   aunt she gave birth to a boy, in 1992. In 1998 she travelled to the UK at
   the invitation  of  another  cousin,  Lovemore,  and  his  wife  who  was
   pregnant, to help care for the baby when born. She  started  studying  in
   the UK and remained here, although she returned to Zimbabwe  in  2001  to
   see her son. Her father died in 1999 and her brother in  2002.  Her  aunt
   and uncle also died in 2005 and 2008, her mother in 2008 and her  son  in
   2009. She therefore had no-one to return to in Zimbabwe  and  nowhere  to
   live as there was no family property remaining there. At the time of  the
   hearing she was living with her cousin Charles and his wife and  children
   and was also close to another cousin Walter, who at the time was in Kenya
   with the British Army. It was Charles and his family with  whom  she  had
   lived and grown up in Harare. Her cousins in  the  UK  were  all  British
   citizens.

5. The judge accepted the appellant's evidence and accepted that she had  no
   family or property to return to and that it would be difficult for her to
   find employment in Zimbabwe. He accepted that the appellant's  dependence
   upon her cousins, who regarded her as a sister, went  beyond  the  normal
   emotional ties existing between family members and he accepted  that  she
   had established a family and private life in the  UK.  The  judge  placed
   considerable weight upon the respondent's failure to make a  decision  on
   the appellant's human rights claim submitted  on  17  December  2003  and
   considered that that  delay  reduced  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
   requirements of firm immigration control in assessing proportionality. He
   concluded that, although finely balanced, the appellant's  removal  would
   be disproportionate and in breach of her Article 8 human rights.


6. In refusing the appellant's application for further discretionary  leave,
   in the decision of 9 April  2015,  the  respondent  considered  that  the
   appellant would not be at risk on return to Zimbabwe and did not  qualify
   for asylum or humanitarian protection. With  regard  to  Article  8,  the
   respondent considered that the appellant had failed  to  demonstrate  any
   dependency on her cousins beyond normal emotional ties and did not accept
   that she had established a family life in the UK. It was  concluded  that
   she could not meet the requirements in Appendix FM, that  there  were  no
   very significant  obstacles  to  her  integration  to  Zimbabwe  for  the
   purposes of paragraph 276ADE(vi)  and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
   circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.


7. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard on 11 August  2015
   by First-tier Tribunal Judge Asjad, at which time the  appellant  was  no
   longer living with her cousin Charles but was living alone in a  flat  in
   Leicester, although still receiving  support  from  her  family  members.
   Judge Asjad preserved the findings of fact made by  the  previous  First-
   tier Tribunal. She noted that the appellant's asylum claim was now  being
   made on the basis that she was a member of  a  particular  social  group,
   namely a lone female living alone in Zimbabwe, and found her evidence  in
   that regard to be misleading and her claim to be contrived. She  did  not
   accept that the appellant was at risk on return to Zimbabwe and dismissed
   the appeal on that basis. As regards Article 8, the judge considered that
   the delay by the Home Office in considering the appellant's human  rights
   claim was still relevant in so far as the appellant's  private  life  had
   become more rooted. She noted that the appellant worked for the NHS as  a
   health care worker and that she had moved away and established new  links
   and friendships in Leicester and integrated herself into the British  way
   of life. The judge found that the requirements in Appendix  FM  were  not
   met and she considered further that, whilst the appellant would face some
   difficulty in  re-integration  in  Zimbabwe,  she  would  not  face  very
   significant obstacles for the purposes of  paragraph  276ADE.  The  judge
   proceeded to consider Article 8 outside the  immigration  rules,  finding
   that she had established a family and private life in the  UK  and  that,
   having regard  to  the  factors  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the interference  with  her  family  and
   private life would be disproportionate and in breach of  Article  8.  She
   allowed the appeal on that basis.

8. Permission to appeal was sought by the respondent  on  the  grounds  that
   the judge had made a material misdirection in relation  to  section  117B
   and that her findings were contrary to the approach taken in AM (S  117B)
   Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 and Forman [2015] UKUT 00412  and  downplayed  the
   public interest in immigration control.

9. At a hearing on 18 March 2016, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  O'Ryan  found
   an error of law in the judge's decision and set it aside. He  then  heard
   evidence  and  submissions  with  a  view  to  re-making  the   decision.
   Unfortunately he was not able to issue a written  decision  with  reasons
   for finding an error of law and he gave no indication of the  outcome  of
   the re-making of the decision. In the absence  of  an  objection  to  the
   proposal, in the decision and directions subsequently issued by the Upper
   Tribunal on 24 November 2016, that that decision was to be treated  as  a
   decision confirming the  error  of  law  decision  given  orally  at  the
   hearing, the parties have been treated as having  given  consent  to  the
   Upper Tribunal not  providing  written  reasons  for  the  error  of  law
   decision. The appeal was then listed for a resumed hearing to re-make the
   decision.

10. At the hearing before me Mr Acharya accepted that the hearing was a  re-
   making of the decision in the appeal and I therefore heard oral  evidence
   and submissions from the parties.

11. The appellant confirmed in her oral evidence that  she  had  lived  with
   her aunt and uncle and cousins in Harare before coming to the UK in March
   1998 and had since that time visited Zimbabwe only once in 2001  for  two
   weeks. She said that she was very close to her cousins in the UK but  did
   not live with them, having moved to Leicester in October  2011  when  she
   found  a  job  there  as  a  healthcare  worker,  after   being   granted
   discretionary leave in May 2011. They visited each  other  regularly  and
   kept in contact by telephone and her cousins provided her with  financial
   and emotional support when needed. She had no family in Zimbabwe  and  no
   property there. She had lived in Leicester with her cousin  Lovemore  and
   his wife when she first came to the UK and she studied  there,  and  then
   moved in with her cousin Charles in Crawley from  around  2004  when  she
   stopped studying and was not permitted to  work.  Once  she  was  granted
   discretionary leave and was able to work she could  not  find  a  job  in
   Crawley and so moved back to Leicester where she maintained contacts from
   previously. Her cousins Charles and Walter had  their  own  business,  in
   pest control. They still helped her out financially when she needed money
   but would not be able to send her money if she was in Zimbabwe as it  was
   very difficult to send money there. She had little contact with Lovemore.
   She would not be able to maintain contact with her cousins from  Zimbabwe
   as there was no electricity there and therefore no internet and no Skype.
   She would have  no  family  support  in  Zimbabwe,  either  financial  or
   emotional.

12.  The  appellant's  cousin,  Fortune  Charles  Murahwa,  then  gave  oral
   evidence before me, confirming his close relationship with the  appellant
   whom he regarded as a sister. He lived with  his  wife  and  three  adult
   children. He and his wife had supported  the  appellant  emotionally  and
   financially.  He  said  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  support   her
   financially if she went back to  Zimbabwe  as  she  would  need  constant
   support and assistance with paying rent which would be expensive for him.
   He agreed, however, that he would not leave her destitute.


13. Mr Mills submitted that the judge's findings on  paragraph  276ADE  were
   to be preserved and it would be difficult to conclude  that  removal  was
   disproportionate  if  there  were  no  very  significant   obstacles   to
   integration. Mr Mills did not accept that there was an established family
   life for the purposes of Article 8 as there was no longer any  dependency
   above the normal emotional ties between adult siblings.  With  regard  to
   private life he relied on the recent decision in  Treebhawon  and  Others
   (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances test) [2017]  UKUT  13  and
   submitted  that  there  was  nothing  compelling  about  the  appellant's
   circumstances. The decision was proportionate and the  appeal  should  be
   dismissed.


14. Mr Acharya, relying on the case of  Ghising  (family  life  -  adults  -
   Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160, submitted that there was an established
   family life despite the appellant having moved away from her cousins.  He
   submitted that removal would be disproportionate, considering the  length
   of time the appellant had been in the UK, which was  just  less  than  20
   years, the family support she had here, the loss of her family members in
   Zimbabwe and the lack of support she had there. He asked that the  appeal
   be allowed.

Consideration and findings

15. For the sake of completeness, I would make it clear that  Judge  Asjad's
   decision  plainly  contained  material  errors  of  law   in   that   her
   consideration of the factors in section 117B of the 2002 Act, such as the
   appellant's ability  in  English,  financial  independence  and  asserted
   compliance with  immigration  laws,  as  being  weighty  factors  in  the
   proportionality assessment, was plainly inconsistent with the approach in
   AM and Forman which made it clear that they were simply neutral  factors.
   As such, her decision was legally unsustainable and could not stand.

16. However, as Mr  Mills  submitted,  the  judge's  findings  on  paragraph
   276ADE(1)(vi) remain intact, there being no challenge to that part of the
   decision, and the finding that there were no very  significant  obstacles
   to the appellant's integration into Zimbabwe has been properly preserved.
   The re-making of the decision in the appellant's appeal is  therefore  in
   respect to Article 8 outside the immigration rules and, as  confirmed  in
   Treebhawon, the test to be applied is that of "compelling circumstances".
   I agree with Mr  Mills  that  the  appellant  has  a  difficult  task  in
   demonstrating that her circumstances are compelling, when it is otherwise
   the case that there are no very significant obstacles to her  integration
   into Zimbabwe.


17. I do not  agree  with  Mr  Acharya's  submission  that  the  appellant's
   circumstances can be compared with those in Ghising in demonstrating that
   family life exists between adult family members, but  consider  that  any
   family life that was found by the First-tier Tribunal in the  appellant's
   previous appeal to have existed no  longer  exists.  The  appellant  has,
   since that time, moved out of her cousin's house and has been working and
   living independently for the past five to six years. Indeed that  was  an
   unchallenged finding made by Judge Asjad at [19]. Whilst it  may  be  the
   case that she receives some additional financial  support  and  emotional
   support at times of need from her cousin, that is far from establishing a
   dependency over and above the normal emotional ties between adult  family
   members. Accordingly the appellant's claim has to be considered in  terms
   of private life.


18. As stated above, the factors relied on by Judge Asjad  at  [27],  namely
   the appellant's ability in English, financial independence  and  asserted
   compliance with immigration laws, are neutral factors. In any  event  the
   judge was clearly wrong  when  considering  the  appellant's  immigration
   status at [27] as she has not always had  valid  leave  in  the  UK  and,
   furthermore, any  leave  she  had  was  precarious.  Accordingly  section
   117B(5) is relevant in that the appellant's private life has therefore to
   be accorded little weight as against the public interest in her  removal.
   The positive factors in the appellant's favour are her family ties in the
   UK and her lack of family ties in Zimbabwe, but she is an adult  who  has
   acquired skills and qualifications in the UK which  can  be  utilised  in
   Zimbabwe to find employment and re-establish  herself  and  there  is  no
   reason why her cousins in the UK cannot assist her, at  least  initially,
   until she has found employment and an independent source of income. I  do
   not accept as  credible  the  appellant's  claim  that  money  cannot  be
   transferred to her in Zimbabwe when there is no evidence to suggest  that
   such facilities do not exist and indeed they clearly do exist. Neither do
   I accept as credible her claim that there is no electricity to facilitate
   internet contact with her  cousins.  The  most  compelling  part  of  the
   appellant's claim is her length of residence in the UK, but that  is  not
   sufficient to meet the requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1)  and,  in  any
   event, has been mostly without leave. The  delay  by  the  respondent  in
   considering her human rights claim was a weighty factor in the First-tier
   Tribunal's decision allowing the appellant's appeal in August 2010 but is
   no longer a relevant or weighty factor.

19. In the circumstances, whilst I accept that a return  to  Zimbabwe  would
   not be easy for the appellant, there is nothing  particularly  compelling
   about her  circumstances  so  as  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
   immigration  control  and  to  justify  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
   immigration rules on wider Article 8 grounds. For all of these reasons it
   is  clear  that  the  appellant's  removal  to  Zimbabwe  would  not   be
   disproportionate and would not breach her Article  8  human  rights.  The
   appeal is therefore dismissed.


DECISION

20. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error  of  law  and  the
   decision has been set aside. I re-make the  decision  by  dismissing  the
   appellant's appeal on all grounds.


     Anonymity
   The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  order.  I  see  no  reason  to
   continue that order and therefore discharge the order.









                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede






