
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07167/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 26 May 2016                       |On 14 July 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                             MR FARIDULLAH SAIDI
                        (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza  (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills   (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    This is the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal  against  a
decision of  the  First-tier Tribunal  (Judge Robertson  hereinafter  "the
judge") promulgated on 31 October 2014, dismissing his appeal against  the
respondent's decision of 10 September 2014 refusing to grant  him  further
leave to remain and deciding to remove him from the UK.

2.    In a determination promulgated on 13 November 2015, I set aside  the
judge's determination and indicated, (a course of action not opposed by  the
parties), that I would remake  the  decision  in  the  Upper Tribunal.   My
determination promulgated on  13 November 2015  explains,  in  detail,  my
reasons for setting aside the judge's decision but, essentially,  I  did  so
because I concluded that in refusing  the  appellant's  application  for  an
adjournment in circumstances where he had found  himself  unrepresented  but
with some prospect of his being able to secure  future  representation,  she
had, albeit understandably, not followed the approach  set  out  in  Nwaigwe
(adjournment fairness) 2014 UKUT 00418 IAC.  It does not appear that  she
was aware of the decision in Nwaigwe when refusing the  adjournment  request
but I decided that in all the circumstances an error of law  had  been  made
such that the determination ought to be set aside in its  entirety  so  that
matters could be considered, by way of remaking, entirely afresh.   That  is
what has happened and the rest of this determination of the  Upper Tribunal
is concerned with the remaking of the decision.

The appellant, his immigration and his adjudication history

3.     The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Afghanistan  and  was  born   on
1 January 1995.  It was not in dispute before me that he  hails  from  the
Kapisa Province in Afghanistan which is one of 44 provinces in that country
and is located in the north east.  It is recorded that he entered the UK  on
15 June 2009, at a time when he was therefore  aged  14 years,  and  then
claimed asylum.  In pursuing his claim he provided  the  respondent  with  a
relatively brief witness  statement  of  6 July 2009  (prepared  with  the
assistance of his then representatives) and  was  then  interviewed  by  the
respondent,  with  the  assistance  of  a  Pushto  speaking  interpreter  on
10 August 2009 when he provided further  details  about  his  claim.   The
interview was conducted in the presence of  a  social  worker.   Thereafter,
for   reasons   explained   in   a   "reasons   for   refusal   letter"   of
1 September 2009, the  respondent  decided  to  refuse  to  grant  asylum.
However, in recognition of the appellant's young age and in accordance  with
Home Office policy, he  was  granted  limited  discretionary  leave  as  an
unaccompanied minor until such time as he attained the age of 17� years.

4.    The appellant, as was his entitlement despite  the  grant  of  limited
leave, sought to challenge the refusal  of  asylum.   He  appealed  and  his
appeal  was  heard  by  Immigration  Judge Parkes  (as  he  then  was)  on
27 October 2009.  There are various copies of Judge Parkes  determination
before me but all of them appear to be incomplete.   However,  it  is  clear
that Immigration Judge Parkes did not accept that the appellant had given a
truthful account of events and that that  is  why  the  appeal  failed.   Of
course, though, the appellant was left  with  his  existing  limited  leave.
Prior to that leave expiring, in fact in June 2012, he applied for  further
leave.  In so doing he supplied a further statement of 26 June 2012  along
with some  documentary  evidence  relating  to  his  life  in  the  UK.   He
maintained that he had told the truth in his asylum claim and appeal and  so
maintained his claim to be entitled to international protection but he  also
sought to rely upon Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights
(ECHR).  The respondent, however, for reasons contained  in  a  reasons  for
refusal letter of 26 August 2014, concluded that he was  not  entitled  to
asylum or any other form of international protection and that removal  would
not bring about a  breach  of  Article 8.   Accordingly,  the  decision  of
10 September 2014, which is the subject of this appeal, was made.   It  is
the appellant's appeal against that decision which forms the matter (by  way
of remaking) now to be determined.

The law in summary

5.    In order to establish  entitlement  to  international  protection  the
appellant must show that there is  a  real  risk  or,  put  another  way,  a
reasonable likelihood that upon return to Afghanistan he will:

    (a)    be persecuted for one  of  the  five  reasons  set  out  in  the
         1951 Refugee Convention;

    (b)    be subjected to serious harm such as to give rise to a grant  of
         humanitarian protection;

    (c)    be treated in such a way as to constitute a breach of Article 2
         or Article 3 of the ECHR.

6.    The relevant date for assessment with respect to all of the  above  is
the date of the hearing before me.

7.    The appellant has also relied upon  Article 8  of  the  ECHR  in  the
context of private life.  He has not, however, relied upon  the  content  of
what might be described as the Article 8 related  Immigration Rules.   His
Article 8 arguments are made outside the rules.  I shall  set  out,  below,
should it be necessary, the various stages which  must  be  considered  when
undergoing an Article 8 assessment outside the rules.

The appellant's account

8.    When he applied for asylum the appellant gave an  account  of  events,
as recorded in his initial statement and in the record of  interview,  which
may be summarised as follows.

9.    The appellant said that at the  time  he  was  living  in  Afghanistan
Kapisa was effectively controlled by the Taliban.  He had a  brother  called
Khalid, who had become a member of the Afghan Army.  The Taliban  had  told
his father that Khalid had to cease  working  for  the  Army  otherwise  the
family would face harsh consequences.  His father  did  persuade  Khalid  to
comply and to return to the family home.  However, shortly  afterwards,  the
Taliban raided the family home, murdered  Khalid  and  abducted  his  father
whom the appellant says he has not seen nor heard from  since.   After  that
his mother made arrangements  for  him  to  leave  Afghanistan  because  she
thought it dangerous for him to remain.  She gave him some  money.   In  his
statement of 6 July 2009 he recounts how he  then  travelled  to  Pakistan
where he met an agent who took him to Tehran.  He also said,  in  that  same
statement, that he then journeyed to Turkey, then to Greece, then  to  Italy
and then to France prior to coming to the  UK,  entering  in  a  clandestine
manner, and claiming asylum.  In pursuing his claim he asserted that  he  no
longer had any contact with his family and that if  he  were  to  return  to
Afghanistan he would be killed by  the  Taliban  because  of  his  brother's
involvement with the Afghan Army.  He also made the  point  that  he  would
have no-one to look after him upon return and would, therefore, be  at  risk
of abuse.

10.   The appellant, in pursuing his  current  appeal,  has  maintained  the
above.  It has also been contended on his behalf that, in  addition  to  his
being at risk of targeting by the Taliban as a result of his  connection  to
his brother, he would, in any event, be at risk of being recruited  by  them
in order to fight for them.  The point is made, in this context, that he  is
a young man of fighting age.  It is further contended on his behalf that  he
would be similarly at risk (that is to say at risk  of  forced  recruitment)
by the organisation known as the Islamic State of Iraq and the  Lavant  and
also known as ISIS and Daesh.  I  shall,  for  convenience,  refer  to  that
organisation, hereafter, as ISIS.  It was also contended on  behalf  of  the
appellant that he had established a private life in the UK, his having  been
here since 2009, and that removal would represent a breach of his Article 8
rights.  It was also contended, with respect to Article 8, that the alleged
failure of the Secretary of State to pursue her tracing  obligations  should
feed into the Article 8 assessment.  Finally, it was contended on behalf of
the appellant that conditions in Afghanistan were now such as to put him  at
risk upon return, and hence to give  rise  to  entitlement  to  humanitarian
protection, on the basis of the high level of indiscriminate violence.

The respondent's case

11.   This was set out in the reasons for refusal letter of 26 August 2014.
 In that letter the respondent maintained the disbelief of  the  appellant's
account and pointed  out  that  immigration  Judge Parkes  had,  similarly,
disbelieved him.  So, it was not  accepted  that  he  would  be  of  adverse
interest to the Taliban if returned.  Given what was felt to be his lack  of
credibility it was not accepted that he did not have family to return to  in
Afghanistan either.  Further, and in any event, it was said  that  he  could
safely relocate to Kabul.  It was not accepted that he would be at  risk  as
a result of indiscriminate  violence  in  Afghanistan  because  it  was  not
accepted  that  any  such  indiscriminate  violence  reached  the  necessary
threshold.  He did not meet  the  requirements  of  any  of  the  Article 8
related Immigration Rules and whatever private life he had built up in  the
UK he had done in  the  knowledge  of  his  precarious  immigration  status.
Removing him would not violate Article 8.

The documentary evidence

12.   I had before me a bundle of documents, in the usual form, supplied  by
the respondent.  That was, in fact, the bundle which  had  been  before  the
First-tier Tribunal.  The respondent had not added  to  that  documentation
for  the  purposes  of  the  remaking  of  the  decision.   The  appellant's
representatives had, in accordance with directions I had  issued,  submitted
a consolidated bundle of documents.  That included,  amongst  other  things,
copies of the statements of the appellant referred to above, a large  volume
of background country material and  new  reports  relating  to  Afghanistan,
some United Nations High  Commissioner  for  Refugees  (UNHCR)  eligibility
guidelines for  assessing  the  international  protection  needs  of  asylum
seekers from  Afghanistan  produced  in  August 2013,  two  expert  reports
prepared by one Dr. L Schuster of 4 March 2015 and December 2015 (there not
being a precise date) and some case law.  A supplementary bundle  containing
an updated skeleton argument and  more  recent  UNHCR  guidelines  was  also
provided.

13.   I confirm that in remaking this decision I  have  given  consideration
to the various documents which have been placed before me.

The proceedings

14.   The hearing concerned with the remaking of the  decision  took  place,
at Birmingham, on 26 May 2016.  Representation was  as  stated  above.   I
heard oral evidence from the appellant who had the assistance  of  a  Pushto
speaking interpreter.  There did not appear  to  be  any  difficulties  with
respect to interpretation.  After hearing oral evidence I heard  submissions
from each representative.  What was said at the hearing has been noted in  a
written record of proceedings which I have retained on  the  tribunal  file.
I have taken all of  what  was  said  into  account.   Where  necessary,  or
otherwise appropriate or helpful, I have referred to the oral  evidence  and
the oral submissions in explaining the decision I have reached.

The credibility of the appellant's account

15.   Since there is a dispute about this, I  have  found  it  necessary  to
consider whether or not I am able to accept the appellant's account  of  the
events underpinning his claim for asylum as given  previously  and  in  oral
evidence (albeit relatively briefly) before me.  In  this  context,  though,
it has been necessary to apply the principles set  out  in  the  well  known
case of Devaseelan v Secretary of State  for  the  Home Department  [2002]
UKIAT 00702  given  that  there  are  unchallenged  or  not   successfully
challenged  findings  contained  in   the   determination   of   immigration
Judge Parkes.  It was said in  Devaseelan,  in  a  nutshell,  that  in  the
context of asylum and human rights appeals, where there has been a  previous
determination and where a  further  claim  or  appeal  involves  overlapping
material, the first  determination  should  always  be  the  starting  point
though not necessarily the end point.  New  evidence  may  displace  earlier
findings but if the  facts  before  the  second  judge  are  not  materially
different from those put to the first judge, and the claim was supported  by
essentially the same evidence, the second judge should regard the issues  as
settled by the first judge's determination.

16.   Immigration Judge Parkes, having considered the  account  offered  by
the appellant, said this:

    "In short I do  not  believe  the  appellant's  account  of  events  in
    Afghanistan with regard to his  brother  and  his  father.   I  do  not
    believe that his brother has been killed or his father kidnapped.  I do
    not believe that the appellant would have  been  sent  away  with  such
    urgency when events had shown he was not at risk or that he would  have
    left behind other family members who would also be in danger."

17.   It does not seem to me that the appellant has shown any viable  reason
as to why, in light of what it said in  Devaseelan,  I  should  depart  from
those findings.  He has not offered anything which can be  characterised  as
new evidence relevant to the claimed events.  Whilst he did seek to  address
those adverse findings in his witness statement of 26 October 2015, all he
really did was assert that what he had originally claimed  was  true.   That
does not seem to me to take matters any further.  Mr Reza, at  the  hearing
before me, invited me to take account of the appellant's young  age  at  the
time he had first presented his account.  Of course, his  age  at  the  time
was something which Immigration Judge Parkes would have been aware  of  (he
specifically mentioned it at paragraph 5 of  his  determination)  and  would
have taken into account.  It seems to me that I  really  cannot,  and  I  do
not, depart from those adverse  credibility  findings.   I  too,  therefore,
find that the appellant's brother was not killed as claimed and  his  father
has not been taken away.

18.   The appellant's claim, as now put, though, does not rest  simply  upon
his initial account and his fear that the Taliban will harm him  because  of
his links to his brother.  So, it is necessary to  make  and  set  out  some
further factual findings.

19.   In this context, as I have already noted, there is  no  dispute  about
the appellant's nationality, his claimed date  of  birth  and  age  and  his
being from Kapisa Province.  I make findings in his favour with respect  to
all of that.  I would also accept that since coming to the  UK  he  has  not
been back to Afghanistan and, of course,  had  he  done  so  he  would  have
effectively given up his asylum claim.  So, he has now been in  the  UK  and
away from his home country for a period  of  around  seven  years.   At  the
hearing he told me that he did not know the current whereabouts  of  any  of
his family members.  He was not specifically challenged about that in cross-
examination though his credibility, in general,  was  subject  to  challenge
and, of course, I have found that his  initial  account  was  untrue.   That
might afford reason to disbelieve him but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is
certainly much to suggest that life can  be  difficult  in  Afghanistan  and
that such might create difficulties in keeping in tough with  one's  family.
There is nothing to positively suggest he has maintained  contact  with  his
family and it is not implausible that he would not have been able to  do  so
despite his brother not having been killed and his father  not  having  been
abducted.  Given the low standard of proof applicable I have found that  the
appellant is not currently in touch with his family members.  The  appellant
also told me, in oral evidence, that he does not have any  family  in  Kabul
and that he has never himself been to Kabul.   Mr Mills  did  not  seek  to
persuade me otherwise in his closing submissions and I can find  nothing  in
the material before me to suggest that the appellant  does  have  family  in
Kabul or has been there.  Of course, I have accepted he is not  from  there.
So, again to the lower standard of proof, I find he does not have any  links
to Kabul or experience of life there.

20.   It is in light of the above findings that I have gone on  to  consider
how I should remake the decision.

My consideration of the arguments

21.   I shall, first of all, consider whether the  appellant  has  made  out
his claim to be a refugee.  I have found that he has provided an  untruthful
account  regarding  the  claimed  fate  of  his  brother  and  his   father.
Accordingly, I conclude, without difficulty, that he will  not  be  at  real
risk of persecution upon return to Afghanistan at the hands of  the  Taliban
on the basis that they have an adverse interest in him as a  result  of  his
brother's claimed previous membership of the Afghan Army.

22.   Mr Reza, though, argues, and the appellant himself says,  that  there
is a real risk he will be forced to fight for the Taliban, or possibly  even
for ISIS, if he is to be returned  to  his  home  area  of  Kapisa.   It  is
perhaps appropriate, therefore, to consider at this stage what sort of  area
Kapisa  is.   The  respondent  has  not  provided  any  background  material
regarding Kapisa.  The appellant has provided some.  There is,  at  page 17
of the supplementary bundle, what appears to be some  form  of  news  report
regarding the killing of Taliban members by the security forces.   There  is
a suggestion contained therein that the  Taliban  do  control  territory  in
that region.  There  is  then  an  article  headed  "Kapisa Province:   the
Taliban's gateway to Kabul", though I note it is somewhat dated having  been
prepared in 2008, which suggests what appears to be quite extensive  Taliban
activity in Kapisa, its being stated that the province  "has  served  as  an
insurgent bastion for several years".  I cannot find  anything  specific  to
Kapisa in the reports of Dr. Schuster and, since there is  no  schedule  of
essential reading (and really there ought to have been), I am  not  directed
to anything specific to it in any of the other background country  material.
 But, on the limited material before me, and I can  only  do  my  best  with
what I have been provided with,  I  would  conclude  that  the  Taliban  are
influential in Kapisa as the appellant has claimed.

23.   The mere fact that the Taliban have influence in  Kapisa,  of  course,
does not mean  that  there  is  a  real  risk  they,  or  indeed  any  other
organisation, will forcibly recruit the appellant to  fight  for  them.   In
seeking to convince me that there is such a  real  risk,  however,  Mr Reza
refers me, in particular, to  the  2016  new  UNHCR  eligibility  guidelines
referred to above.  It is  suggested  therein  that  in  areas  where  anti-
government elements exercise  control  over  territory  and  the  population
"they are reported to use a  variety  of  mechanisms  to  recruit  fighters,
including recruitment mechanisms based on coercive strategies".  It is  also
noted that "persons who resist recruitment, and their  family  members,  are
reportedly at risk of being killed or punished".  In HK and Others (Minors -
 indiscriminate violence - force recruitment  by  Taliban  -  contact  with
family members) Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378 IAC it  was  said,  in  the
context of child recruitment by the Taliban, that  such  a  risk  cannot  be
discounted, particularly in areas of  high  militant  activity  or  militant
control, though evidence was required to show that  such  was  more  than  a
mere possibility.

24.   Mr Mills, if I understand him correctly, relied  primarily  upon  the
appellant's  ability  to  live  safely  in  Kabul  rather  than  in  Kapisa.
However, he did also submit that the appellant had not shown anything  above
a mere possibility that he might be forcibly recruited.  He had  not  shown,
for example, that he would be  particularly  vulnerable  to  such  treatment
though Mr Mills did observe, very fairly, that it might be  the  case  that
Kapisa would be an area where anti-government elements were  in  control  or
were engaged in an armed struggle.  Mr Reza, in  his  submissions,  perhaps
surprisingly, did not focus very much if at all upon  the  risk  in  Kapisa,
though he did draw my attention to his  reference  to  it  in  his  skeleton
argument.

25.   The material does appear to show that Kapisa  is  an  area  where  the
Taliban do have influence and I have already made a finding to that  effect.
 I have found that the appellant is no longer in touch with his family  and,
against that background, although I have not accepted  his  claim  that  his
family were harmed in 2009, I would conclude that there is a real risk  that
they will no longer be there to receive him.  I note the  risk  of  forcible
recruitment in certain areas as referred to in the UNHCR guidelines of  2016
which are, of course, very recent.  Strictly on  the  facts  of  this  case,
therefore, and bearing in mind the lower standard of proof, I am  satisfied,
albeit that it is marginal, that the  appellant  has  demonstrated  he  will
face a real risk of forcible recruitment at the hands of the Taliban  (I  do
not think that the evidence suggests any specific  risk  in  Kapisa  at  the
hands of any other organisation) of forcible  recruitment.   However,  there
is the matter of an  internal  fight  alternative  which  was  the  argument
pursued most forcibly by Mr Mills before me.  In  this  context  there  has
never been any suggestion  that  the  appellant  could  safely  relocate  to
anywhere other than Kabul and so it is Kabul, in this context, which I  must
now consider.

26.   The general approach to be taken to internal fight has been  explained
by the House of Lords in Januzi v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department and Others [2006] UKHL 5.  Essentially,  it  was  said  that  in
considering internal fight a decision maker should assess whether it  would
be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect a claimant to relocate to  another
part of the home country. Decision makers should not conduct the assessment
by way of a comparison between conditions in the area of  proposed  internal
relocation and international human rights law standards  or  the  conditions
in the country of refuge.

27.   In considering internal fight I have looked at the material which  has
been placed before me regarding the situation in  Kabul.   It  seems  to  me
that much of that material has been put forward with a  view  to  persuading
me that the  appellant  should  be  entitled  to  a  grant  of  humanitarian
protection on  the  basis  of  the  levels  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
Afghanistan including in Kabul.  I have,  however,  focused  here  upon  the
situation  concerning  internal  fight  and  whether  or  not  it  would  be
unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect the appellant to  take  advantage  of
such an alternative.

28.   A good starting point might be what the appellant himself has  had  to
say.  However, at paragraph 14 of his statement  of  26 October 2015,  he
simply asserts that he could not relocate because he will not be  safe  from
the Taliban anywhere in Afghanistan and because the expert who has  prepared
the two reports referred to above has said the whole country is unsafe.   In
his oral evidence, when cross-examined on the  point,  he  referred  to  the
cost of living in Kabul being high and to  reports  of  killings  in  Kabul.
When pushed further he said that there would be no-one  to  look  after  him
and suggested, as I understand it, that he would be unfamiliar with the  way
of life there.  Mr Mills, in submissions, was  quite  dismissive  of  that,
suggesting that what the appellant had claimed did not amount  to  any  real
difficulty in relocating at all.  Mr Reza, as I understand it, argued  that
the Secretary of State cannot expect all returnees to go to Kabul (I  assume
that behind that was a suggestion that the city  is  overcrowded)  and  that
many of the areas outside  of  Kabul  city  itself  are  controlled  by  the
Taliban.  He also submitted,  perhaps  more  pertinently,  that  there  were
difficulties in obtaining housing and employment in Kabul.

29.   I bear in mind what is said about  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  in
AK (Article 15(c) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) in particular at
paragraph 243.  My focus here is upon the "unduly  harsh"  aspect.   It  is
necessary, in that context, to conduct a fact specific consideration and  to
bear  in  mind  findings  which  have  been  made  regarding  a   claimant's
individual circumstances.  Here, I have found that the  appellant  does  not
have any family or other connections in  Kabul,  has  never  been  to  Kabul
before, that he came to the UK as a  child,  that  he  has  never  lived  in
Afghanistan as an adult, that he has been in the UK for seven years  (during
which time he has transitioned from a child to an adult) and that he  is  no
longer in touch with his family in Afghanistan.   Those  are  matters  which
might be thought to support his contention that internal  fight  would,  for
him, be unduly harsh.  On the other hand, he is a young man  who  has  shown
himself to be resourceful in building a  life  for  himself  in  the  UK  as
Mr Mills points out.  Further, there is the availability  of  a  relocation
package to consider although that, as I understand  it,  would  only  assist
with the initial process of resettling.  I would accept  background  country
material suggesting that for persons without connections  the  obtaining  of
shelter  and  employment  is  likely  to  be  very  difficult.   I  did  not
understand Mr Mills to be suggesting that that was not the case.  In AK the
appellant did have a family contact in Kabul and that was, on my reading  of
the decision, thought to be a matter  of  some  significance  and  it  is  a
factor which is lacking here.  Whilst, again, matters are quite marginal,  I
have decided that in the particular circumstances  of  this  case  requiring
this appellant to relocate would be unduly harsh.   I  conclude,  therefore,
that he has demonstrated that he is a refugee, on the basis of his  being  a
member of a particular social group, his being at risk in his home  area  of
Afghanistan and his not having available to him (because it would be  unduly
harsh to expect him to do so) an alternative involving internal  relocation.


30.   My having resolved the appeal in this way  does,  I  am  afraid,  mean
that it is not necessary for me to express any view of what I  did  feel  to
be rather wide ranging and in some respects ambitious  arguments  concerning
the unfitness of Kabul for the relocation of  any  person  and  the  current
risk  to  citizens  on  the  basis  of  an  internal  armed   conflict   and
indiscriminate violence.  Those  arguments  will  have  to  be  assessed  on
another day.  Nor, my having decided that the appellant is a refugee, is  it
appropriate for me to  consider  humanitarian  protection  at  all.   I  do,
though, on the same basis as I have found the appellant  to  be  a  refugee,
conclude that he succeeds under Article 3 of the ECHR.  There is nothing to
be gained, in the circumstances, by my going on to consider Article 8.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already been set aside.

In remaking the decision I allow the appeal on asylum grounds and  on  human
rights grounds (Article 3)

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed      Date: 14 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and there can, therefore, be no fee award.

Signed      Date 14 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
