
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07831/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 February 2016                      |On 5 April 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                     nm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel instructed by Jeya & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by [NM] against the decision by First-tier Tribunal K
    W Brown who heard her appeal on 10 November 2015 and in a Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 23 November  2015  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    short background to the appeal is that the Appellant came to the United
    Kingdom initially as a student on 19  October  2010  and  extended  her
    leave until 28 October 2014 when she made an asylum claim.   The  basis
    of her claim in essence was that she  had  been  detained  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities on account of her  perceived  political  opinion  in
    December 2009, during which time she had been ill-treated and subjected
    to rape.  She feared if she returned she would  again  be  arrested  on
    suspicion of being an LTTE member and also be subjected to further ill-
    treatment. It was additionally the Appellant's case that,  since  2011,
    she had participated in pro-Tamil activities in the United Kingdom,  in
    particular, she was a member of the British Tamil Forum [BTF]  and  had
    undertaken work for the TGTE in Wembley.

 2. The Respondent in refusing her application accepted that the  Appellant
    had been arrested, detained and ill-treated in the way she describes in
    December 2009 but did not  accept  the  entirety  of  her  claim.   The
    reasons provided by the judge for  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    were that although he accepted that the  Appellant  had  suffered  ill-
    treatment in the past and that she continues to suffer from  depression
    and possibly PTSD, he found that she would not be  at  risk  on  return
    because of what had happened in the past and that her activities in the
    United Kingdom did not put her in a category of risk as set out in  the
    country guidance decision of GJ, finding at [55]: "I  do  not  consider
    the Appellant's roles in the  organisation  she  has  mentioned  to  be
    significant when considering the risk that she faces upon return to Sri
    Lanka".  He also found in respect of the Appellant's mental  health  at
    [57] that treatment would be available in Sri Lanka to  anyone  capable
    of engaging mental health services.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made in time on 4  December
    2015.  The grounds of appeal in support of that application  are  dated
    30 November.  There are five grounds of appeal.

    (i)  Ground 1 - the judge  erred  materially  in  failing  to  properly
         consider the Appellant's   diaspora activities in relation to  risk
         on return.

    (ii) Ground 2 - the judge erroneously failed to consider Article 3  and
         the risk  of  torture,    inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  as  a
         separate ground from the asylum claim.

    (iii)    Ground 3  -  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the
         principles in HJ (Iran).

    (iv) Ground 4 - the judge failed to consider the country guidance in GJ
         when considering  Article 3 in respect of  the  Appellant's  mental
         health.

    (v)  Ground 5 - the judge failed to give any reasons for dismissing the
         appeal on the     grounds of Article 8 of the  European  Convention
         on Human Rights.

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing before me, Ms Benfield made detailed submissions on  the
    Appellant's behalf.   In  respect  of  ground  1  and  the  Appellant's
    diaspora activities she submitted that the judge had failed  to  engage
    or direct himself properly in respect of  those  activities  and  their
    significance and that his analysis at paragraph 55 was not  sufficient.
    He had, in essence, conflated the various risk categories  at  356  and
    367 of the country guidance decision of GJ whereas in fact neither  the
    Upper Tribunal nor the Court of Appeal had set out any express test  as
    to what would be significant in diaspora activities and found that fact-
    sensitive enquiries must  be  made.   She  drew  my  attention  to  the
    skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  which  had  set
    out in  detail  the  level  and  extent  of  the  Appellant's  diaspora
    activities over a substantial period of time  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    She submitted that both the BTF and TFTE were  proscribed  by  the  Sri
    Lankan Government and the judge was made aware of this  point  but  had
    not taken it into account in assessing whether or not  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government would be aware of the  Appellant's  involvement  with  those
    organisations in the United Kingdom.

 5. She also drew my attention to the grant of permission by the Right  Hon
    Lord Justice Briggs in the case of UB (Sri Lanka) on 29 June 2015 where
    permission was granted on the same issue i.e. that the  evidence  about
    the proscription of  the  TGTA  had  not  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or the  Upper  Tribunal  which  had  led  those  Tribunals  to
    proceeding upon the basis of a mistake of fact which might have made  a
    material difference to the outcome of the appeal.  Ms Benfield informed
    me that she was not aware of a judgment or a consent order  in  respect
    of this case to date.

 6. In respect of the second ground, this concerned a failure by the  judge
    to engage with the risk of ill-treatment on  return  in  light  of  the
    country guidance and it was Ms Benfield's contention that  this  was  a
    separate ground of appeal based on the fact that the  Appellant  is  an
    accepted victim of rape by the Sri Lankan authorities.   The  Appellant
    was particularly vulnerable to detention because of her fear  as  to  a
    repetition of that treatment upon facing the Sri Lankan authorities  on
    return to Sri Lanka.

 7. Ground 3 in respect of the  HJ  (Iran)  and  RT  (Zimbabwe)  principles
    states simply that it was clear the Appellant  would  not  be  able  to
    express her political opinion in Sri Lanka given the context for  Tamil
    people there.

 8. Grounds 4 and 5 were both concerned with the judge's assessment of  the
    Appellant's mental health and Ms  Benfield  submitted  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal found in both MP and GJ that it was  possible  to  succeed  on
    mental health grounds and this was drawn to the  judge's  attention  at
    paragraph 31 of the skeleton argument.  The judge had erred in  failing
    to consider the diagnosis, the prognosis and the treatment requirements
    and had erred in simply addressing the decision of the House  of  Lords
    in N [2005] UKHL 31 without going any further.

 9. Similarly, in respect of the Appellant's physical and moral  integrity,
    it was submitted that the judge did not go far enough in giving reasons
    as  to  why  the  appeal  should  not  succeed  given  the  Appellant's
    particular history and it was clear that she was at risk of suicide and
    that her mental health would deteriorate if she were to be  removed  to
    Sri Lanka.

10. Mr Wilding in helpful submissions defended  the  judge's  decision  and
    stated that it was open to the judge to conclude that the Appellant was
    no more than a face in  the  crowd.   The  Judge  did  not  ignore  her
    involvement with NGOs but did not agree that this would put  her  in  a
    category of risk and his finding was adequate and sustainable  in  this
    respect.  He submitted in respect of ground 2 that there was no  causal
    link in respect of the Appellant's mental health  condition  invariably
    leading to her detention.   Similarly,  in  respect  of  ground  3,  he
    submitted that this is inextricably linked to ground 1 so  unless  that
    succeeds then HJ (Iran) does not bite.  In respect of grounds 4  and  5
    Mr Wilding submitted that the judge clearly considered the  Appellant's
    mental health with respect to Articles 3 and  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention and he submitted that whilst in GJ the  Tribunal  looked  at
    the issue of mental health in respect of one of the Appellants, it  was
    quite clear from 456 that they allowed that appeal on the facts of  the
    case and were not in fact giving  country  guidance  on  the  issue  of
    mental  health  and  Sri  Lanka.   He  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    considered the medical evidence and came to the  conclusion  which  was
    sustainable that there would be no breach of Article 3  by  removal  of
    the Appellant nor of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

     Decision and reasons

11. I find, for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal that the judge
    did err materially in law.  It is clear from the Appellant's bundle  of
    evidence and from the skeleton  argument  that  there  was  substantial
    evidence of her involvement with proscribed organisations in the United
    Kingdom and that this arguably would put her at risk on return for  the
    reasons set out in the country guidance decisions of GJ, MP and NT.   I
    find that the judge's consideration of this aspect of  the  Appellant's
    claim was insufficient at [55] in  simply  stating  that  he  does  not
    consider that  the  Appellant's  roles  in  the  organisation  she  has
    mentioned are significant when considering  the  risk  she  faces  upon
    return and in describing her simply as just "a face in the  crowd."   I
    find that being the case and that an  error  has  been  established  in
    respect of the judge's analysis of the Appellant's  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom, then it is also the case that ground 3 is made  out  in
    that it would not be  possible  for  the  Appellant  to  continue  that
    political involvement and express her political opinion if she were  to
    be returned to Sri Lanka.

12. I also find that there is a material error of  law  in  the  manner  in
    which the judge addressed Article 3 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights.  As ground 2 submits, there is no separate consideration of the
    impact upon the  Appellant  of  being  detained  given  her  particular
    history of ill-treatment by the Sri Lankan authorities and I find  that
    the judge further erred in respect of his analysis of  the  application
    of Article 3 given the Appellant's mental health issues  and  that  the
    same applied in respect of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  in
    terms of the Appellant's physical and moral integrity.

13. I accept the submission of Ms Benfield that it is possible in the light
    of GJ to succeed on the basis of mental health and therefore the errors
    by the judge in that respect are material.

Notice of Decision

14. The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  for  re-hearing
by a First-tier   Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  K  W
Brown

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 16 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date: 16 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

