
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/07668/2015
                                                               AA/07734/2015
                                                               AA/07735/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st May 2018                      |On 10th May 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                   PR (1)
                                   NM (2)
                                   CR (3)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jagarajah, of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    London Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




Introduction

    1. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka, the  first  two  appellants
       are  a  married  couple  and  the  third  appellant  their  son.  The
       appellants arrived  in  the  UK  in  October  2010  with  the  second
       appellant having leave as a Tier 4 student migrant and the other  two
       appellants having leave as her dependents. This leave to  remain  was
       extended until October 2014. In April 2014 the appellants made a trip
       to Sri Lanka, and returned in May 2014.  On  17th  October  2014  the
       first appellant made his asylum claim.

    2. The asylum claim presented is,  in  short  summary,  that  the  first
       appellant has a well founded fear of persecution on  grounds  of  his
       imputed political opinions on return to Sri Lanka because he provided
       accommodation to a Tamil for three weeks between April and May  2010,
       and it later transpired that  this  man  was  a  suspected  terrorist
       connected to killings in Colombo.  The first appellant  says  he  was
       detained and questioned in 2010 but was released following payment of
       a bribe and left Sri Lanka to study in the UK. He says he returned to
       Sri Lanka in 2014 as he was told  that  the  police  were  no  longer
       making enquiries about him but he was arrested from the  family  home
       and detained and ill-treated. Since he has returned  to  the  UK  the
       police have been to the family home on a number of occasions  and  he
       is afraid as there are arrest warrants for him, and  he  believes  he
       will be detained and ill-treated if returned to Sri Lanka.

    3. This claim was refused in a  decision  dated  23rd  April  2015.  The
       appellants appealed, and their appeal was dismissed by the First-tier
       Tribunal. This decision was found to contain errors of law,  and  was
       set aside by the Upper Tribunal. The decision was then remade in  the
       First-tier Tribunal by Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       McCarthy, however the appellants once again  appealed  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty found that there had
       been an error of law in the decision, and remitted it once  again  to
       the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de  novo.  The  appeal  was  then
       remade by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  in  a  decision
       promulgated on the 1st November 2017.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 15th
       March 2018 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
       judge had erred in law. Firstly, it was arguable that the decision to
       refuse to adjourn the  hearing  to  obtain  supporting  evidence  was
       unfair, particularly as this was used  as  a  ground  of  refusal  at
       paragraph 68. Secondly it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in the application of the decision of VT  v  SSHD  (Article  22
       Procedures Directive - confidentiality) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT 368.

    5. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.





Submissions & Conclusions - Error of Law

    6. Three errors of law are set out in  the  grounds  of  appeal  but  Ms
       Jagarajah only pursued one. She did not rely upon the arguments  that
       it was procedurally unfair to refuse to adjourn the  hearing  or  the
       more general contention that the credibility of the appellant was not
       properly assessed to the lower civil standard of proof applicable  in
       asylum claims.

    7. Ms Jagarajah did however maintain that an erroneous approach has been
       taken to the court file and  arrest  warrants  and  other  associated
       documents obtained by the appellants' solicitors, and that  this  was
       highly material to the outcome of the appeal.

    8. Ms Jagarajah submitted that the documents at pages 83 and 84 of   the
       bundle that was before the First-tier Tribunal showed the Sri  Lankan
       attorney, Mr R Raguaraajah, who the First-tier Tribunal  conclude  is
       independent, was instructed directly by  Greater  London  Solicitors,
       and had on instructions from Greater London Solicitors  met  the  Sri
       Lankan TID and the officer in charge and confirmed that the file  was
       with them under reference B/5455/01/14 and that the arrest warrant is
       still in force against the first  appellant.  He  also  attended  the
       Colombo Magistrates Court and was able to  confirm  that  the  arrest
       warrant had a mistaken reference number, B5455/01/10 but this did not
       affect its validity. He also  confirms  that  when  he  attended  the
       Colombo Magistrates Court previously he showed  the  Court  Registrar
       the court file papers provided by Greater London Solicitors.  It  was
       his, Mr Raguaraajah's, error  to  repeat  the  wrong  arrest  warrant
       reference number for the court file. Mr Regauraajah's earlier  letter
       confirmed that the  case  records  sent  to  him  by  Greater  London
       Solicitors were a true copy of the Colombo Magistrates Court file for
       the first appellant, and had attached a copy of his  Bar  Association
       of Sri Lanka registration card. His letter of instruction is set  out
       at page 119 of the bundle, and the DHL envelope by which the evidence
       of Mr Raguaraajah was sent to the UK is included at page 117  of  the
       bundle.

    9. The copy documents sent to  Mr  Raguaraajah  for  checking  with  the
       Magistrates file had been obtained by the appellant's solicitors from
       the first appellant's own Sri Lankan attorney, Mr U  Gunasekera,  and
       the evidence of this is set  out  at  page  147  of  the  bundle.  Mr
       Gunasekera might be seen as tainted as he was first contacted by  the
       appellants rather than the appellant's UK solicitors, see the finding
       of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 48 of the  decision,  and  so
       hence the checking process through the independent Mr Raguaraajah, as
       set out at paragraphs 49 and 50 of the decision.

   10. The translations of the documents were done by  a  court  interpreter
       from Colombo, as can be seen by the stamps on those  documents  which
       can be found at pages 148 to 154 of the bundle. They are  a  complete
       copy of the court file. From page 149 of the bundle it  can  be  seen
       that the arrest was under the Act of  Terrorist  Prevention  and  the
       allegation was that the first appellant helped an  LTTE  pistol  team
       member who had killed a former president and former defence  minister
       and others. It is an application by the TID, who are the  prosecutors
       in this case. The allegations are very detailed, see page 151 of  the
       bundle, and the first appellant's full name appears.  It can be  seen
       that the first appellant was produced on 16th April 2014 and the 30th
       April 2014, and that Mr Gunasekera appeared and applied for bail, see
       page 153 of the bundle, with the second appellant  (his  wife)  as  a
       surety. The notes then record that  the  first  appellant  failed  to
       attend on 16th May 2014 and on the 30th May 2014  and  that  warrants
       were issued for the arrest of the first and second appellants.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal rightly rejected  the  respondent's  document
       verification evidence as it had been obtained contrary to Article  22
       of the Procedures Directive relying upon VT, and because  the  checks
       were possibly against the wrong case number. At paragraph 46  of  the
       decision it is accepted that the court and arrest  warrant  documents
       are generally consistent bar  the  issue  of  the  numbers  which  is
       addressed by the evidence of Mr Raguaraajah. It is also accepted that
       the first appellant was bailed, see paragraph  47  of  the  decision.



   12. Ms Jagarajah argues that the First-tier Tribunal finds erroneously at
       paragraphs 51 and 75 of the decision that VT means that evidence from
       Sri Lanka lawyers even if obtained directly from an  independent  Sri
       Lankan lawyer by an English lawyer cannot  be  seen  as  reliable  as
       there is corruption in which Sri Lankan lawyers have  been  involved,
       and because as Judge Landes states : " I observe that  a  Sri  Lankan
       lawyer who was corrupt might seek to contact the  client  of  the  UK
       lawyer instructing him or the client's family to  ask  for  money  to
       give false testimony to send back to the UK lawyer." This was not the
       position taken in VT.  There  was  evidence  from  the  British  High
       Commission in Sri Lanka that some Sri Lankan attorneys  had  produced
       false documents but as a result the Sri Lankan  Bar  Association  had
       taken  action  against  those  lawyers  and  they  were  subject   to
       penalties. Neither Mr Gunasekera nor Mr Raguaraajah had been involved
       in this or were subject to penalties for such  matters.  Further  the
       evidence of the respondent, set out at paragraphs 54 and  55  of  the
       decision in VT, was that the majority of attorneys of the Sri  Lankan
       Bar Association were honourable, and members of the legal  profession
       in Sri Lanka had acted with great bravery and integrity. There was no
       evidence supporting a contention that the evidence of  a  Sri  Lankan
       attorney should not be treated as reliable, just as  evidence  of  an
       English lawyer would  be,  as  there  was  no  evidence  of  systemic
       corruption in the legal world or in the courts, or indeed the  press,
       in Sri Lanka. Further, no allegations of specific corruption had been
       put to Mr Raguaraajah.

   13. I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give  the  powerful
       evidence of Mr Raguaraajah and the  court  file  in  support  of  the
       appellants'  claim  proper  consideration  by  taking  into   account
       irrelevant considerations as set out by Ms Jagarajah above. The First-
       tier Tribunal had also made other positive findings in the appellants
       favour: namely that  the respondent's  document  verification  report
       could not be  given  significant  weight;  that  the  documents  were
       generally consistent with the appellant's case; that  the  background
       evidence supports the appellant being able to escape by payment of  a
       bribe; that provision of accommodation  to  the  suspected  terrorist
       might  mean  the  authorities  were  only  interested  in  the  first
       appellant and not his family; that it was not inconsistent  with  the
       background evidence that  the  appellant  was  not  detained  at  the
       airport but was only detained at home; and that the evidence  of  the
       first appellant and his wife (the second appellant)  and  his  father
       are largely consistent. In these circumstances I therefore find  that
       the error of law was material.

   14. I informed  the  parties  of  my  decision  without  giving  an  oral
       judgement. Both parties were happy to proceed  immediately  with  the
       remaking of the decision.

Submissions & Conclusions - Remaking

   15. Ms Jagarajah relied largely on the detailed  submissions  above.  She
       submitted that the first appellant was being arrested for  a  serious
       issue of treason, which was viewed as more serious as he is seen as a
       traitor as a Sinhalese man.  It was contended by the Sri Lankan state
       that he had assisted the LTTE and thereby serious political killings.
       The court file documents show that he was and is the  subject  to  an
       investigation rather than a prosecution for a  political  crime,  and
       during this investigation the TID had had to seek judicial  authority
       to detain. She submits that the evidence that the court documents are
       genuine from Mr Raguaraajah is not contradicted by anything from  the
       respondent, who could have contacted Mr Raguaraajah or the  registrar
       of the court (as the appellant would have consented  to  this  rather
       than the director of TID which  would  have  been  inappropriate)  to
       check the validity of this evidence had they  so  wished.  It  should
       therefore be accepted that the appellants had a well founded fear  of
       persecution on account of their imputed political  opinions  in  line
       with the country guidance decision of GJ and others (post-civil  war:
       returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00319,  and  the  appeal  should  be
       allowed.

   16. Ms Everett accepted that the  respondent  had  not  taken  the  steps
       outlined above to challenge the evidence of Mr Raguaraajah, and asked
       simply that I look at all of the evidence in the round.

   17. At the end of the hearing I informed the appellants that I  would  be
       allowing the appeal, but would set out my reasons in writing.

   18. I find that the evidence of the attorney and member of the Sri Lankan
       Bar Association Mr Raguaraajah that the court documents  relating  to
       the first appellant and warrants for the first and second appellant's
       arrest are genuine compelling. There is no  reason  to  question  his
       integrity as a qualified attorney and Bar Association member, and  he
       has carried out careful checks and documented this to the Tribunal to
       a high level, and honestly accepted making a mistake as to the  court
       file reference by referring to the  erroneous  one  relating  to  the
       arrest warrant. The documents themselves contain serious  allegations
       of the first appellant assisting terrorism at the highest level; they
       are also detailed; no reasons have been identified for their being in
       the wrong format, with the one issue of a wrong  number  having  been
       carefully explained; they are found to be broadly consistent with the
       appellant's case and the appellant, his wife and father were found to
       be largely consistent with each other by the First-tier  Tribunal.  I
       find that this evidence strongly outweighs the negative  findings  of
       the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant  failed  to  mention  the
       court date on 16th May 2014 and the number of arrest  warrants;  that
       he was inconsistent about his exact relationship with the  Tamil  man
       he accommodated which led to the investigation by the  TID;  that  it
       was not consistent that he could have kept  his  passport  after  the
       court hearing; that the second appellant and his father  knew  little
       about the warrants and gave an inconsistent history as  to  how  they
       knew the Tamil man; and that the appellants  had  delayed  in  making
       their asylum claim.

   19. Considering all of the evidence before me,  I  am  satisfied  to  the
       lower civil standard of proof, applying the guidance in GJ, that  the
       first appellant has a well founded fear of being detained and subject
       to ill-treatment on return to Sri Lanka as a person who in  the  eyes
       of that state poses a threat to the  integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
       single state and because it is probable that his name and that of the
       second appellant is on a computerised stop list at the airport due to
       the existence of arrest warrants against them.

    Decision:

        1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved
           the making of an error on a point of law.

        2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

        3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing  it  under  the
           Refugee Convention and on human rights grounds.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellants. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm  arising
to the appellants from the contents of their protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 1st May 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

