

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07792/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |                  Decision and Reasons  |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|on 16 June 2015                     |                  On 23 June 2015       |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 YUN QUIN HE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Katani, of Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant identifies herself as a citizen of China, born on 25 July
    1958.  The respondent refused her asylum claim for reasons explained in
    a letter dated 22 September 2014.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski
    dismissed  her  appeal  for  reasons  explained  in  her  determination
    promulgated on 2 December 2014.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
    four grounds.  A First-tier Tribunal Judge found none of the grounds to
    be arguable.  The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal, on the
    same grounds.  In a decision dated 15  April  2015  an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge said that grounds 1 and 2 were arguable, but  refused  permission
    on grounds 3 and 4.

 3. Mr  Katani  submitted  that  the  grounds  should  be  upheld  and  the
    determination should be set aside.

 4. Mr Matthews firstly queried whether any appeal was properly before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal's refusal  of  permission  was
    issued on 8 January 2015.  As specified on the form of application, the
    appellant had 14 days after the date on which notice of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's refusal was sent to her within which to apply to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  That gave her until 22 January 2015.  Her application to the
    Upper Tribunal was signed by Mr Katani on 23 January 2015 but faxed  to
    the Upper Tribunal only on 27 January, which was recorded as  the  date
    of receipt.  The application said that it was being sent late  "due  to
    an administrative error ... no fault of the appellant's".  Mr  Matthews
    said that was an inadequate  explanation.   The  (purported)  grant  of
    permission overlooked the point.  The first matter to consider now  was
    whether to extend time.  He said that the  application  should  not  be
    admitted.

 5. I invited Mr Matthews to address me in the alternative on the merits of
    the grounds.  He pointed out firstly  that  the  respondent's  decision
    rejected the  claim  not  only  for  credibility  reasons  but  in  the
    alternative on internal relocation, and that the judge made  a  similar
    finding at paragraphs 42 to 44.  That finding was  not  challenged  and
    was a complete answer to the case. The grounds on which permission  was
    granted overlooked paragraphs 23 to 27 of the determination  where  the
    judge gave good reasons for holding that the appellant was  not  giving
    credible evidence but simply reciting a script she had learned.  As  it
    had been found that her account was wholly invented, there was no  need
    to go  into  the  particular  explanations  contained  in  her  witness
    statement which was said to have  been  ignored.   Ground  1  complains
    about the finding at paragraph 28 that the judge  would  have  expected
    the hospital authorities to contact the city police about  the  alleged
    fatal stabbing of the appellant's son.  The appellant  said  that  this
    was speculative, but it was reasonable.  The second part of this ground
    complains about the finding at paragraph 36  that  the  murder  of  the
    appellant's son would  have  generated  serious  interest  from  senior
    officials who would not have been affected by a local official or Triad
    gang.  The same point applied.  Ground 2 complains about paragraph  33,
    where the judge said that the appellant had not explained why  it  took
    her two weeks to complain to the police.  The appellant says that  this
    was explained at paragraph  18  of  her  witness  statement.   All  the
    appellant says there is that she could not accept reality and  went  to
    the police station two weeks later when she could  think  clearly.   Mr
    Matthews said that was no explanation at all.  A judge was not bound to
    deal with every detailed aspect of the evidence  before  her.   If  the
    application for permission to appeal was admitted, the appeal should be
    dismissed.

 6. Mr Katani in response said that the application made to the  First-tier
    Tribunal had been in time, and the one made to the Upper  Tribunal  was
    less than a  week  late.   Such  administrative  mishaps  unfortunately
    happen.  The interests of justice  were  more  significant.   The  Home
    Office filed a Rule 24 response to the grant  of  permission  in  which
    they did not raise the point.  The objection should  have  been  raised
    then and not only on the day of the hearing.

 7. In response on the merits, Mr Katani said that it is  well  known  that
    Triads  operate  nationally  and  are  well  resourced,   so   internal
    relocation was not an option.   The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant
    claimed also to fear the Chinese authorities, so there was no need  for
    internal relocation to be considered.  The two points made in ground  1
    showed that the  judge  relied  on  guesswork.   She  should  not  have
    speculated on what was likely to  happen  in  China  without  objective
    evidence.  Ground 2 identified that the judge was wrong to say that the
    appellant had "not explained" the delay.  The judge's  conclusions  had
    been shown to be unsafe and a fresh hearing should be ordered.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. An administrative oversight by  solicitors  is  not  generally  a  good
    ground for extending time.  A delay having been noticed  on  Friday  23
    January 2015, only one day late in terms of the specified period on the
    form, there is no explanation of why there was a  further  delay  of  a
    weekend plus two working days until the form was  submitted.   However,
    the delay is  relatively  short.   The  point  was  not  taken  by  the
    respondent at the first opportunity but rather late.  There has been no
    particular prejudice to the respondent.  The issue is  finely  balanced
    but in all the circumstances I think it is in the interests of  justice
    to admit the application.

10. I do not find the grounds to be of merit.

11. The finding on  internal  relocation  is  itself  conclusive,  and  the
    grounds do not challenge it.

12. The grounds conveniently overlook the finding that  the  appellant  was
    rehearsing an invented script.  That conclusion was open to  the  judge
    who had  the  advantage  of  hearing  the  oral  evidence,  is  clearly
    reasoned, and is not affected by any error.

13. In  context,  grounds  1  and  2  amount  to  no  more  than  selective
    disagreement on particular points.  At  highest,  the  judge  may  have
    overlooked the appellant's explanation (such as it was)  for  delay  in
    reporting to the police.  If the judge had  said  that  there  was  "no
    adequate explanation" there could have been no complaint.   The  matter
    is minor.  It bears nowhere near the significance which  might  require
    to the determination to be overturned.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity order has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            18 June 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
