
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07241/2015
                                                               AA/07244/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2015                 |On 20th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                 mr Charles Anand Mukerjee (first Appellant)
                   Mr Shahzad Mukerjee (Second Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R O'Ryan - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Charles Anand Mukerjee a  citizen  of  Pakistan
    born 12th January 1967.  He appeals against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Evans issued on 31st July 2015 dismissing on asylum
    and human rights  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent made on 8th April 2015 to refuse  to  grant  asylum  and  to
    remove him from the United  Kingdom.   The  first  Appellant's  son  is
    dependent on his appeal.

 2. On 27th August 2015 a First-tier Tribunal Judge granted  permission  to
    appeal.  He said:

         "The grounds argue that the Judge, in assessing that  there  was  a
         sufficiency of protection available to the  Appellants,  failed  to
         take into account, or adequately engage with, the specific evidence
         that the police had failed to provide support to the Appellants  in
         the past  in  Pakistan,  failed  to  make  findings  on  particular
         relevant issues/evidence and also failed to take into  account  the
         particular facts and evidence with reference to  the  viability  of
         internal relocation.  Having  read  the  Judge's  decision  in  its
         entirety and having given consideration to the Appellants' case  as
         presented, I conclude that the grounds have arguable merit."

 3. The Secretary of State provided a response under Rule 34 to the Grounds
    of Appeal  submitting  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed
    himself appropriately.

 4. The grounds are rather verbose, but essentially the submissions are:

      i) That Judge Evans erred in failing to resolve a conflict of fact  on
         material matters.  In particular he ignored evidence that  a  First
         Instance Report (FIR)  making  very  serious  criminal  allegations
         against the Appellant had been filed and also  failed  to  consider
         the fact that the complaint was wholly ignored by  the  authorities
         notwithstanding the concession of the Respondent that  the  account
         of the Appellant was generally credible.   This  issue  was  highly
         relevant to the issue of sufficiency of protection and the issue of
         whether the Appellant suffered persecution in the  past.   Reliance
         is placed in particular on paragraph 42 of the determination.   The
         issue of the reliability of  the  FIR  was  challenged  within  the
         decision of the Respondent and so was an issue in dispute that  the
         Judge failed to resolve.

     ii) It is submitted that the Judge misdirected himself in  relation  to
         the issue of internal relocation.  The Appellant had contended that
         the epilepsy of his son, its seriousness and unpredictability meant
         that the family  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to  relocate
         because they would not be able to access appropriate  medical  care
         away from  a  major  urban  centre.   The  Tribunal  rejected  this
         argument on the ground that  Suneel  (the  family  member  who  the
         Appellant claimed was persecuting him)  would  not  necessarily  be
         able to track the Appellant down.  Judge Evans failed  to  consider
         the effect on the family of requiring them to relocate away from an
         urban centre.

    iii) The Judge did not  consider  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  is  a
         committed Christian. He failed to  consider  how  relocation  would
         affect the ability of the family  to  practise  their  religion  in
         Pakistan.

 5. In oral submissions Mr O'Ryan submitted that inadequate  findings  were
    made about the FIR.  He referred in particular to  paragraph  47  about
    the sufficiency of protection  available  and  the  likelihood  of  the
    police helping him.

 6. At this point I said that I agreed with Mr O'Ryan  that  there  was  no
    finding about the FIR and that this arguably was an error  of  law.   I
    questioned however whether it is material given the other findings that
    were made and the Judge's attitude in  general  to  the  evidence.   Mr
    O'Ryan said that with regard to sufficiency of protection  Judge  Evans
    restricted his discussion to physical harm. He said that the  issue  is
    the use of State apparatus corruptly by the Appellant's brother.

 7. Mr O'Ryan then turned to   the findings at paragraph 48  in  which  the
    Judge said that he did not  accept  that  the  illness  of  the  second
    Appellant means that the Appellants' relative would be  able  to  track
    down the Appellants, even if, as was accepted by the  first  Appellant,
    it might take him years to do so.  It had been put to Judge Evans  that
    the Appellants would be tracked down because Suneel  brother  would  be
    able through his contacts and influence  to  identify  the  doctor  who
    might be treating the second Appellant. Judge Evans said that   even to
    identify the epilepsy specialists  in  large  cities  like  Lahore  and
    Islamabad would be a significant task and in any event he found that it
    would not be necessary for the Appellants to live  in  the  city  given
    that the evidence was that the second Appellant would be  referred  for
    tests every year to eighteen  months.   There  is  no  reason  why  the
    Appellants could not live elsewhere and travel to a hospital in a  city
    as necessary.

 8. Mr O'Ryan also submitted that given  that  the  first  Appellant  is  a
    solicitor it is difficult to see how he would be able to make a living.
     Being a solicitor is not a private mode of earning a living.  He would
    be known.  People would know he was there.

 9. The submission of Mr Harrison was that the Appellant is  simply  trying
    to re-argue the case.  It is a simple disagreement with the findings of
    the Judge.  Judge Evans made very strong findings in paragraphs 39  and
    40.  The Appellants' themselves are wealthy and have influence.

10. What the Judge said in paragraphs 39 and 40  was  that  he  could  find
    nothing political about the family feud and the only way in which it is
    related to politics is that  Suneel now works for a Senator and  it  is
    said this gives him  power that he would not otherwise have.  There was
    no suggestion in any of the evidence before him that  any  threats  had
    been made to the first Appellant which related to his actual or imputed
    political opinion and he was not made aware during the hearing  whether
    the first Appellant is or is not a supporter of the PPP.

11. He concluded that neither Appellant is at risk for a Convention reason.
     He went on to conclude that they were not  at  risk  of  a  breach  of
    Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR and gave sound reasons at paragraph 42  for
    this.  He said:

         "First, the history of the family feud to date has not been  marked
         by any violence.  It is said that on two occasions Suneel travelled
         to the UK and made threats but the fact remains that he did not  on
         either occasion even manage to speak to the first Appellant face to
         face.   Secondly  the  emails  do  not  contain  clear  threats  of
         violence: rather they are obscene and incoherent tirades  referring
         to the alleged theft of money belonging to Suneel and  wishing  the
         first Appellant ill in a rather  hyperbolic  way.   They  are  also
         addressed primarily to the first Appellant's sister and not to  the
         first Appellant himself."

12. He went on to say that if he is wrong about the threat posed there is a
    systemic sufficiency of State protection in Pakistan.  He  went  on  to
    consider background information that had been put  before  him  by  the
    Appellant's representative to support a submission that Suneel would by
    virtue of his position in the PPP be able  to  influence  the  judicial
    system corruptly so that it would not protect the Appellants  from  him
    and/or would prosecute him unjustly and corruptly.  Judge Evans pointed
    out that the background materials referred to do not deal  specifically
    with the ability of the PPP to influence corruptly the processes of the
    courts.  Rather they indicate that corruption is a significant problem.
     Reliance was placed on SA (political activists - internal  relocation)
    Pakistan [2011] UKUT 30.  Judge Evans pointed out that the facts of  SA
    are very different from the  facts  in  the  case  before  him  as  the
    Appellant was involved in a political party opposed to the PPP and  his
    brother had been murdered quite possibly by  members  of  the  opposing
    party.  The question in that case was whether the Appellant was at risk
    of persecution by the PPP because of his imputed  or  actual  political
    opinion and there was a history of persecution by the PPP.  This is not
    so in the Appellants' case.

13. I have considered all the submissions made and have thoroughly read the
    determination. I have already said that I accept that the FIR  was  not
    dealt with but I do not consider that to be material.  No  evidence  on
    the relevance of the FIR was put before the Judge.  In  any  event  the
    findings made at paragraph 42 and set  out  above  are  crucial.  These
    findings were justified on the evidence. A real risk to  the  Appellant
    had not been established.  The Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
    medical care required by the second Appellant  were  reasonable.  There
    was simply no reliable evidence that the Appellants  would  be  at  any
    real risk of a breach of their rights under Articles 2  or  3  ECHR  if
    they were removed. The Judge did not err in finding that no  Convention
    reason was established. No  significant  reliance  was  placed  by  the
    Appellant on his religious beliefs.

Notice of Decision

I find that there is no material error of law in the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal and that decision shall stand.


N A Baird     Date: 17th November 2015
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

