
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07838/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 May 2017                                |On 22 June 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     sM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, instructed by South West London Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born in September  1998.   It  is
    not in dispute that he arrived in the United Kingdom on 28 May 2014 and
    claimed asylum the following day.  This application was  refused  in  a
    decision of 15 September 2014. On  the  same  date  the  appellant  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain until 28 March 2016.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant  to  section
    83(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002[1]  -  the
    scope of the appeal being limited  to  an  assessment  of  whether  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department's (SSHD's) decision breaches
    the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention,  and
    whether  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  entitled  to  a   grant   of
    humanitarian protection (see FA (Iraq) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 696).

 3. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Ms  Smith  conceded  that  the
    appellant could not establish the former of these two  grounds  -  such
    concession being made  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  could  not
    establish that there would be a convention reason for  any  persecutory
    treatment he may suffer in Albania.  I  am,  therefore,  limited  to  a
    consideration of whether the  appellant  is  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection.

Law

 4. The appellant is entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection in  the
    United Kingdom if he can meet the requirements of paragraph 339C of the
    Immigration Rules.  In the instant  case  the  substantive  requirement
    that the appellant asserts that he meets is to be  found  in  paragraph
    339C(iii), which reads:

         "[it must be demonstrated that] substantial grounds have been shown
         for believing that the person concerned, if returned to the country
         of return, would face a real risk of suffering serious harm and  is
         unable, or, owing to such risk, unwilling to  avail  themselves  of
         the protection of that country ...".

 Serious harm is defined thereafter as:

         "(iii) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of a
             person in the country of return ...".

 5. The aforementioned rule mirrors the substantive requirements of Article
    15(b) of the Qualification Directive 2004/83EC.   The  CJEU  considered
    the  application  of  Article  15  in  its  decision  in   Elgafaji   v
    Staatssecretaris van Justitie [2009] 1 WLR  2100.  Although  the  Court
    were therein primarily considering the operation and effect of  Article
    15(c) of the Directive it also  observed  as  follows  in  relation  to
    Article 15(b), at [28]:

         "In that regard,  while  the  fundamental  right  guaranteed  under
         Article 3 of the ECHR forms  part  of  the  general  principles  of
         community law, observance of which is ensured  by  the  court,  and
         while the case law of the European Court of Human Rights  is  taken
         into consideration in interpreting the scope of that right  in  the
         community legal  order,  it  is,  however,  Article  15(b)  of  the
         Directive which corresponds, in essence, to Article 3 of the  ECHR.
         By contrast, Article 15(c) of the Directive  is  a  provision,  the
         content of which is different from that of Article 3 of  the  ECHR,
         and the interpretation of which must,  therefore,  be  carried  out
         independently although with due regard to the  fundamental  rights,
         as they are guaranteed under the ECHR."

 6. The burden of proof is on the appellant but the standard of proof is  a
    low one - akin to the standard that applies in asylum appeals.

History of this appeal

 7. The history of this  appeal  is  lengthy.   The  appeal  was  initially
    dismissed before the First-tier Tribunal in a decision of  26  February
    2015.  Subsequently,  the  Upper  Tribunal  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and remitted the  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for consideration afresh.  The appeal was heard for  a  second
    time before the First-tier Tribunal on  17  December  2015,  this  time
    being allowed in a decision promulgated on 21 January  2016.   However,
    once again the Upper  Tribunal  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and remitted the appeal back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    consider afresh.

 8. The appeal was then heard for a third time by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on 21 July 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow dismissing  it  in  a
    decision promulgated on 2 September 2016.  The matter then came  before
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC in the  Upper  Tribunal  and  in  a
    decision of 25 January 2017 the First-tier Tribunal's decision was once
    again set aside. Whilst I need not set out  the  reasons  behind  Judge
    Hill's decision, it is prudent to identify  the  following  observation
    found at paragraph 9 thereof:

         "It is unnecessary to preserve the findings of  fact  made  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal because  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  was
         unchallenged.  What will need to be considered is the assessment of
         risk on return which will  be  informed  by  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant and the country guidance already in existence."

Factual Matrix

 9. The appellant's case is accurately summarised in the following terms in
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision:

         "7.  The appellant comes from Mehaj near the town of Koplik in  the
             north west of Albania where he  lived  with  his  parents  and
             attended the local school.  His father was an alcoholic and  a
             gambler.  His mother worked as a cleaner.  He has two  married
             sisters.  On 1 May 2014 when he was on his way  to  school  he
             was approached by two males, one of whom grabbed his  shoulder
             and the other who warned that he should tell his  father  that
             time was running out.  That evening the appellant informed his
             parents about  the  incident.   A  few  days  before  this  he
             overheard his father telling  his  mother  that  he  had  been
             warned that the appellant would be kidnapped by those whom  he
             owed money.  The mother cautioned the father  that  she  would
             not forgive him if this happened.  A few days later on  Sunday
             4 May 2014 the mother informed the appellant that he would  be
             going to England to save his life.  The following  morning  he
             was collected by two men driving a Mercedes and taken  out  of
             Albania using his own passport to an unknown destination.  The
             day after arrival in the UK he  made  his  asylum  claim.   If
             returned to Albania the appellant fears persecution and/or ill-
             treatment from those who are owed money  by  his  father.   In
             order to avoid such conduct he would  be  forced  to  relocate
             whereupon  he  fears  homelessness,  destitution   and   being
             trafficked.

         8.   The appellant has  lost  contact  with  his  mother.   On  one
             occasion, he spoke to her  by  mobile  phone,  but  subsequent
             attempts have been unsuccessful for want of any answer.  While
             his personal and  family  details  have  been  passed  to  the
             British Embassy in Tirana to assist with  family  tracing,  he
             does not wish to be in contact with  his  parents.   He  fears
             that the consequences of contact would jeopardise  his  safety
             and that of his parents.  ... he has  no  knowledge  of  their
             whereabouts and in any event he cannot look to  them  for  any
             assistance ... ."

10. The following evidence given by the appellant is also of relevance:

      a) In January 2014, he  and  his  parents  travelled  to  Greece.   He
         believes this was because of problems his father  had  in  Albania.
         The family returned to Albania after a week because  they  did  not
         have a place to work or live in Greece;

      b) He does not know why his parents did not travel with him to the UK;

      c) As far he is aware his family did not report any of  the  incidents
         to the police;

      d) He has two married sisters in Albania but they are not on  speaking
         terms with the appellant's parents because his  father  owes  their
         husbands money;

      e) His uncles and aunts live about 20 minutes away from  his  parents,
         but they do not speak to his parents because his father  owes  them
         money;

      f) He has managed to speak to his mother once (in  around  June  2014)
         since his arrival in the UK.  He rang his father's  phone  on  this
         occasion;

      g) He does not know who paid for the agent that brought him to the UK

11. Despite it being apparent  from  Judge  Hill's  decision  that  it  was
    proposed  that  the  re-making  be  undertaken  on  the  basis  of  the
    unchallenged evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, the Secretary  of
    State, in her skeleton argument drawn for the purposes of  the  instant
    hearing, asserted that:

         "It is not accepted that [SM] has been unable to contact any of his
         family members, last contact claimed to be in the summer  of  2014,
         in recent years that could assist in his internal relocation in the
         same way that they are financially assisted in sending him  to  the
         United Kingdom.  It should be noted that  only  recently  have  his
         solicitors approached the Red Cross.  [SM]  had  previously  stated
         that he did not want to contact his parents ...".

12. In response to such challenge Ms Smith did not seek argue that, in  the
    light of Judge Hill's observations, the  point  was  not  open  to  the
    Secretary of State to take. Instead, she  requested  permission  (which
    was granted) for the appellant to give oral evidence to deal  with  the
    issue raised.

13. In his evidence the appellant maintained that he is not in contact with
    his parents. He has only spoken to his mother once since his arrival in
    the UK, and has not spoken to his father at  all.   Whenever  he  comes
    across an Albanian in the UK he "carefully" tries to find  out  whether
    they are from his village. He has thus far not come across someone  who
    is.  He has recently contacted the British Red Cross in order to  trace
    his family; however,  after  having  had  conversations  with  them  he
    ultimately  concluded  that  the   procedure   was   not   sufficiently
    confidential that he wished to engage in it.  He told the  British  Red
    Cross that he would contact them at a later date and  he  was  given  a
    reference number.

14. Under cross-examination the appellant stated that the last time he  had
    seen his sisters was when he was aged 8 or 9.  He  has  not  spoken  to
    them since that time.  He had made no attempt to  contact  his  sisters
    since his arrival in the United Kingdom, nor has he made any attempt to
    trace where they live. He has  not  attempted  to  contact  friends  in
    Albania because if he did so this may lead to his whereabouts  becoming
    known - the village he is from being small.  He is afraid that  if  his
    whereabouts in the UK becomes known,  something  might  happen  to  him
    here.

15. The appellant further stated he did not believe that his  father  would
    have paid the debt back.  The appellant  recalls  his  father  drinking
    alcohol even when (the appellant) was a small boy.  He could not recall
    his father ever having had employment and he did  not  think  that  his
    father would have obtained employment or stopped drinking since he (the
    appellant) had left the country.

16. The appellant finally confirmed that he currently  lives  in  a  shared
    house with two other males, one Albanian and one Afghan.  He washes his
    own clothes and does not cook  any  food  because  the  cooker  in  the
    premises is broken.  He buys food from a local shop.  He  is  currently
    studying at college to be an electrician.

Decision and Discussion

17. The  only  issue  of  primary  fact  within  the  appellant's  personal
    knowledge which is in dispute is that surrounding his contact (or  lack
    thereof) with his parents.

18. The appellant's claim is that he purchased a sim card and phone in  the
    UK (with assistance) in June 2014, and thereafter contacted his  mother
    "after June 2014 and before September 2014" (statement  of  3  December
    2014). He did so using  his  father's  telephone  number,  because  his
    mother did not have a telephone and neither was there a house phone.

19. The timing of this telephone call can be narrowed to a date prior to  2
    July 2014 because it is  referred  to  in  a  statement  drawn  by  the
    appellant on that date. At paragraph 17 of that statement the appellant
    asserts that he "could not contact [his mother] after that date as  she
    does not have a mobile phone. I did not like to contact my father as he
    will be very angry with me as I left Albania without his knowledge  and
    approval."

20. Nevertheless, in his statement of 3 December 2014 the appellant asserts
    that he attempted to contact his mother in  September  2014  using  his
    father's mobile number, without  success.  He  also  made  unsuccessful
    attempts to contact his mother on 20 November 2014,  but  there  was  a
    recorded message identifying that the number could  not  be  contacted.
    The appellant has not disclosed details of any further attempts made to
    contact his mother by telephone after 20 November 2014.

21. Whilst I find it surprising that the appellant waited for around  three
    months before he attempted to make  further  contact  with  his  mother
    after June 2014, and a further 2 months after the unsuccessful  attempt
    in September 2014, I bear in mind that the  appellant  was  only  15/16
    years old at that time and that he would have only relatively  recently
    arrived in a foreign land having left Albania  in  circumstances  which
    must have been traumatic for him. I also view this discrete credibility
    issue in the context of the  acceptance  of  the  truth  of  the  other
    aspects of the appellant's evidence.

22. I observe that the appellant's evidence,  both  throughout  the  asylum
    determination process and the  appeal  process,  has  been  laced  with
    concerns (whether held on an objectively well  founded  basis  or  not)
    that the putative persecutors would be able to locate  his  whereabouts
    in the UK if they became aware he was  here.  This  has  most  recently
    raised its head in the appellant's rejection  of  the  offer  from  the
    British Red Cross to trace his parents.  It is, also, of relevance that
    the  appellant  has  reported  feelings  of  unhappiness  and   anxiety
    triggered by the thought of being returned to Albania and  that  he  is
    receiving counselling as a consequence (see letters of 19 July 2016 and
    28 February 2017 from COMPASS).

23. Looking at the appellant's evidence in  the  round  I  am  prepared  to
    accept, to the lower standard, that he has not had contact with  either
    his parents, any other members of his family or any friends in Albania,
    since he arrived in the UK, save for one conversation with  his  mother
    in June 2014.  I  further  accept  that  the  fears  expressed  by  the
    appellant as to the consequences of his whereabouts in the UK  becoming
    known to the persons whom he fears in Albania are  genuinely  held.  In
    short, I find that the appellant has been honest with the  Tribunal  in
    every regard.

24. Mr Melvin submitted that even if the appellant's  account  is  accepted
    this appeal should, nevertheless, fail for three reasons.  First,  that
    the appellant would not be at risk in his home area; second,  there  is
    in any event  a  sufficiency  of  state  protection  available  to  the
    appellant in Albania and,  third,  that  there  is  a  viable  internal
    relocation alternative - the appellant can live in Tirana.

25. Taking these in turn. In relation to current risk upon  return  to  the
    appellant's home  area,  Mr  Melvin  relied  upon  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had not produced any evidence supporting his belief that  his
    father's  circumstances  have  not  changed  since  the  time  of   his
    departure. It was observed, in particular, that no  evidence  had  been
    produced to the effect that  the  appellant's  father's  debt  remained
    outstanding.

26. I first ask myself whether the vacuum in the evidence identified by  Mr
    Melvin was something that the appellant could be reasonably expected to
    have filled i.e. was there evidence that the appellant could have,  but
    did not, take reasonable steps to obtain.

27. The appellant gave evidence as to why  no  attempt  had  been  made  to
    contact other family members in Albania in order to  obtain  up-to-date
    information about his parents' circumstances. He has no contact details
    for these family members, and has not  had  contact  with  them  for  a
    considerable period of time prior  to  his  departure  from  Albania  -
    ostensibly because his father owed monies to them. I find this to be  a
    perfectly reasonable explanation as to why no contact has been made  by
    the appellant. Mr Melvin also points to the  British  Red  Cross  as  a
    potential source of information. Once  again,  however,  I  accept  the
    appellant has provided a reasonable explanation, which I have  set  out
    above, for not pursuing this avenue.

28. Turning then to the evidence that is before me. The appellant's  father
    has been an alcoholic and a gambler for as long as  the  appellant  can
    recall. He is  indebted  to  many  people,  including  the  appellant's
    sisters' husbands. His failure and/or  inability  to  repay  monies  to
    these family members has led  to  a  situation  where  the  appellant's
    sisters no longer have contact with their parents,  or  the  appellant.
    The appellant knows his father used to work, but  since  the  appellant
    has been "grown up" he has not known his father have a regular job. The
    appellant's mother worked as  a  cleaner  and  the  family  was,  also,
    receiving some state support.

29. As of the date of the  appellant's  departure  it  is  clear  that  the
    appellant's mother perceived the appellant  to  be  at  risk  of  being
    harmed if he remained in Albania. Sending a child alone  to  a  foreign
    land is a big step for any parent to take and I  infer  from  the  fact
    that the appellant's mother was prepared to take this option, that  she
    believed that there was sufficient possibility that the warnings  given
    to her husband and the appellant would be acted upon. It is inherent in
    the drawing of such inference  that  the  appellant's  mother  did  not
    believe that her husband would be able to repay the debt, at  least  in
    the immediate term.

30. The appellant's mother's actions give a  particular  insight  into  her
    beliefs about the nature of the person/organisation from whom/which the
    threats emanated. It is to be recalled that the appellant's father owed
    money to many people, yet it was only the events of May 2014 which  led
    the appellant's mother to take such drastic steps as sending her  minor
    child abroad, alone.

31. The appellant's mother's view as to the risk to the appellant  in  2014
    does not, of  course,  establish  that  such  a  risk  was  real,  i.e.
    objectively  well-founded.  Such  view  plays  only  one  part  of  the
    assessment of risk.

32. One must also look at the appellant's claim, and his mother's  actions,
    in the context of the background situation in Albania at  the  relevant
    time.  In this regard, I have reports before me from, inter  alia,  the
    US Department of State,  the  Council  of  Europe  and  UNICEF  -  each
    relating to the year that the events material to the instant  case  are
    said to occurred, i.e. 2014.  In her skeleton argument Ms Smith  points
    to increased incidents of societal killings, including blood feuds  and
    revenge killings in Albania.  This though is not a case where there  is
    a blood feud case.  The background  evidence  does  disclose,  however,
    that Albanian organised crime is one of the fastest expanding  networks
    of criminal groups in the Balkans and Europe.

33. Looking at all the evidence in  the  round,  and  bearing  in  mind  in
    particular: (i) that the appellant has been found to be  a  witness  of
    truth; (ii) the appellant's mother's actions in sending her minor child
    abroad as a  consequence  of  the  threats  received;  and,  (iii)  the
    background evidence before me,  I am prepared to accept  to  the  lower
    standard that at the time of the appellant's departure there was a real
    risk of him suffering serious harm from persons who  wished  to  either
    persuade his father to pay back an outstanding debt or  to  punish  the
    father for failure to  thus  far  pay  back  that  debt,  or  indeed  a
    combination of both.

34. Moving on, Ms Smith readily acknowledged the  vacuum  in  the  evidence
    before the  Tribunal  relating  to  the  appellant's  parents'  current
    circumstances. It may be, as Mr Melvin submits, that the debt has  been
    repaid  and,  consequently,  that  the  risk  to  the   appellant   has
    dissipated. Alternatively, it may be that the person or organisation to
    whom the debt was owed by the appellant's father has  written  off  the
    debt, or agreed to repayments in instalments or  that  the  appellant's
    father could work off the  debt.   All  of  these  possibilities  would
    clearly reduce (or negate) the risk to the appellant from such  persons
    or organisation.

35. The burden is on the appellant to demonstrate that he is still at  risk
    upon return, but the standard of proof is a  low  one.  The  fact  that
    there is a vacuum in the evidence and a number of  potential  scenarios
    in which the appellant would not be  at  risk  upon  return,  does  not
    preclude a finding that the appellant would be at risk.

36. On the available evidence before me, I conclude that there  is  a  real
    risk that the appellant's father has not repaid the debt which  led  to
    the appellant being at risk 3 years ago. The description given  by  the
    appellant of his father's his long-term  gambling  habits  and  alcohol
    abuse - which continued even in the face  of  the  family  having  lost
    contact with the appellant's sisters as a consequence  -  leads  me  to
    find that there is a real possibility that he has not changed his ways.
    Furthermore, on the accepted evidence, the appellant's father  has  not
    had regular employment for as long as the appellant can recall.

37. Whilst the appellant's mother managed to obtain the necessary funds  in
    order to pay for the appellant's journey to the United Kingdom, this is
    not indicative of her ability to fund  the  repayment  of  the  debt  -
    indeed, if anything, the fact that these monies were not used to  repay
    the debt in 2014 may be indicative of the size of  the  debt  that  the
    appellant's father had accrued or his wife's belief that  even  if  the
    monies were used to repay the debt that her husband  would  not  simply
    accrue further debt thereafter.

38. If the appellant returns to his home area, which is not  a  large  city
    such a Tirana, there is a real risk that his presence will become known
    by the person/organisation who threatened his kidnap in 2014.  Whatever
    the motivation was of such persons in 2014 i.e. as a warning to  others
    not to fail to repay debt or whether to use the appellant  as  leverage
    in order to facilitate repayment by the appellant's father,  there  is,
    it seems to me, a real risk that such motivations will be  retained.  I
    concluded above that there was a real risk  to  the  appellant  at  the
    point in time of his departure in 2014. In such circumstances, and  the
    given my findings that the circumstances in relation to  the  debt  and
    the motivations of the debtors have not  changed  since  2014,  I  also
    conclude that there is a real risk of the appellant  suffering  serious
    harm if returned.

39. Mr Melvin submits that, in any event, there  would  be  sufficiency  of
    protection for the appellant in Albania.

40. Article 7 of the Qualification Directive provides:
         1. Protection can be provided by:
         (a) the State; or
         (b)   parties    or    organisations,    including    international
         organisations, controlling the State or a substantial part  of  the
         territory of the State.
         2. Protection is generally provided when the  actors  mentioned  in
         paragraph 1 take reasonable steps to  prevent  the  persecution  or
         suffering of serious harm, inter alia, by  operating  an  effective
         legal system for the detection, prosecution and punishment of  acts
         constituting persecution or serious harm,  and  the  applicant  has
         access to such protection.
         3. When assessing whether an international organisation controls  a
         State  or  a  substantial  part  of  its  territory  and   provides
         protection as described in paragraph 2, Member  States  shall  take
         into account any guidance which may be provided in relevant Council
         acts.

41.  These  minimum  standards  reflect  the  approach  taken  in  domestic
    jurisprudence. Sufficiency of state protection means a willingness  and
    ability on the part of the receiving state to provide through its legal
    system  a  reasonable  level  of  protection  from  ill-treatment.  The
    effectiveness of the system provided is to be judged  normally  by  its
    systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent the form of persecution  of
    which there is a risk, not just  punishment  of  it  after  the  event.
    Notwithstanding  systemic  sufficiency  of  state  protection  in   the
    receiving state, a claimant may  still  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution if it can be shown that its authorities know  or  ought  to
    know of circumstances particular to  the  case,  but  are  unlikely  to
    provide  the  additional  protection   the   particular   circumstances
    reasonably require.: see Bagdanavicius v Secretary of  State   for  the
    Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1605,

42. In support of his submission Mr Melvin draws attention to a  series  of
    Country Information and Guidance notes from 2016/17, each relating to a
    distinct  social  group  within  Albania  which,  it  is   said,   have
    characteristics that are more likely to lead  to  persons  within  that
    group to be persecuted than this appellant's circumstances.  In each of
    these policy notes there  is  a  section  relating  to  sufficiency  of
    protection.  The Secretary of State's position in each is  that  "there
    is in general sufficiency of protection" for persons in Albania falling
    with the social group in question.

43. I observe that at paragraph 2.1.2 of the most  recent  general  Country
    Information bulletin relating to Albania (August 2015) the following is
    said:


         "There is a fully functioning police and judicial system.  Civilian
         authorities generally maintain effective control over  the  police,
         Republican Guard, armed forces  and  SHISH,  although  periodically
         there are instances of corruption and of members  of  the  security
         forces  having  committed  abuses.  Poor  infrastructure,  lack  of
         equipment,  inadequate   supervision,   contribute   to   continued
         corruption and unprofessional behaviour. Impunity remains a serious
         problem, although  the  government  has  made  greater  efforts  to
         address this. The government  has  mechanisms  to  investigate  and
         punish  police  abuse  and  corruption  and  reportedly  carry  out
         investigations and provide redress."

44. In her submissions Ms  Smith  draws  attention  to  numerous  documents
    within the appellant's bundle that identify the existence of corruption
    within the police force in Albania.  I observe that  this  evidence  is
    entirely consistent with that provided to the Tribunal in  the  country
    guidance decision relating to trafficked women from Albania i.e. TD and
    AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC).

45. In TD the Tribunal observed that recent prosecution of police  officers
    is a positive sign that the problem of  corruption  within  the  police
    force  in  Albania  is  being  tackled  by  the  authorities.  It   was
    nevertheless concluded that corruption remains a serious problem,  "not
    least in the minds of the Albanian public who  after  many  decades  of
    living with bribery as a way of life may find it difficult to  see  any
    change"  (at  [94].   This  evidence  is  also  consistent   with   the
    appellant's explanation as to  why  his  parents  did  not  report  the
    threats against the appellant to the police.

46. Looking at all the evidence before me in the round I conclude that  the
    level of corruption in the police force is such that in cases  such  as
    the instant one, where there is the possibility of corruption  becoming
    material to the actions of the police, that there is not a  sufficiency
    of protection offered by the Albanian police, or indeed any  other  arm
    of the Albanian state, to persons in the appellant's position.

47. I finally move on to consider the issue of internal relocation.

48. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive reads:


      1. As part of the assessment  of  the  application  for  international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.


      2. In examining whether  a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.


      3. Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical obstacles to return
         to the country of origin.



49. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007]  UKHL
    49 Lord Bingham referred [at 5] to the guidance in Januzi  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5:


         "In paragraph 21 of my opinion in Januzi I summarised  the  correct
         approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with  which
         all my noble and learned friends agreed:


           'The   decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all    relevant
           circumstances pertaining to the  claimant  and  his  country  of
           origin, must decide whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
           claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
           expect him to do so...There is, as Simon Brown LJ aptly observed
           in Svazas v Secretary of State for the Home Department, [2002] 1
           WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of cases.  The decision-maker must
           do his best to decide, on such material as is  available,  where
           on the spectrum the particular case falls... All must depend  on
           a fair assessment of the relevant facts'.


         Although specifically directed to a secondary issue  in  the  case,
         these observations are plainly of general application.  It  is  not
         easy to see how the rule could be more simply or clearly expressed.
          It is, or should be, evidence that the enquiry must be directed to
         the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
         experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
         relevant.  There is no warrant for excluding,  or  giving  priority
         to, consideration of the applicant's way of life in  the  place  of
         persecution.  There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority
         to consideration of conditions generally  prevailing  in  the  home
         country.  I do not underestimate the difficulty of making decisions
         in some cases.  But the difficulty lies in applying the  test,  not
         in expressing it. ..."

50. Mr Melvin assets that there is a viable internal relocation alternative
    open to the appellant in Tirana. It is said  that:  (i)  the  appellant
    would not be at risk in Tirana because there is no  evidence  that  the
    persons who wish to persecute him in his home area would be  aware,  or
    could become aware, that he was living there; (ii) the appellant  would
    receive support from  his  family  (it  not  being  accepted  that  the
    appellant  has  lost  contact  with  them);  (iii)  the  appellant  has
    transferable skills such that he could  obtain  employment  in  Tirana;
    and, (iv) the appellant would be entitled to apply  for  funds  through
    the VAR scheme.

51. Ms Smith submits that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant  to
    relocate to Tirana because: (i) there is a real  risk  in  Tirana  from
    those to whom his father owes a debt (i.e. the same person/organisation
    form the whom the appellant is at risk in his home  area)  and/or  (ii)
    there is a real risk that the appellant would  become  street  homeless
    and destitute in  Tirana  and  he  would  therefore  be  vulnerable  to
    exploitation and forced labour.

52. In support of the second of these submissions, Ms Smith draws attention
    to the fact that the appellant would have to register in Tirana  if  he
    wished to reside there. It was asserted that  he  would  be  unable  to
    register because of the lack of means and property ownership.  He would
    therefore not have access to essential services.

53. The appellant is now 18 years old and living in shared accommodation in
    the United Kingdom. He  is,  though,  still  a  'Looked  After'  person
    receiving  some  local  authority  assistance.  He  has,  nevertheless,
    demonstrated an ability  to  function  independently,  and  has  learnt
    transferable skills from his college courses that would assist  in  the
    him obtaining income from employment in Tirana.

54. There is, though, a requirement for civil registration in Tirana.  This
    was referred to by the Tribunal in the country guidance decision in  EH
    (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC) in which the following
    observations, made in the May 2012  Home  Office  Operational  Guidance
    Note, were identified, without demur:

         "2.4.4. Internal migrants must transfer their civil registration to
         their new community of residence to receive government services and
         must prove they are legally domiciled through property ownership, a
         property rental agreement, or utility bills. Many persons could not
         provide  this  proof  and  therefore  lacked  access  to  essential
         services."

55. The only evidence before me expanding on this registration  process  is
    contained in a document authored jointly by Save the Children and Terre
    Des Hommes published  in  November  2014  ("Children  on  the  Move  in
    Albania"), in which the following is said at [39]:

         "Often, the consequence of movement is related to problems of civil
         registration in the new area the family has moved to. The  transfer
         of civil registry from the local administration  of  the  place  of
         origin  to  the  location  of  destination  is  long,  non-coherent
         administrative  procedure   that...exclude   the   possibility   of
         some...individuals or families being eligible  since  the  criteria
         for registration is to submit a documentation the property  of  the
         house (and/or contract of rent); document certifying employment and
         a certificate of incomes. The lack of civil registration results in
         limited  access  to  health  and   educational   services,   social
         protection  programs,  cash  assistance  scheme   etc,   but   also
         difficulties in accessing other public institutions."

56. Mr Melvin does not submit that the appellant currently has any  of  the
    documentation necessary to undertake a civil  registration  in  Tirana,
    nor does he identify how it is said that  the  appellant  would  obtain
    such  documentation  prior   to   obtaining   employment   and   rental
    accommodation.

57. On the evidence before me I find that the appellant would not  be  able
    to register in Tirana in the immediate aftermath of his return  because
    he would not have the relevant documentation to do  so.  He  would  not
    have access to 'essential services' of the type identified in paragraph
    55 above, until he registers.

58. Mr Melvin submits that this would not cause the appellant  difficulties
    in the immediate aftermath of his return because he could apply for  an
    Assisted Voluntary Return package prior to leaving the  UK.  I  observe
    firstly that this program is only available for those who  "voluntarily
    return". The appellant does not wish to return to Albania, and all  the
    evidence before me points  towards  him  not  agreeing  to  voluntarily
    return because of his subjective fear of doing so. As such, the  scheme
    would not apply to the appellant.

59. In any event, although I take judicial notice of  the  fact  that  such
    return packages are available to those who have unsuccessfully  claimed
    asylum, and that "up to �2000" can be provided, there  is  no  evidence
    before me as to the level of the funds that it is said  this  appellant
    is likely to receive, nor do I have evidence identifying the  mechanism
    by which successful applicants are chosen or how  the  level  of  funds
    that they will be allocated is calculated.  In all these circumstances,
    I conclude that the availability of assisted return packages for  those
    who  voluntarily  return  is  of  little  assistance  to   me   in   my
    consideration  of  whether  there  is  a  viable  internal   relocation
    alternative for the appellant in Tirana.

60. The appellant will be  forcibly  returned,  as  an  18-year-old,  to  a
    country in which he has a genuine subject  fear  of  suffering  serious
    harm (which is objectively well-founded in his home  area),  such  fear
    manifesting itself in anxiety at such a level that  he  is  undertaking
    counselling. He will have no familial support upon return and he cannot
    obtain  assistance  from  the  state  until  he  undertakes   a   civil
    registration. The appellant cannot undertake such registration until he
    finds accommodation and employment. He would have no  funds  to  obtain
    accommodation or other  essential  needs  until  he  finds  employment.
    Furthermore, I have not been directed to any evidence  suggesting  that
    there are shelters or other assisted accommodation types  available  in
    Tirana for persons presenting with the appellant's circumstances.

61. In these circumstances, I concur with Ms Smith's submissions  that  the
    appellant is likely to find himself living on the streets upon arrival,
    and at least until he can find employment. It is simply not  realistic,
    on the evidence before me and even  given  the  appellant's  particular
    skill set, to  conclude  that  he  will  be  able  to  find  employment
    immediately upon return. There will inevitably be a  period  of  delay,
    something which I have no doubt will  also  be  impacted  upon  by  the
    appellant's subjective fears.  In all the circumstances, I find that it
    would not reasonable to expect the appellant to internally relocate  to
    Tirana - and that such internal relocation would be unduly harsh.

62. For all the reasons given above, I find that returning the appellant to
    Albania  would  not  be  in  accordance  with  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules and would breach Article 15(b) of  the  Qualification
    Directive. The  appellant  is  entitled  to  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection and his appeal is, accordingly, allowed.





Notice of Decision

For the reasons given by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC,  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Having re-made the decision, I allow the appellant's appeal.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor    Date 22/6/2017


































                           -----------------------
[1] Now repealed by section 15 of the Immigration Act 2014

