
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07264/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th August 2015                   |On 1st September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                MARCUS MBUNGU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Neville, of Counsel instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. On 24th November 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal E M M Smith in which he  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  asylum,  humanitarian
    and human rights protection to the appellant, a  male  citizen  of  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo.

 2. Judge Parkes thought it arguable that the judge had applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof to the evidence when finding that the  appellant  was
    not a credible witness.

Error on a Point of Law

 3. At the commencement of the hearing Mr McVeety  agreed  that  the  judge
    appeared to have given himself the wrong self direction in paragraph 16
    of the decision indicating that the standard of proof was "the  balance
    of probabilities".  Nevertheless, he drew attention to the response  of
    12th December 2014 in which it was argued that, in  paragraph  24,  the
    judge had referred to K (DRC) [2003] UKIAT 00014 (I believe this should
    be a reference to the decision in SK (DRC) [2003]  UKIAT  00014)  which
    examined the guidance  set  out  in  Chiver  (10758)  decided  in  1994
    referring to the "low standard of proof".

 4. Mr Neville contended that the judge had  clearly  contradicted  himself
    and it could not be clear which standard had actually been  applied  to
    the evidence before the judge reached his  negative  findings.   I  was
    also reminded of the decision of the former Immigration Appeal Tribunal
    in Kaja (Political asylum: standard  of  proof)  (Zaire)  [1994]  UKIAT
    11038 which makes it clear that there is only one standard of proof  of
    a reasonable degree of likelihood to be applied in relation  to  asylum
    claims as a one stage process.  On  this  basis  paragraph  24  of  the
    decision could not be seen as a complete or correct self direction.

 5. After considering the matter for a few moments I indicated that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision showed a material error on a point  of  law
    such that the decision should be  set  aside  and  re-made.   That  was
    because the judge's  self  direction  under  the  heading  "Burden  and
    standard of proof" in paragraph 16 clearly sets out the civil  standard
    which is wrong.  I am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge's  comments  in
    paragraph 24 of the decision can be said to show that the judge  simply
    made a mistake in his self direction because the judge's  comment  that
    he was not satisfied "even to the low standard of proof" (my  emphasis)
    could be said to suggest that the judge was applying two  standards  to
    the evidence when, as Kaja makes clear, there is only one.

DIRECTIONS

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on  a  point  of
    law such that it should be set aside and re-made.

 7. Having regard to the nature of the error it will be necessary  for  the
    appeal to be heard afresh.  Applying the provisions of paragraph 7.2(b)
    of the Practice Statements by the Senior President of  Tribunals  dated
    25th September 2012 it is appropriate that this matter should be  heard
    afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The appeal will be heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 18th March  2016
    at the Stoke Hearing Centre.

 9. A Lingala interpreter will be required.

10. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E M M
    Smith.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested before the Upper Tribunal nor do I  consider  it
appropriate.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
