
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07203/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 18 September 2015                |On: 21 September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL KAMARA


                                   Between

                                    MR FH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Targett-Parker, counsel instructed by Barnes
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Griffith dated 26 November 2014. Permission to appeal was granted  on
       11 May 2015.

  Background


    2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely,  aged  14.
       He applied for asylum on 11 February  2009  on  the  basis  that  the
       Taliban  had  attempted  to  recruit  him.  The  respondent's  checks
       disclosed that the appellant was fingerprinted in Greece in July 2008
       and France in January 2009. The appellant's asylum claim was  refused
       on 11 August 2009, however he  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to
       remain until 1 July 2012.  The appellant applied for further leave to
       remain on 15 June 2012 but that application was not decided until  20
       June 2014, when it was refused.

    3. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the
       appellant was the only witness. The FTTJ found that  the  appellant's
       entire account was  a  "total  fabrication"  including  his  evidence
       before the Tribunal. Reference was made to a number of  discrepancies
       in his evidence including  as  to  the  existence  of  siblings;  the
       identity of a cousin in  the  United  Kingdom;  whether  or  not  his
       fingerprints were  taken  and  his  lack  of  co-operation  with  the
       respondent regarding  the  tracing  of  his  family.  The  FTTJ  also
       considered that the appellant could relocate. In relation to  Article
       8 outside the  Rules,  the  FTTJ  considered  that  the  respondent's
       concerns far outweighed the appellant's right to a private life.

  Error of law


    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on the
       basis that, firstly, it was arguable that the FTTJ failed to give
       sufficient weight to the appellant's age at the time he arrived in
       the United Kingdom; that he had been under the control of an agent
       during his journey here or considered the guidance before her in
       relation to the assessment of credibility of children in asylum
       proceedings. Secondly, in relation to the duty to trace, it was said
       that no consideration had been given by the FTTJ to the decision in
       JS (Former unaccompanied child - durable solution) Afghanistan [2013]
       UKUT 00586, in reaching her decision about future risk. Thirdly, it
       was considered arguable that the appellant's presence in the United
       Kingdom was not precarious, contrary to what was found by the FTTJ.

  The hearing


    5. Ms Targett-Parker relied on her substantial skeleton argument,  which
       had been submitted on the morning of the hearing  and  in  which  she
       continued to rely upon the three grounds upon  which  permission  was
       granted.  Firstly,  she  argued  that  the  FTTJ's  findings  on  the
       appellant's credibility were unsound, with  particular  reference  to
       the lack of liberal application of the benefit of the doubt  in  view
       of his age at the time he arrived in the  United  Kingdom.  Secondly,
       she submitted  that  the  FTTJ  failed  to  adequately  consider  the
       respondent's duty to trace the appellant's family from 2009 until  he
       became an adult. Thirdly, Ms  Targett-Parker  argued  that  the  FTTJ
       failed to apply EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 in taking into account the
       appellant's private life established from 2009 until the date of  the
       hearing. I also asked her to address the arguments set out on page  6
       of the permission application relating to whether  the  Secretary  of
       State had acted in accordance with the previous  Discretionary  Leave
       policy. Ms Targett-Parker advised me that she  had  not  drafted  the
       grounds and did not seek to rely on that matter further.

    6. Mr Clarke submitted that the FTTJ's decision  disclosed  no  material
       error of law. He relied on a sentence in the judgment in  TN  and  MA
       (Afghanistan v SSHD [2015] UKSC 40 at [73] that being  "There  is  no
       presumption of credibility."  He argued that the FTTJ was mindful  of
       age of appellant at  [39]  and  [40].   He  referred  to  my  earlier
       observation that the respondent's case was that  fingerprinting  took
       place before the appellant says he left Afghanistan. He asked  me  to
       note that the appellant denied being fingerprinted at the hearing but
       at the same time he remembered  discussing  with  an  agent  that  he
       should not discuss fingerprinting. It was difficult to  see  how  the
       FTTJ could do anything other than view that in a negative  light.  Mr
       Clarke asked me to note that the appellant claimed he could not  read
       or write despite evidence to contrary. There were  also  said  to  be
       inconsistencies in relation to the appellant's family in Afghanistan,
       which also went to the tracing issues. Mr Clarke maintained that  the
       appellant did not consent to the Home Office tracing his  family,  he
       conceded that he had not seen correspondence  relating  to  this  but
       stated that it was not disputed  that  the  consent  was  not  given.
       Further discrepancies related to the identity of the cousin  who  was
       in the United Kingdom. He argued that it was  open  to  the  FTTJ  in
       considering the  appellant's  evidence  at  the  hearing  along  with
       earlier accounts, to find his claim  was  a  fabrication.  Mr  Clarke
       stressed that the inconsistencies and implausible  matters  were  not
       specific to when the appellant was aged 14. Finally, on this  ground,
       Mr Clarke argued that for the FTTJ to say that the  appellant  always
       intended to come to the United Kingdom was not an absurd finding.

    7.  With  regard  to  the  second  ground,  Mr  Clarke  relied  upon  EU
       (Afghanistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 32 at [6] and [7] and argued that there
       was now no risk to the appellant on return. He stated that there  had
       been no failure to trace. Referring again to TN and  MA  at  [69]  he
       submitted that a child must be properly consulted about  his  or  her
       wishes and that the Home  Office  could  not  steam  ahead  and  make
       tracing enquiries without the appellant's consent.  Mr Clarke  argued
       that there was no case law to say the Home Office was under a duty to
       trace for an adult and that the appellant should have  raised  it  in
       his minority. He  said  the  appellant  had  clearly  obstructed  the
       respondent in giving inconsistent  information.  There  was  also  no
       longer a duty under  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Immigration  and
       Citizenship Act 1999 now the appellant was an adult. In  response  to
       the appellant's argument that there had been a failure by the FTTJ to
       look at his circumstances on return, Mr Clarke noted [44]  where  the
       FTTJ did not accept the appellant's parents were  killed;  [45]  that
       the asylum claim was  a  sham  and  at  [50]  where  the  appellant's
       education, background, family,  length  of  residence,  that  he  was
       living independently and an absence of vulnerability. The FTTJ  found
       that he could relocate to Kabul and her findings were  in  line  with
       the case law.

    8. Addressing ground 3, Mr Clarke noted that  EB  (Kosovo)  was  heavily
       relied on, however he considered that the law has  moved  on  in  the
       light of s.117B of the 2002 Act. The  FTTJ  had  no  choice  in  that
       nothing more than little weight can be given to  the  appellant's  to
       private life. While the FTTJ was wrong on  precariousness,  the  fact
       was that the appellant was always in the United Kingdom  precariously
       including when he was on  Discretionary  Leave.   He  invited  me  to
       dismiss the appeal.

    9. In reply, Ms Targett-Parker argued that there was  no  evidence  that
       after appellant gave information about his family  in  the  screening
       interview that any action was taken to inform, advise or seek consent
       from him.

   10. With reference to JS at [39], it was argued that full and  sufficient
       information was provided at the first opportunity. With regard to the
       alleged misleading information, at time of the screening  interviews,
       the appellant believed his parents to  be  alive  in  Afghanistan.  A
       cousin informed him otherwise, subsequently. The FTTJ found  at  [44]
       and [45] of the decision that his parents were not  killed,  if  this
       was the case then they are expected to be in Afghanistan and could be
       traced.  In relation to Article  8,  the  appellant  was  not  living
       independently but  in  "sheltered"  accommodation  with  other  young
       people paid for by social services and was not working.  In  relation
       to the alleged discrepancy regarding  the  appellant's  siblings,  Ms
       Targett-Parker asked me to record that they had been born  after  the
       appellant's departure and therefore there was no inconsistency.

   11. Ms Targett-Parker advised me that the appellant was in no position to
       proceed if an error of law was found because his cousin, who  was  in
       Ireland, had confirmed that he was unable to attend on  18  September
       2015. Furthermore, no interpreter had been booked for the appellant.

   12. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision as to whether there
       had been an error of law.

  Decision on error of law

   13. In  reaching  my  decision,  I  have  taken  into  consideration  the
       submissions made by both parties as well as relevant case law and the
       material, which was before the FTTJ.

   14. The FTTJ noted the appellant's age at the time of his arrival in  the
       United Kingdom but did  not  demonstrate  that  she  took  this  into
       consideration in relation to  the  apparent  inconsistencies  in  his
       account.  I  consider  that  she  failed  to  consider  the   liberal
       application of the benefit of  the  doubt  afforded  to  a  minor  as
       referred to by the UNHCR  in  the  publication  "Refugee  Children  -
       Guidelines on Protection and Care 1994." The majority of the matters,
       which the FTTJ considered to undermine  the  appellant's  credibility
       relate to peripheral issues including the  timing  of  his  departure
       from Afghanistan, failure to apply for asylum in  Greece  or  France,
       failure to tell the truth regarding whether he had been fingerprinted
       en route to the United Kingdom  and  that  it  had  always  been  his
       intention to come here. However, the appellant  was  a  13  year  old
       under the control of an agent between his departure from  Afghanistan
       soon after he turned 13 and his arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
       January 2009. Furthermore, it was the decision of his father to  send
       him out of Afghanistan. The FTTJ's view that the  appellant's  entire
       claim was a fabrication, including the details of his journey,  makes
       no reference to his age or lack of autonomy.

   15. While the FTTJ noted the appellant's most recent  witness  statement,
       she made no reference to his  explanation  for  having  denied  being
       fingerprinted; that being that it was impressed upon him by the agent
       who brought him to Europe that he must not tell the Home Office about
       it or he would be removed  from  the  United  Kingdom.  Therefore  it
       cannot be said that he continued  to  deny  being  fingerprinted.  In
       these  circumstances,  it  is  perhaps  unfair  to  find  that   this
       particular matter undermines the appellant's credibility.

   16. The FTTJ accepted at  [43],  the  respondent's  submission  that  the
       appellant was fingerprinted in Greece before he claimed to have  left
       Afghanistan. However, nowhere in any of  the  witness  statements  or
       interview records has the appellant ever been able to provide even an
       approximate date as to when he left Afghanistan.

   17. The appellant is described as uneducated, from a rural background and
       unfamiliar with calendars. Given that the appellant  states  that  he
       turned 13 around the beginning of 2008 and he left shortly  after,  I
       find that it could not be said that being fingerprinted in Greece  in
       July 2008, following a 4 month journey, fatally undermines his asylum
       claim.

   18. The FTTJ finds at [42] that the appellant did not  mention  a  cousin
       previously and comments adversely on  his  "sudden  appearance."  Yet
       when the appellant was screened in 2009 he mentioned having  multiple
       relatives in the United Kingdom. This is particularly relevant to the
       appellant's claim, as it is this cousin who  informed  the  appellant
       about the death of his family, which the FTTJ did not accept  because
       she considered that this cousin had not  been  mentioned  previously.
       While the appellant  denied  having  siblings  when  he  arrived,  he
       referred to three during his oral evidence. While the FTTJ  considers
       this a further reason to reject his claim, there is no  reference  to
       the appellant being questioned about this discrepancy. I am told that
       there is a simple explanation for this apparent inconsistency,  which
       the appellant could provide if given the opportunity.

   19. The FTTJ took an adverse view of the appellant's credibility at  [44]
       owing to his apparent failure to co-operate with  the  respondent  to
       give consent to his family being contacted  in  Afghanistan.  In  the
       grounds, it is accepted that the respondent sent a  letter  dated  11
       February 2014 seeking the appellant's consent to  tracing.  While  it
       may be that the appellant did not consent,  this  is  not  altogether
       surprising given his evidence, recorded by the FTTJ at [27]  that  it
       was around this time that his cousin informed him that his family had
       died.

   20. AA (unattached children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC), made
       reference to the UNHCR document referred to above. I note  while  the
       standard of proof is the same for minors as adults,  a  more  liberal
       approach should be taken with respect to the benefit  of  the  doubt.
       For the above reasons, I find that the  FTTJ's  credibility  findings
       were unsafe and amount to a material error of law.

   21. I will briefly address Grounds 2 and 3 together. It is not in dispute
       that the appellant provided the full names and address of his  parent
       in Afghanistan at his screening interview, which took place in  2009.
       The FTTJ had no regard to the respondent's  failure  to  endeavor  to
       trace the appellant's family while he was a minor  and  placed  undue
       emphasis on the appellant's lack of consent to tracing in  2014  when
       he aged 19. Owing to the negative credibility findings, there was  no
       consideration by the FTTJ of relevant case law in  relation  to  this
       duty in the case of former minors, that is  KA  (Afghanistan)  &  Ors
       [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 and  JS  (Former  accompanied  child  -  durable
       solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00586.  While the evidence did  not
       demonstrate that the appellant has  developed  an  extensive  private
       life in the United Kingdom, it is relevant that he has  been  in  the
       United Kingdom for over six years, two of those years while  awaiting
       a decision on his application for further leave to remain.  The  FTTJ
       In JS it was held that, in some cases, a durable solution may need to
       be found in the host state. Therefore owing to the FTTJ's failure  to
       consider the un-discharged  duty  of  the  respondent  to  trace  the
       appellant's  family  while  he  was  a   minor   and   consider   the
       aforementioned cases, I find that the FTTJ also materially  erred  in
       this regard.

   22. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are  errors  of  law
       such that the decision be  set  aside  to  be  remade.  None  of  the
       findings of the FTTJ are to stand.

   23. Further directions are to follow.

       Conclusions


       The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
       making of an error on a point of law.

       I set aside the decision to be re-made.

       Directions


         . This appeal is remitted to be heard de novo by any First-tier
           Tribunal Judge except FTTJ Griffith.

         . The appeal should be listed for a hearing at Taylor House.

         . An interpreter in the Nepali language is required.

         . Time estimate is 3 hours.




  Signed    Date: 19 September 2015


  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


