
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07931/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 May 2014                                 |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     H g
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Garrett instructed by Aston Carter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant was born on 26 October 1987 and claims to be a citizen of
    Eritrea.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 June 2013 and claimed
    asylum.   On  19  July  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused   the
    appellant's claim for asylum and made a decision to remove  her  as  an
    illegal entrant to Eritrea/Ethiopia by way of directions under paras 8-
    10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 25 September 2013, Judge S Meah dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    on all grounds.  Judge Meah did not accept that the  appellant  was  an
    Eritrean national and, in addition, found her  not  to  be  a  credible
    witness.  As a consequence, the judge rejected the appellant's claim to
    be at risk in Eritrea either  on  the  basis  of  being  a  Pentecostal
    Christian or  because  she  had  left  Eritrea  illegally.   The  judge
    concluded that there was no basis upon which the appellant could  claim
    to be at risk in Ethiopia.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds, challenging the judge's finding  that  she  had  not
    established that she was an Eritrean national, his adverse  credibility
    finding and that she would not be at risk if returned to Ethiopia.

 5. On 18 October 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the  following
    grounds:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in determining the  issues  of
         nationality prior to considering the evidence of the  witness,  and
         attached undue weight to her language skills.  All grounds  may  be
         argued."

 6. Thus, the appeal came before me.

 7. Mr Garrett relied upon the grounds of  appeal  and  made  a  number  of
    submissions challenging the judge's finding that the appellant had  not
    established she was an Eritrean  national  and  in  making  an  adverse
    credibility finding.

Discussion

 8. At the conclusion of the parties' submissions, I indicated that  I  was
    satisfied that the judge had materially erred in law  in  reaching  his
    findings and that  his  decision  cannot  stand.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

 9. First, the judge considered at paras 9-15  whether  the  appellant  had
    established  that  she  was  an  Eritrean  national.   He  was  not  so
    satisfied.  Having done so, at  paras  16-20,  the  judge  went  on  to
    consider what he described as the  appellant's  "general  credibility".
    In truth, the issue of the appellant's nationality could only  properly
    be considered in the context of the credibility of her  evidence  as  a
    whole.  It was, in my judgment, wrong to compartmentalise the issues of
    her nationality and credibility in this way.

10. Secondly, in determining the appellant's nationality, the judge  placed
    significant reliance upon the fact that  the  appellant  spoke  Amharic
    (the language of Ethiopia) and could not speak Tigrinya  (the  language
    of  Eritrea).   The  judge's  reasoning  is  at  paras  10-12  of   his
    determination as follows:

         "10. The appellant's  spoken  language  is  Amharic  which  is  the
             national language of Ethiopia.  She does  not  speak  Tigrinya
             which is the national language of Eritrea despite stating that
             this was her late father's main language and the fact that she
             had claimed to live in Eritrea for two years.   She  does  not
             speak Tigrinya as a second language either and  she  does  not
             speak any of the other Eritrean languages.  She  stated  there
             were 360 islands in the bay of Assab when in  fact  there  are
             only 30.  She incorrectly stated  that  the  nearest  town  to
             Assab is Mendefera and she could not  give  the  name  of  the
             street in which she lived in Assab and  had  little  knowledge
             about Assab generally.

         11.  It was the appellant's claim that she did not go to school  in
             Eritrea  during  the  two  years  she  lived  there,   despite
             schooling being available free of charge, on account of having
             to care for her father who was paralysed prior to  his  death.
             The respondent stated that this was being used as an excuse to
             cover up the fact that the appellant could not prove that  she
             was  genuinely  an  Eritrean  national.   I  agree  with   the
             respondent and I shall now explain why I find  incredible  the
             appellant's claim that she is Eritrean.


         12.  Firstly, I find it incredible that  the  appellant  would  not
             speak Tigrinya given that she spent two years there.   I  find
             that this, alongside the  fact  that  her  father  would  have
             spoken this as his first language, means it is  reasonable  to
             expect that she would also have spoken Tigrinya at least as  a
             second language if she is genuinely of Eritrean origin."

11. In my judgment, the judge's reasoning  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    evidence that she could not  speak  Tigrinya  is  inadequate.   On  the
    appellant's account, she was deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea when she
    was 13 years old and only spent two  years  there.   Her  father  spoke
    Amharic (the language of Ethiopia).  In my judgment, the judge was  not
    entitled to find that it was "incredible" that  having  only  lived  in
    Eritrea for two years prior to 2002, and given that  her  father  spoke
    Amharic, that she would not now be able to speak Tigrinya as  a  second
    language.

12. Thirdly, at the hearing the appellant called a witness, ("RB") to  give
    evidence on her behalf.  RB  gave  evidence  that  she  had  known  the
    appellant between 2000 and 2001 when their families had lived next door
    to one another in Eritrea after the appellant and her father  had  been
    deported from Ethiopia.   RB  also  gave  evidence  that  subsequently,
    having returned from Sudan where she had  gone  with  her  father,  the
    appellant's aunt told RB that the appellant's father had died and  that
    RB had been detained.

13. The judge dealt with the evidence of RB in  paras  18  and  19  of  his
    determination as follows:

         "18. Turning to the evidence  of  the  appellant's  claimed  friend
             [RB], she stated she knew the appellant when  they  were  both
             young as they had spent time together in Eritrea by virtue  of
             being  neighbours.   Her  evidence  was  in   an   effort   to
             corroborate the appellant's claim to be an Eritrean national.

         19.  Firstly, I am not prepared  to  attach  any  weigh  to  [RB]'s
             evidence  given  my  doubts  about  the  appellant's   overall
             credibility and my significant doubts about the  substance  of
             the claim.  I find to this end that [RB]'s evidence is  likely
             to have been designed simply to  corroborate  the  appellant's
             claim rather than there being  any  real  truth  to  what  she
             stated.  I also found  incredible  [RB]'s  response  that  the
             appellant had told her about her father's death  yet  when  Ms
             Ololade had asked the appellant several times whether she  had
             told [RB] about the death her repeated  responses  were  vague
             and inconclusive and the essence of it was that  she  was  not
             sure whether she had told [RB] about her  father's  death.   I
             found this discrepancy between the evidence of the two of them
             to be incredible."

14. Whilst the judge did give some reasons for doubting the credibility  of
    RB's evidence, the first sentence of para 19 makes plain that he placed
    no weight on her evidence given that he had already formed  an  adverse
    view on the appellant's overall credibility.  In my judgment,  in  that
    latter regard the judge fell into error.  RB was a witness of fact  and
    the appellant's credibility could only properly  be  determined  taking
    into account what was, on its face, supporting evidence from  RB.   The
    judge could not, as he clearly does in the opening sentence of para 19,
    disregard  RB's  evidence  simply  because  he  did  not  believe   the
    appellant.  RB had, herself, been recognised as a refugee  in  the  UK.
    It is difficult to see the basis upon which the judge  considered  that
    RB's evidence was "designed  simply  to  corroborate"  the  appellant's
    claim, rather than "there being any real truth to what she said".

15. Although Mr Garrett relied upon the judge's reference in para 14 to the
    evidence of the appellant as to how  she  obtained  a  "passport"  from
    Eritrea as a material error of fact, it is clear that that is simply  a
    typographical error as in both para 13 and the  remaining  sentence  of
    para 14, the judge is correctly dealing with the  appellant's  evidence
    of how she obtained a "birth certificate".

16. Nevertheless, the judge did fall into error in a number of respects  in
    reaching his adverse findings on the appellant's  nationality  and  her
    credibility.  Although he does give other reasons for his  findings,  I
    am not satisfied that without these errors his findings would have been
    the same and, therefore, I am satisfied that the errors  were  material
    to his decision.

Decision

17. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    The decision cannot stand and I set it aside.

18. Both representatives accepted that in the light  of  my  decision,  the
    proper course was for the appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing before a different judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.   Having  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  fact-finding
    required, and in the light  of  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit it to
    the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  rehearing.   The  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge  other  than
    Judge S Meah.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
