
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07938/2014
                                                AA/07940/2014, AA/11211/2014
                                                AA/11213/2014, AA/11216/2014
                                                AA/11214/2014, AA/11218/2014
                                                ia/42223/2013, DA/00311/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|and decision given orally            |                                     |
|on 14 January 2016                   |On 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                     Ma
                                     FM
                                     OA1
                                     Aa1
                                     OA2
                                     fa
                                     AA2
                                     AA3
                                     aa4
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent





Representation:
Appellant:    Ms J Fisher, of Counsel, instructed by Powell Spencer and
                    Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
 1. In my judgement the decision of the First-tier Tribunal suffers from  a
    series of material errors of law.  First, there is a  failure  to  make
    necessary findings on an  extensive  list  of  material  issues.   This
    conclusion follows from a very simple analysis of the text itself.   It
    applies particularly to paragraphs 136, 137, 138, 140 and 145.  That is
    not necessarily an exhaustive list.
 2. In all of these passages the common denominator is that the judge poses
    material questions but fails to answer them in the form  of  clear  and
    unambiguous findings. This stands out as an egregious  legal  infirmity
    in the determination.
 3. Secondly, while the judge does make some key findings I  conclude  that
    they are inadequately reasoned.  Paradigm illustrations  are  found  in
    paragraphs 142 to 144. These paragraphs are  couched  in  conclusionary
    terms.  They suffer from a necessary degree of analysis of evidence and
    appropriate findings. This is illustrated in particular by the  opening
    part of paragraph 142 in which the judge refers vaguely  and  obliquely
    to "extensive evidence" considered without providing the slightest hint
    of what the main aspects of that evidence were and what his findings in
    relation thereto actually are.
 4. This is linked with a third clearly ascertainable error of law  in  the
    determination, namely the judge's consideration of the  credibility  of
    the parents and his application  of  Section  8  of  the  2004  Act.  I
    consider that in his treatment of this topic it was  incumbent  on  the
    judge to engage with the Secretary of State's decision which  contained
    a series of passages relating to credibility.  Paragraphs 25 to  31  of
    that decision refer.  There is no nexus whatsoever in the determination
    between the judge's consideration of credibility and the assessment and
    conclusions of the Secretary of State in the decision letter. This  too
    stands out as a striking lacuna  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.
 5. The next clear error of law in the determination is the judge's failure
    to engage with applicable country guidance.  Mr Wilding  has  submitted
    that duly analysed, the judge, although not referring  to  the  country
    guidance decision itself, and not identifying its  essential  elements,
    has in fact managed  to  apply  it.   If  correct,  this  would  be  an
    admirable feat of mental gymnastics, of Olympic  gold  proportions.   I
    find that in a case of this nature a failure  to  engage  in  the  most
    elementary way with the country guidance is a clear error of law.
 6. The next error of law contaminating the determination  is  the  judge's
    consideration and application of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 Act.  Suffice to say on this issue  that  this
    judgment fails all of the touchstones identified  in  the  decision  of
    this Tribunal in JO (Nigeria).  Fundamentally there  is  a  failure  to
    separate the children individually  or,  alternatively,  to  provide  a
    reasoned basis for dealing with them in combinations and in  any  event
    to identify their best interests.  These are not expressed  and  cannot
    realistically be implied anywhere  in  the  relevant  passages  of  the
    judgment.
 7. Furthermore, the judge conflates the exercise of identifying  the  best
    interests  with  countervailing  proportionality  factors,  instead  of
    clearly segregating these two quite separate issues.
    These two steps require to be taken separately.  Paragraph 155  of  the
    determination in my judgement makes this particularly clear.   This  is
    linked to a related deficiency in  the  judgment,  namely  the  judge's
    failure to conduct the Razgar staged  approach  to  Article  8  of  the
    Convention.  The correct approach would,  in  principle,  have  avoided
    these errors.  The difficulty here is that the correct approach was not
    adopted and an error strewn path followed in consequence.
 8. A further error of law  infecting  the  determination  is  the  judge's
    failure to separate the claims made one from each other.  There was  an
    obligation to undertake a reasonable and adequate individual assessment
    of the claims but the judge has failed to do so.
 9. Finally, linked to the first of the errors which I have identified,  is
    the judge's treatment of the  issue  of  the  childrens'  education  in
    paragraph 136 and the availability of  medical  treatment  to  them  in
    Kuwait in paragraph 137.  The inadequate and incomplete  assessment  of
    these issues forms part and parcel of the first error of law diagnosed.


10. For this combination of reasons I conclude that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is unsustainable in law and must be set  aside.   I
    should make clear that I find no merit in the challenge  based  on  the
    time taken to write the  determination.   That  is  not  a  sustainable
    ground in this particular case.
Order
11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  appeal  is
    remitted to a differently constituted tribunal for a fresh hearing  and
    new decision.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                       Date: 25 January 2016
