
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07463/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2016                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr B. Hoshi, instructed by B.H.T. Immigration Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to   contempt   of   court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 27 June  1997.  This  appeal
    arises from the decision of the respondent to  refuse  the  appellant's
    application for asylum/ humanitarian protection and his ensuing  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") which was dismissed.

 2. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that in around March 2014,
    aged 16 years old and whilst  living  with  his  parents  in  Iran,  he
    started a relationship with a married  woman  (although  the  appellant
    thought she was divorced) which lasted for about four or  five  months.
    The  relationship  was  discovered  by  the  woman's  husband.  Shortly
    thereafter he was attacked and beaten and his family received  threats.
    The intelligence services then raided his house, taking his laptop  (on
    which were caricatures of religious  leaders)  and  a  Christian  bible
    given to him by a friend. Fearing  for  his  life,  he  escaped.  Since
    arriving  in  the  UK  he  has  attended  church   and   converted   to
    Christianity.

 3. The respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's  conversion  to
    Christianity was genuine and  described  it  as  an  opportunistic  act
    undertaken in the UK with the sole object of boosting his asylum claim.
    His account of being involved in an adulterous  affair,  and  of  being
    wanted by the authorities as a consequence, was also  not  accepted  as
    credible.

 4. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by FtT Judge  Fox.  The
    FtT did not  find  the  appellant's  account  of  the  affair  in  Iran
    credible. In particular, it did not accept as credible that the  affair
    would have carried on in the appellant's home or that his parents would
    have tolerated it. At paragraph [60] the FtT stated that the  appellant
    effectively claimed to have lived within a social and religious  vacuum
    separated from the reality of the country conditions which  prevail  in
    Iran. At paragraph [62] the FtT stated that "when considered within the
    prism of country conditions the appellant's claim is not credible".

 5. The FtT also did not find the appellant's evidence about his conversion
    to Christianity credible and identified a number of inconsistencies  in
    his evidence.

 6. The appellant sought to rely on a report from Ms Enayat  on  conditions
    in Iran in support of  his  case.  The  FtT  discussed  the  report  at
    paragraphs [76]-[80] of the decision and concluded that it  was  unable
    to rely on the report to support  the  appeal  "when  the  evidence  is
    considered in the round."

 7. The grounds of appeal submit, firstly, that the FtT erred by failing to
    consider the appellant's age in reaching findings  on  credibility.  He
    was sixteen when the key incidents took place and 17 when he arrived in
    the UK.

 8. The second ground of appeal is that the FtT, in its assessment  of  the
    appellant's affair, made findings based  on  speculation  and  inherent
    probability  which  were  contradicted  by   objective   evidence.   In
    particular, the FtT failed to give reasons for not accepting the expert
    evidence of Ms Enayat about the underlying  permissiveness  in  Iranian
    society which is inconsistent with the findings made by the FtT.

 9. The third ground alleges that the FtT failed to  properly  consider  Ms
    Enayat' expert evidence.  This  evidence,  it  is  argued,  was  highly
    relevant to the assessment of the appellant's credibility.

10. Before me, Mr Hoshi argued, in respect of the first  ground,  that  the
    FtT, although it recognised the appellant's age, did not consider if  a
    child sensitive approach was  required  and  failed  to  show  how  the
    appellant's age impacted the findings.

11. In respect of the second ground, Mr Hoshi submitted that the FtT made a
    series of  assertions  about  the  implausibility  of  the  appellant's
    behaviour on the basis of its inconsistency with  Iranian  values  that
    were not consistent with the evidence before it in the form of a report
    from the well respected expert Ms Enayat. Moreover, he  submitted  that
    the FtT, at paragraphs [62] and [63], relied on a document titled "Iran
    Country of Origin Report, September 2013" even though that document was
    not part of the evidence before it.  Referring  to  AM  (fair  hearing)
    Sudan [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC), he argued that the  FtT  had  undertaken
    inappropriate independent research and it was unfair for the FtT to not
    put the parties on notice that this report would be relied on.

12. Regarding the third ground of appeal, Mr  Hoshi  reiterated  the  point
    made in the grounds that the FtT had  not  properly  explained  why  Ms
    Enayat's report was not accepted.

13. Mr Whitwell argued that  the  FtT  was  clearly  aware  and  took  into
    consideration  the  appellant's  age.  It  had  specifically  disavowed
    reliance on the screening interview of the appellant on the basis  that
    he was under 18 and not accompanied by an appropriate adult.  Read as a
    whole, it is apparent the FtT had  in  mind  the  appellant's  age  and
    maturity.

14. Regarding the second and third grounds, Mr Whitwell accepted  that  the
    Country of Origin report was not referred to in the Reasons for Refusal
    letter but argued that it is a publicly available  document  and  falls
    within the principle of judicial notice.

15. In respect of Ms Enayat's report, he submitted that the report does  no
    more than describe what is plausible and that it was  for  the  FtT  to
    determine credibility, not Ms Enayat.

Consideration

16. At paragraphs [62] and [63] of the  decision  the  FtT  referred  to  a
    document titled: "Iran Country of Origin Report,  September  2013".  It
    made specific references to paragraphs within that report (9.05 onwards
    and 19.19) and cited the report in support of its  findings  about  the
    credibility  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's  account  was   not
    consistent with objective evidence of conditions in Iran as set out  in
    the report.

17. It was common ground between the  parties  that  this  report  was  not
    mentioned in the  respondent's  refusal  letter  and  was  not  in  the
    evidence before the FtT. Mr Hoshi commented that it is not available on
    the respondent's website.

18. As stated in AM (fair hearing) Sudan, it is not for a judge to assemble
    evidence. Inter alia, the headnote to that case states:

         If a judge is cognisant of  something  conceivably  material  which
         does not form part of either party's case, this must be brought  to
         the attention of the parties at the earliest possible stage,  which
         duty could in principle extend beyond the hearing date.

19. In my view, the FtT made an error of law by relying on  a  report  that
    was not raised by, referred to, or part of the case  of,  either  party
    without first bringing the report to the attention of the  parties  and
    giving them an opportunity to make submissions in relation to  it.  The
    error was material because it is  clear  from  the  decision  that  the
    content of the report played a part in shaping the FtT's opinion as  to
    the credibility of the  appellant's  account  when  considered  in  the
    context of the prevailing conditions in Iran. The  consequence  of  the
    FtT relying on a report without first bringing it to the  attention  of
    the parties is that the hearing was not a fair one  and  therefore,  in
    accordance with Section  7.2(a)  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement, the decision should be set aside and remitted to the FtT  to
    be remade afresh.

Decision

 a. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside in its  entirety  and  the  appeal
    heard afresh.

 b. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    before a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Fox.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 23 February 2016              |

