
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07531/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 28th January 2016                     |             4th February 2016       |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mrs andrean bailey
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Bobb, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and  Mrs  Bailey
    as "the appellant".

 2. The appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom  in  May  2000  on  a
    visit visa.  She subsequently applied for leave to remain as a student.
     This was refused and she appealed.  That appeal was  dismissed  on  17
    August 2007 at which point she became appeal rights exhausted.   On  15
    March 2010 she made a further application for leave to  remain  outside
    the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  (the  "Rules").   That
    application was refused and she was  served  with  a  Form  IS.151A  in
    February 2011.  She then made an application  for  discretionary  leave
    based upon her Article 8 rights which was  refused  in  June  2011.   A
    further application was made and  refused  on  8 August  2014.   On  3
    September 2014 she was detained pending her  removal.   She  then  made
    further submissions and lodged a judicial review.  On 24 September 2014
    she was released from detention and granted  temporary  admission.   In
    October 2014 she then made a claim for asylum.   That  application  was
    refused.

 3. The  appellant  appealed.   Not  only  did  she  rely  on  a  need  for
    international protection under both  the  Refugee  Convention  and  the
    European Convention on Human Rights but also on Article  8  grounds  in
    relation to her private and family life.

 4. Her appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N M Paul  on  2
    November 2015.   On  18  November  2015  he  promulgated  his  decision
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds but allowing it  on
    human rights grounds.  That being with reference to Article 8.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal and in a  decision  dated  8
    December 2015  permission  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Parkes.  His reasons for so doing were:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against  a  decision
             of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Paul  promulgated  on  18
             November 2015  whereby  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
             Secretary of State's decision was allowed.  The application is
             in time and is admitted.

         2.   The Judge found that the Appellant's evidence relating to  the
             circumstances of her son's death  vague  and  incredible,  the
             circumstances of his death were speculative and there  was  no
             substance to the claim of risk on return.  The  Appellant  did
             not succeed under the Immigration Rules but did under  article
             8 and section 55 of the 2009 Act.

         3.   The grounds argue that the Judge erred in the assessment  made
             outside the rules.  The Appellant's daughter and granddaughter
             are both Jamaican nationals with LLTR who could follow her  to
             Jamaica if they wished.  The  evidence  was  that  the  mother
             played a significantly more active role than the Appellant  in
             the child's life.  It is also argued that given the number  of
             adverse findings the Judge had not engaged with  section  117B
             meaningfully.

         4.   Given that the Judge found that the Appellant's  evidence  was
             not reliable and there were a number of  factors  against  her
             including  accessing  NHS  resources  to  which  she  had   no
             entitlement and her lengthy  time  in  the  UK  in  precarious
             circumstances and limited role in her grandchild's life it  is
             arguable that it was not open to the Judge to  find  that  the
             best interests of the  child  required  the  presence  of  the
             Appellant to the  extent  that  the  public  interest  in  the
             enforcement of immigration control was overridden.

         5.   The grounds are arguable and permission to appeal is granted."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me.

 7. Mr Clarke relied upon the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  in
    particular the failure of the judge to engage with the fact  that  were
    the appellant to be removed from the United  Kingdom  it  was  for  her
    daughter and granddaughter to decide if they wished to  follow  her  to
    Jamaica in order to continue their family  life.   There  would  be  no
    interference with the family's Article 8 rights without, as  here,  the
    judge making a finding that  the  daughter  and  granddaughter  of  the
    appellant could not return to  Jamaica.   Finding  that  returning  the
    appellant to  Jamaica  is  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    family's Article 8 rights is not one that can be sustained.  The  judge
    has attached inappropriate weight to various aspects  of  the  evidence
    including when coming to findings in relation to the role played in the
    everyday life of the appellant's granddaughter by her mother.  Likewise
    he has erred in the weight attached to the findings of  an  independent
    social worker's report.  The judge has failed to deal with this  expert
    evidence in the round when looking at the totality of  the  appellant's
    claim.  Moreover, given the adverse credibility findings of  the  judge
    combined with the oral evidence that was recorded, the judge was  under
    a duty to treat  the  independent  social  worker's  report  with  some
    caution.  That he failed to do.  Beyond that  there  is  a  failure  to
    engage with Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002.  The judge had failed to explain why the appellant's family  life
    should outweigh the public interest in protecting the public purse.

 8. Mr Bobb argued that this was a well reasoned decision where  the  judge
    had taken into account all aspects of the appellant's claim and carried
    out the required balancing exercise.  The grounds of appeal  failed  to
    take account of  several  issues  including  that  of  the  appellant's
    funding as described by the judge in his decision at paragraph 39.   It
    is clear and implicit that he  has  had  in  mind  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.   The  judge  concluded
    that the appellant's granddaughter had no real connection with Jamaica.
      Any  inconsistencies  in  relation  to  the  oral  evidence  and  the
    independent social worker's report do not  go  to  the  "heart  of  the
    judge's decision".  This is  a  family  that  has  lived  together  for
    fifteen years and just because the appellant's mother was registered at
    the General Practitioner and school as the prime carer of her  daughter
    is not inconsistent with the role that the appellant has played in  her
    granddaughter's life.  It is clear from the decision that the judge had
    adopted the findings of the independent social worker's report which he
    was entitled so to do.

 9.  During  the  course  of  his  submissions  Mr  Clarke  handed  up  the
    authorities of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387  (IAC)  and  JL  (Medical
    reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) which I have taken
    into account.

10. I am satisfied that the judge has materially erred.  It  was  incumbent
    upon him to carry out a two stage approach when looking at Article 8 by
    firstly considering the Immigration Rules  and  in  the  event  of  the
    appeal failing thereunder to conduct a balancing exercise outside those
    Rules  guided  by  Section  117A  to  D  (where  applicable)   of   the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum   Act   2002   and   Article   8
    jurisprudence.   Following  SS  (Congo)   there   must   be   something
    "compelling" about a claim for it  to  succeed  on  Article  8  grounds
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The judge here has materially erred  in
    failing to engage with the totality of  the  issues  that  fell  to  be
    decided.  No finding has been  made  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    daughter and  granddaughter  being  able  to  return  to  Jamaica,  the
    consideration of the independent social worker's report is in isolation
    to the balance of the evidence and  has  not  been  considered  in  the
    round.  Accordingly inappropriate  weight  has  been  attached  to  it.
    There is a lack of reasoning as to why such weight was placed upon  the
    independent social worker's report and the evidence has  not  been  set
    into the context of the adverse credibility  findings  that  the  judge
    made.  Beyond that there is a failure to engage with  Section  117  and
    the public interests requirements therein contained.

11. In light of my finding that a material error of law exists within  this
    decision for the above-mentioned  reasons  both  representatives  asked
    that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the  Article
    8 issue alone to be considered de novo.  Mr Clarke argued  that  there
    had been a failure to make findings in relation to various  aspects  of
    the Article 8 claim and hence this was the  appropriate  approach.   Mr
    Bobb was in agreement.

12. On my own analysis that is how the appeal should proceed.  I find  that
    the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains  errors  of  law  in
    relation to its Article 8 analysis and that that aspect  alone  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision has to be set  aside  for  consideration
    afresh.  The balance of the judge's findings in relation to  all  other
    issues in this appeal is not disturbed.

Notice of Decision

13.  The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for Article 8 alone to be
    dealt with afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement  7(2)(b)  before
    any judge aside from Judge N M Paul.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Dated:  1 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


