
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07905/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 November 2013                        |On 4 December 2013         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                  MR A S M
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr R Jesurum of
           counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr P Nath a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born  on  1  January
      1994. He has been given permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge  O'Garro  ("the  FTTJ")  who  dismissed  his
      appeal against the respondent's decision of 9 August 2012 to refuse to
      vary his leave to enter the UK.


   2. The appellant entered the UK illegally. He claimed asylum on 27  March
      2008.  He  claimed  to  fear  persecution  from  the  authorities   in
      Afghanistan because of his father's involvement with the  Taliban.  He
      also feared the Taliban because they would forcibly recruit him.


   3. The appellant's application was refused on 15 September  2008  with  a
      right of appeal. However, he did not appeal.  On  28  September  2008,
      because he was not yet an adult and there were no  adequate  reception
      facilities if  he  was  to  return  to  Afghanistan,  he  was  granted
      discretionary leave. On 22 June 2011 the appellant applied for further
      leave which led to the  decision  under  appeal.  The  appellant  then
      appealed and his appeal was heard by a First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  who
      allowed his  appeal.  The  respondent  applied  for  and  was  granted
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The Upper  Tribunal  found
      that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law and set aside  the
      decision directing that  the  appeal  be  reheard  in  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal. It was in these circumstances that the  appeal  came  before
      the FTTJ on 6 August 2003.


   4. At that hearing both parties were represented,  the  appellant  by  Mr
      Jesurum, who appears before me.  The  FTTJ  heard  evidence  from  the
      appellant through an interpreter. Whilst the respondent had not  found
      the appellant's claims to be credible the FTTJ accepted core  elements
      of the appellant's claim. She accepted that his father fought with the
      Taliban and that the Taliban may have attempted to  recruit  him.  The
      latter finding is addressed in the grounds of appeal and  there  is  a
      challenge as to whether it is sufficiently  clear.  The  FTTJ,  whilst
      accepting that the appellant left Afghanistan because of his fear that
      he would be harmed by the Taliban, said that she  needed  to  consider
      whether he would be at risk on return to Afghanistan at  the  date  of
      the hearing. She found that, whilst he left Afghanistan because of his
      fear that he would be harmed by the Taliban, it was  not  likely  that
      there would now be attempts to force him to join the Taliban. He would
      not  be  at  risk  from  the  authorities  because  of  his   father's
      involvement with the Taliban. His fears were subjective and if he  was
      returned to Afghanistan these would subside as would his  anxiety  and
      panic attacks. He had not been disadvantaged  because  the  respondent
      had not tried to trace his family. If he was to return there would  be
      a  reasonable  likelihood  that  through  the  word-of-mouth  networks
      available in Afghanistan he would be able to reunite with some members
      of his extended family.


   5. The FTTJ found that the appellant did not have a well founded fear  of
      persecution, was not entitled to humanitarian protection and that  his
      human rights would not be infringed if he was returned. She  dismissed
      the appeal.


   6. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to  appeal  by  a
      judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. The five grounds  of  appeal  submit
      that the FTTJ erred in law. Firstly, by  stating  that  there  was  no
      objective evidence to support the expert evidence  from  Dr  Giustozzi
      that being a family member  of  a  Taliban  insurgent  would  lead  to
      detention by the  authorities.  Secondly,  by  failing  to  apply  the
      principles in Rashid, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 744 because, if the  appellant
      was at risk  of  forced  recruitment  and  entitled  to  international
      protection in 2008  this  was  powerfully  relevant  to  fairness  and
      proportionality if he was now denied the protection to  which  he  was
      then entitled. Thirdly, the respondent's failure to attempt  to  trace
      the appellant's family and the FTTJ's conclusion  that  this  had  not
      prejudiced the appellant ignored key evidence and the four years  that
      had been  lost.  Fourthly,  that  she  lacked  the  necessary  medical
      expertise and it was not  open  to  the  FTTJ  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant's subjective fear and panic attacks would  diminish  on  his
      return to Afghanistan. Fifthly,  that  the  FTTJ  failed  properly  to
      analyse  the  Article  8  grounds  in  the  light  of  the  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence regardless of the position under the Immigration Rules.


   7. Mr Jesurum informed me  that  those  representing  the  appellant  had
      obtained a supplementary report from Dr Giustozzi and the  psychiatric
      report from Dr Paul Foster. Neither of these was before the  FTTJ  and
      he accepted that they were not relevant to the question of whether the
      FTTJ erred in law. If her decision was set aside  there  would  be  an
      application to admit this evidence. There is no new material before me
      apart from the cases of KA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 ,
      EU (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  32  and  MF  (Nigeria)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192  (08
      October 2013).


   8. Mr Jesurum relied on the grounds of appeal, submitting that no part of
      the appellant's claim had been rejected although  some  findings  were
      unclear and other necessary  findings  were  absent.  The  finding  in
      paragraph 41 as to whether there had been attempts by the  Taliban  to
      recruit the appellant  was  unclear.  Whilst  the  appellant  did  not
      dispute the conclusion that  he  was  no  longer  at  risk  of  forced
      recruitment by the Taliban, the question was relevant  to  whether  he
      was at risk when he arrived in this country and  therefore,  following
      Rashid principles, whether it would  be  unfair  not  take  this  into
      account when making a decision now.


   9. Mr Jesurum submitted that the expert report from Dr  Giustozzi  showed
      that there was an informal network mechanism in Afghanistan that would
      result in his being identified as the son of a  Taliban  fighter.  The
      Afghan police arrested people on an arbitrary rather than  a  rational
      basis. In reply to my question, Mr Jesurum accepted that there was  no
      explicit statement in the background material that the police arrested
      people to bring pressure  to  bear  on  their  relatives.  The  FTTJ's
      finding in paragraph 43 that the appellant would be of no interest  to
      the authorities on return to Afghanistan was overly optimistic and not
      a rational finding in the light of the evidence.


  10. As to the respondent's duty to try and trace the appellant's relatives
      in Afghanistan, Mr Jesurum submitted that even if the  appellant  made
      efforts to trace them with  the  assistance  of  social  services  and
      through the Red Cross and the Red Crescent, the delays he  encountered
      might not have been encountered by the  respondent  if  she  had  made
      enquiries as soon as the appellant made himself known in this country.


  11. There was no medical report before the FTTJ but a letter from the  NHS
      backed up by the social services report. The NHS letter  did  not  say
      that the opinions were based on what the appellant had said. The  FTTJ
      was not qualified to make any psychiatric diagnosis.


  12. In relation to the Article 8 grounds Mr  Jesurum  submitted  that  the
      authorities relied on and referred to in the  determination  had  been
      overtaken by the judgement of the Court of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria).
      This  provided  guidance  although,  unlike  this  case,  it   was   a
      deportation appeal. In reply to my question, Mr Jesurum accepted  that
      the grounds of appeal did not set out what factors  were  relevant  to
      consideration of the Article 8 grounds  outside  the  new  Immigration
      Rules and how these might have led the FTTJ to a different conclusion.
      His submissions did not fill this gap in the grounds  except  for  the
      argument that they might have been  relevant  to  the  application  of
      Rashid principles.


  13. Mr Nath asked for and I gave him an adjournment to read the  documents
      which were not in his file. He had the first appeal decision  but  not
      the one now under appeal. After the adjournment he said  that  he  was
      ready to proceed. He relied on the refusal letter of  9  August  2012.
      The appellant accepted that he would not now  be  at  risk  of  forced
      recruitment at the hands of the Taliban. Taking paragraphs 41  and  46
      together it was sufficiently clear that the FTTJ had  found  that  the
      Taliban had attempted to recruit the appellant. This left the question
      of whether he would be at risk because  of  his  father's  involvement
      with the Taliban. There was nothing in Dr Giustozzi's report  to  show
      that family members of those involved with the Taliban were at risk.


  14. The appellant's evidence was that he started  to  try  and  trace  his
      family in 2008 and social services became involved in  2009.  The  Red
      Cross were persuaded to try and assist in 2012 and had not  been  able
      to find the appellant's uncle or other  members  of  the  family.  Any
      suggestion that the respondent might have been able to do  better  was
      speculative. There was no evidence to support this.  The  letter  from
      the NHS  was  not  a  proper  medical  report  and  the  FTTJ  reached
      conclusions on the appellant's condition which were open to her.


  15. In relation to the Article 8 human rights grounds, Mr  Nath  submitted
      that the earlier authorities had been overtaken by  MF  (Nigeria).  It
      was not always necessary to carry out a second stage assessment of the
      Article 8 grounds outside the current Immigration Rules. The appellant
      had not shown that even if this had been done it would have  made  any
      difference. I was asked to uphold the determination.


  16. In his reply Mr Jesurum submitted that the primary risk on return  for
      the appellant was  his  father's  involvement  with  the  Taliban.  He
      highlighted the relevant paragraphs in Dr Guistozzi's report.  Nothing
      absolved the respondent from her  failure  to  attempt  to  trace  the
      appellant's family. In relation to the medical evidence the FTTJ  said
      that the appellant's condition  was  due  to  his  immigration  status
      whereas the NHS letter said only that this was a factor.  In  relation
      to the Article 8 grounds Mr Jesurum emphasised that  this  was  not  a
      removal case.


  17. I reserved my determination.


  18. In the first ground of appeal it is argued that the  FTTJ  erred  when
      she  said  that  there  was  no  objective  evidence  to  support   Dr
      Guistozzi's conclusion  that  being  a  family  member  of  a  Taliban
      insurgent would lead to detention. The grounds are unhelpful  in  that
      they do not identify the passages in the COIR report which is said  to
      be replete with evidence of arbitrary detention and widespread use  of
      torture. In any event, even if the statement is correct, it  does  not
      link arbitrary detention and torture to a child's father's involvement
      with the Taliban. Paragraph 16 of Dr Guistozzi's  report  relating  to
      the practice of arresting relatives in order  to  force  fugitives  to
      hand themselves over or prisoners  to  confess  does  not  assist  the
      appellant where his father is dead and there is no indication that the
      authorities are still looking for him. In his submissions  Mr  Jesurum
      referred to further passages in paragraph 6 of Dr Guistozzi's  report.
      This part of his opinion assumes that the authorities would  be  aware
      or become aware that the appellant's father fought for the Taliban and
      that as a result he would be  "highly  suspect".  But  this  does  not
      address the question of what "useful information" the appellant  might
      have as he was a child when he left Afghanistan and has  been  out  of
      the country since 2008. I find that the reasons given by the  FTTJ  in
      paragraph 43 pay sufficient regard to Dr Guistozzi's  opinions.  These
      opinions do not support a conclusion that the appellant is  likely  to
      be arrested as a consequence of  his  father's  involvement  with  the
      Taliban either because of particular interest in him or as part  of  a
      more general roundup.


  19. As to the second ground of appeal, whilst I accept that the passage in
      paragraph 41 which reads; "it cannot be ruled out that the Taliban may
      have attempted to recruit the appellant as he claims" is  not  on  its
      own as clear a finding as would  be  desirable  I  find  that  another
      passage in the determination and the tenor  of  the  FTTJ's  reasoning
      indicate that she did accept to  the  low  asylum  standard  that  the
      Taliban attempted to recruit the appellant. The clearest passage which
      leads me to this conclusion is in paragraph 46 where  the  FTTJ  says;
      "although I am prepared to accept that the appellant left  Afghanistan
      because of his fear that he would be harmed by the Taliban".


  20. I find that the application of Rashid  principles  relied  on  in  the
      third ground of appeal does  not  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
      appellant would have been entitled to international protection when he
      arrived  in  this  country  in   early   2008,   that   fairness   and
      proportionality require that this be taken into account now or that it
      was conspicuously unfair to deny him now  what  he  should  have  been
      given then. The question of whether he was entitled  to  international
      protection in 2008 must have been addressed at  the  time  because  he
      claimed asylum which was refused on 15 September 2008 and  ,  although
      he had a right of appeal, he did not appeal. That would have been  the
      best time to address whether he was at risk because of  the  Taliban's
      attempt to recruit him. The assessment would have to have been made in
      the light of the country evidence and perhaps expert evidence  of  the
      position at that time.  Attempted  recruitment  two  or  three  months
      before the appellant left Afghanistan does not on its own mean that he
      was entitled to international protection. The grounds  did  not  argue
      that the Secretary of State did not follow any relevant policy at that
      time.


  21. As to tracing in the third ground of appeal, the FTTJ  concluded  that
      the fact that the respondent did not attempt to trace the  appellant's
      relatives  in  Afghanistan  had  not  resulted  in  any   disadvantage
      (paragraph 52). I find that even if the appellant did provide  contact
      details on arrival and the respondent made no attempt  to  trace,  the
      argument that the respondent might have succeeded where the appellant,
      social services, the Red Cross and the Red Crescent failed is no  more
      than speculation.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  respondent  has
      available to her channels which were not explored at  the  appellant's
      behest or that if she had attempted to trace in early 2008  she  would
      have had any success as opposed to the lack of success experienced  by
      the appellant and social services largely because the  Red  Cross  did
      not make enquiries until 2012.


  22. In relation to the fourth ground of appeal,  internal  relocation  and
      panic attacks the appellant relies on a letter from  the  Central  the
      North West London NHS Foundation Trust  dated  25  August  2011  which
      addresses a referral of the appellant by his social  worker  after  he
      complained of "episodes of  breathlessness,  tightness  of  chest  and
      dizziness followed by palpitation and fear that he's  going  to  die".
      When he was taken to hospital he was told that everything was  normal.
      The appellant said  that  he  had  "general  anxiety  about  his  life
      including immigration status but he did not think that it  is  related
      to the panic attacks". The author of the letter, a "Speciality  Doctor
      in Child and Adolescent Psychiatry" concluded that  he  was  suffering
      from classic symptoms of panic disorder. No medication  was  required.
      Crucially, the appellant himself did not think that his panic  attacks
      were related to his immigration status and neither he nor  the  doctor
      said anything about what might happen to his mental or physical health
      if he had to return to Afghanistan. I can find nothing in this  letter
      to  support  the  statement  in  paragraph  56  that  the  appellant's
      condition  "is  due  to  his  uncertain  immigration  status  and  his
      subjective fear of what he  might  encounter  if  he  is  returned  to
      Afghanistan". However, this is an error  without  consequence  because
      the letter contained no conclusion or opinion as to the effect on  the
      appellant of having to return to Afghanistan. As to the criticism that
      the FTTJ erred in describing the letter as a  medical  report  I  find
      that this was no error. Whilst it is in the form of a letter it  reads
      as a medical report and was given by a doctor apparently qualified  to
      express an opinion.


  23. As to  the  fifth  and  last  ground  of  appeal,  the  FTTJ  properly
      considered the Article 8 grounds under the Immigration  Rules.  As  to
      whether she  should  have  gone  on  to  consider  the  grounds  under
      jurisprudence outside the Immigration Rules she said that she was  not
      satisfied that it was necessary to  do  so  because  "the  Immigration
      Rules and the learning on Article 8 are in harmony. I  find  that  the
      appellant's circumstances raise no exceptional factors." MF  (Nigeria)
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  (08
      October 2013) was not available when the FTTJ heard the appeal and her
      determination was promulgated but both representatives accept that  it
      is now the relevant law encapsulating earlier jurisprudence  to  which
      the FTTJ was referred. Whilst MF (Nigeria) was a deportation case  the
      principles are relevant to this appeal. The Court of  Appeal  referred
      to "exceptional circumstances".  The  FTTJ  referred  to  "exceptional
      factors". I  can  see  no  material  difference.  Furthermore,  whilst
      paragraph 14 of the appellant's grounds refers to factors which I have
      already addressed and concluded do not amount to errors of law,  there
      is nothing in the grounds or  in  submissions  to  indicate  that  any
      second stage test outside the Immigration Rules could or  should  have
      led the FTTJ to a different conclusion.


  24. The FTTJ made an anonymity direction which should continue in force. I
      make an order under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of  any  matter
      likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant.


  25.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  her
      determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 13 November 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

