

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07991/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent          |
|On 20 May 2014                                |On 9 June 2014              |
|                                              |                            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     LD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration and Asylum
                    Practitioners Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 9 February 1988.
       She arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 July 2013 and claimed asylum.
       On 9 August 2013, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
      claim for asylum and humanitarian protection and under  Article  8  of
      the ECHR.  On that date the Secretary of State also made a decision to
      remove the appellant by way of directions to Albania.

   3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated  on  22  November  2013,  Judge  Whiting   dismissed   the
      appellant's appeal on all grounds.   First,  he  did  not  accept  the
      appellant's account that she had been the subject of domestic violence
      by her husband in Albania to be credible.  Secondly, in any event,  in
      the course of making  that  finding,  Judge  Whiting  found  that  the
      Albanian State provided a sufficiency of protection to the victims  of
      domestic violence.  Thirdly, the  Judge  found  that  the  appellant's
      removal (together with her two children) to Albania would  not  breach
      Article 8 of the ECHR.

   4. The appellant's application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal was initially  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
      Warren L Grant) on  13  December  2013.   The  appellant  renewed  her
      application to the Upper Tribunal and on 16  January  2014  the  Upper
      Tribunal (UTJ Grubb) granted the appellant permission to appeal.   The
      grant of appeal identified the following arguable  errors  of  law  in
      Judge Whiting's determination:

           "The Grounds identify arguable errors of law.   First,  although
           the  Judge  gives  a  number  of  reasons  for   rejecting   the
           appellant's account  of  leaving  Albania  because  of  domestic
           violence, some of those reasons  are  arguably  inadequate.   In
           particular,  the  alleged  inconsistency  in   the   appellant's
           evidence referred to in  para  30  of  the  determination  about
           whether her aunt paid only for her flight to France or also  her
           journey  from  France  to  the  UK,  arguably  does  not  exist.
           Further, the Judge arguably was wrong to expect the appellant to
           obtain  supporting  evidence  from  her  family  in  Albania  of
           domestic violence.  Even if these errors  are  established,  the
           extent to which  they  were  material  to  the  Judge's  adverse
           credibility finding will need exploration.  Secondly, in finding
           that the Albanian state provides a  sufficiency  of  protection,
           the Judge arguably  failed  to  consider  the  totality  of  the
           background evidence about the situation of victims  of  domestic
           violence.  Finally, it  was  arguably  speculation  whether  the
           appellant's child could obtain the necessary Hep  B  vaccination
           in Albania.  It does not appear that the evidence  relied  upon,
           even if sufficient, was raised at the hearing."

   5. Thus, the appeal came before me.

   6. At the outset of the  hearing,  I  raised  with  Mr  Richards  and  Mr
      McGarvey who respectively represented the Secretary of State  and  the
      appellant whether there was any  objection  to  my  dealing  with  the
      substantive hearing as I was the Upper Tribunal Judge who had  granted
      permission to appeal.  Both indicated that they had no objection to my
      dealing with the appeal.

The Appellant's Claim

   7. The appellant married her husband in Albania on 13 August 2009.  Their
      first child was born in August 2010.  In February/March,  her  husband
      lost his job and started drinking heavily.  As  a  result,  he  became
      violent towards the appellant,  including  throwing  objects  at  her,
      kicking and punching  her  and  committing  incidents  of  rape.   The
      appellant attempted to leave her husband by going  to  stay  with  her
      elderly relatives but was  followed  there  by  her  husband  and  she
      returned to her home when he threatened her and their child.  The same
      thing occurred in September 2012.

   8. In December 2012, the appellant  became  pregnant  with  their  second
      child.   The  appellant's  husband  discovered  she  was  pregnant  in
      March/April 2013.  He did not believe that the child was  his  and  he
      did not want her to keep it.  He  beat  her  and  kicked  her  in  the
      stomach and she suffered cuts and bruises but he would not  allow  her
      to go to hospital for medical attention.  The appellant's evidence was
      that her husband would lock her in the bathroom for hours  at  a  time
      and would not allow her to leave the house.  However, she would  sneak
      out in order to obtain the medicine she needed for her  pregnancy  and
      on one occasion when her husband found out he dragged her by the  hair
      the length of the hallway.  As a result of that event,  the  appellant
      decided that she had to leave Albania.

   9. She left on 14 July 2013 and came to the UK.   Their  second  son  was
      born in the UK on 4 October 2013.  The appellant's evidence  was  that
      she did not feel able to report these matters to  the  police  because
      her husband was an acquaintance of the local police chief  and  was  a
      cousin of the member of the Albanian Parliament.

The Submissions

  10. Mr McGarvey relied upon the  grounds  of  appeal.  He  challenged  the
      Judge's adverse credibility finding.  First,  he  submitted  that  the
      Judge had wrongly  identified  an  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's
      evidence at para 30 of his determination in relation  to  whether  the
      appellant's aunt had organised and paid for her trip to the UK or  had
      only given the appellant money to leave Albania.  Mr McGarvey referred
      me to the appellant's asylum interview at B11 of the  bundle  and  her
      answers at questions 51-56 and to her witness statement at para 21  at
      page 5  of  the  appeal  bundle.   He  submitted  that  there  was  no
      inconsistency in what the appellant had said:   she  had  simply  said
      that her aunt had helped her to leave Albania.  Mr McGarvey  submitted
      that, in any event, this inconsistency did not go to the core  of  the
      appellant's account; it was a peripheral matter and, therefore, it was
      insufficient to doubt the appellant's credibility.

  11. Secondly, Mr McGarvey submitted that the Judge had  wrongly  required,
      in effect, corroborative evidence to support  the  appellant's  claim.
      In para 43, the Judge took into account that the appellant's family in
      Albania had not provided any "independent supporting evidence" and  in
      para 46 had taken into account that the appellant's brother  (who  was
      in the UK) had not given evidence.  Mr  McGarvey  submitted  that  the
      Judge's reliance upon TK Burundi v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ  40  was  an
      error.  There, Mr McGarvey submitted that Thomas LJ (as he  then  was)
      was concerned in [21] of his judgment with the absence of "independent
      supporting evidence" which was "available from persons subject to this
      jurisdiction.  Mr McGarvey submitted  that  could  not  apply  to  the
      appellant's family in Albania. As regards the appellant's brother,  Mr
      McGarvey initially submitted that his evidence could  not  be  of  any
      assistance as he had left Albania to come to the UK in 2001 before the
      relevant event that gave rise to the appellant's claim.   However,  in
      his reply Mr McGarvey accepted that the appellant's brother's evidence
      might have been relevant to the appellant's account that she  and  her
      family had fallen out with  her  brother  over  her  marriage  to  her
      husband.

  12. Thirdly, Mr McGarvey submitted that the Judge had been wrong  to  take
      into  account  that  the  background  evidence  demonstrated  that   a
      sufficiency of protection was available to  the  victims  of  domestic
      violence in Albania.  Mr McGarvey submitted that the Judge had  failed
      to take into account, in reaching that  finding,  all  the  background
      evidence which had been submitted by the appellant at  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's hearing.  He referred me to a bundle of objective  evidence
      and, in particular, at page 60 a "Schedule of Essential Pages" and the
      UKBA's Operational Guidance  Note  (May  2013)  which,  he  submitted,
      demonstrated that domestic violence was  widespread  and  the  Albania
      authorities did little to prevent it or prosecute those who  committed
      it.

  13. Fourthly, in relation to the appellant's Article 8 claim, Mr  McGarvey
      submitted  that  the  Judge  had  speculated  at  para  78  that   the
      appellant's second child would be able to receive in Albania the final
      Hepatitis B vaccination when 12 months old which was necessary as  the
      appellant is Hepatitis B positive.  He  submitted  that  the  evidence
      referred to by the Judge in para 25.35 of the Country  of  Information
      Report on Albania (March 2012) was not sufficient  to  find  that  the
      vaccination would be available.  Mr McGarvey suggested  that,  in  any
      event, that finding was inconsistent with the Judge's  view  expressed
      at para 65 that the appellant had come to the UK for the sole  purpose
      of accessing the NHS.  That was also a finding, Mr McGarvey submitted,
      the Judge was not entitled to make on the evidence.

  14. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards  submitted  that  the
      Judge's factual findings were sound.

  15. First, Mr Richards submitted that the evidence did support the Judge's
      finding of an inconsistency in paragraph 30 in relation  to  the  role
      that the appellant's aunt played in her departure from Albania.

  16. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that the Judge was  entitled  to  take
      into account at paragraph 43 and at paragraph 46  that  the  appellant
      had provided no supporting evidence from her family in Albania and her
      brother had not given evidence at her appeal hearing.  In  any  event,
      he submitted that the Judge had not rejected the  appellant's  account
      principally on the basis of the absence of corroborative evidence even
      if it was possibly a factor. There were a number of factors taken into
      account by the Judge and even if an error could be identified, it  was
      not material to his decision.

  17. Thirdly, in any event, Mr Richards submitted that any  error  was  not
      material.  At paragraph 64 the Judge noted that there were a number of
      inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence and, in his determination,
      gave a number of  reasons  for  rejecting  her  credibility  including
      reliance  upon  s.8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
      Claimants, etc) Act 2004 because the appellant had not claimed  asylum
      in France; that the appellant had said that she  and  her  family  had
      fallen out with her brother in 2006/7 as a result of his  disagreement
      with her marrying her husband when she had not married until 2009; and
      that she had said that her husband's violence began after he lost  his
      job  which  she  had  inconsistently  said   to   have   occurred   in
      February/March 2012 and September/October 2012.  Further, Mr  Richards
      submitted that the Judge was entitled to take  into  account  both  in
      assessing the appellant's credibility and  in  dismissing  the  appeal
      (even if she  were  believed)  that  the  Albanian  authorities  would
      provide a sufficiency of protection.  Mr Richards submitted  that  was
      the conclusion in the country guidance  case  of  DM  (Sufficiency  of
      Protection - PSG - Women - Domestic Violence) Albania CG [2004]  UKIAT
      0059 which the  Judge  referred  to  in  paragraph  32.   Mr  Richards
      submitted that the Judge was entitled  to  find  that  there  was  not
      "cogent" evidence to depart from the  country  guidance  case.      Mr
      Richards submitted that that  finding  was  sufficient  in  itself  to
      dismiss the appellant's appeal.  In addition, he  submitted  that  the
      Judge was  entitled  to  take  that  into  account  in  assessing  the
      plausibility of  the  appellant's  claim  that  she  was  in  need  of
      protection from domestic abuse and violence (at para 40).

  18. Fourthly, in relation to the  Judge's  finding  that  the  appellant's
      second child would  be  able  to  access  the  final  vaccination  for
      Hepatitis B in Albania, Mr Richards pointed out that  this  issue  had
      not been raised by the Secretary  of  State  nor  in  the  appellant's
      skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal. As a consequence, no
      evidence had been produced  that  the  required  vaccination  was  not
      available.  The Judge had considered the COI Report which  was  before
      him, and Mr Richards submitted that it was not an error of law for the
      Judge to rely on the only evidence that was before him and to conclude
      that it had not been established that the  vaccination  would  not  be
      available.

  19. Mr Richards invited me, therefore, to dismiss the appellant's  appeal.



Discussion

  20. In my judgement there is  substance  in  a  number  of  Mr  McGarvey's
      submissions.

  21.  First,  the  Judge  wrongly  identified  an  inconsistency   in   the
      appellant's evidence at para 30  of  his  determination.   There,  the
      Judge said this:

           "The appellant's written statement records that her aunt  helped
           her to get the money to leave Albania.  The  appellant's  travel
           by air from Albania to Italy  and  on  to  France  is  elsewhere
           recorded.  During her asylum interview  the  appellant  recorded
           that her maternal aunt and uncle organised everything  for  her,
           and even paid for the ticket.   There is a  clear  inconsistency
           in the appellant's record that the appellant's travel from Vlore
           to Tirana and on to France via Rome and on to the  UK  with  the
           assistance of unknown people whom she met in France and who took
           her from the airport by minivan to a location where  she  stayed
           overnight before being taken to London the following day,  which
           had been organised without her knowledge and  paid  for  by  her
           aunt and the record that her aunt only helped her to  get  money
           to leave Albania.  I note that inconsistency."

  22.  In  her  asylum  interview,  at  questions  51-56  (at  B11  of   the
      respondent's bundle) the appellant dealt with the circumstances of her
      leaving Albania.  At question 56 she said this:

           "I didn't organise this trip, it was my mother's sister and  her
           husband that  organised  everything.   They  even  paid  for  my
           ticket. I didn't know the people were going to  bring  me  here,
           hence why they had a piece of paper with my name on  it  at  the
           airport."

  23. That passage follows the appellant's explanation that she travelled by
      coach to Tirana where she boarded an aircraft  for  France  travelling
      via Rome.  In France she met up with people who put her in a lorry and
      took her to the UK.

  24. In her witness statement (at para 21) the appellant said:

           "I decided to escape from [my husband] and I knew that I had  to
           leave Albania because it was not possible  to  live  in  another
           part of the country.  My aunt helped me  to  get  the  money  to
           leave Albania."

  25. The appellant then described her journey by coach to Tirana and her
      aeroplane flight to France via Rome before boarding a lorry to the UK.



  26. In  my  judgement,  there  is  no  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's
      evidence. In truth, her account at interview is simply a  little  more
      detailed than her account in her witness statement.  She did  not  say
      in her witness statement, as the  Judge  states  in  para  30  of  his
      determination, that "her aunt only helped her to get  money  to  leave
      Albania." (my emphasis)  She simply stated that her aunt helped her to
      get money to leave Albania.  She does not say in her witness statement
      who organised the trip.   Whilst  that  is  an  omission,  it  is  not
      inconsistent with what is said in her asylum interview which,  on  its
      face, is plainly more detailed.  The Judge was wrong, in my  view,  to
      treat the appellant's evidence as inconsistent on this  issue  and  to
      take it into account when assessing her credibility.  I do not  accept
      Mr McGarvey's submission that it was wrong to take this  into  account
      as a matter peripheral to the core of the appellant's claim, if it had
      been an inconsistency it  remained  relevant  as  to  the  appellant's
      credibility on all matters.  The point is however well made that it is
      not in fact properly seen as an inconsistency.

  27. Secondly, the Judge fell into  error  by  calling  into  question  the
      credibility of the appellant's evidence  because  of  the  absence  of
      "independent  supporting  evidence  from  the  appellant's  family  in
      Albania".  In doing so, the Judge relied upon [21] of the judgment  of
      Thomas LJ in TK (Burundi).  At [21], Thomas LJ said this:

           "The circumstances of this case  in  my  view  demonstrate  that
           independent supporting evidence which is available from  persons
           subject to this jurisdiction be provided wherever  possible  and
           the need for an Immigration Judge to adopt a  cautious  approach
           to the evidence of an  appellant  where  independent  supporting
           evidence, as it was in this case, is  readily  available  within
           this jurisdiction, but not provided.  It follows  that  where  a
           Judge in assessing credibility relies on the fact that there  is
           no  independent  supporting  evidence  where  there  should   be
           supporting evidence and there is no  credible  account  for  its
           absence commits no error of law when he relies on that fact  for
           rejecting the account of an appellant."

  28. In TK (Burundi), the appellant had relied upon Article 8 of  the  ECHR
      and his relationship with a partner who was the mother  of  his  child
      who was in the UK.  The appellant did not produce  any  evidence  from
      his partner.  The Judge took that into account  in  assessing  whether
      there was any family life established between the  appellant  and  his
      partner and child.  It was in that context that  Thomas  LJ  concluded
      that, absent a credible  explanation,  the  failure  to  produce  that
      supporting evidence was "a very strong pointer that the account  being
      given is not credible" (see [20]).  In other  words,  the  failure  to
      call (or rely upon) independent supporting evidence  which  should  be
      available to an appellant is a factor which a  Judge  is  entitled  to
      take into account in assessing an appellant's credibility.

  29. In this appeal,  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  brother  in  all
      probability fell into that category. I do  not  accept  Mr  McGarvey's
      initial submission that the evidence of the appellant's brother was of
      little relevance as he had left Albania in 2001 before the  events  of
      domestic violence upon  which  the  appellant  relied.   That,  as  Mr
      McGarvey recognised in his reply, would not be true in relation to the
      appellant's evidence that she and her family had fallen out  with  her
      brother over her marriage.  The appellant's brother could, of  course,
      have given first hand evidence of that.  Nevertheless, in relation  to
      "independent supporting evidence" from  the  appellant's  parents  and
      family in Albania, there  are  greater  difficulties.   First,  it  is
      difficult  to  see  how  that  could  be  described  as  "independent"
      evidence.  It is not suggested, for example, by the Judge  that  there
      were supporting documents which  the  appellant's  family  could  have
      produced on her behalf to corroborate her account.  It was, of course,
      always part of the appellant's case that  she  had  not  reported  the
      incidents of domestic violence to the police because of her  husband's
      connection with a local police chief and an Albanian MP.  It was  also
      not evidence which was available from within this jurisdiction.  It is
      difficult to see, therefore, what the Judge had in mind  in  paragraph
      43 as "independent" supporting evidence  falling  within  Thomas  LJ's
      category in TK (Burundi)  available  "from  persons  subject  to  this
      jurisdiction".

  30. To that extent, I accept Mr McGarvey's submission that  the  Judge  in
      paragraph 43 was  wrong  to  take  into  account  when  assessing  the
      appellant's credibility that she  had  failed  to  provide  supporting
      evidence from her family in Albania.

  31. Thirdly, there is the issue of sufficiency of protection.  Mr Richards
      relied upon the country guidance case of DM.  In that case, the IAT in
      2004 concluded that an individual would be provided a "sufficiency  of
      protection"  by  the  Albania  state  from  her   previously   violent
      boyfriend.    Country guidance cases must be followed by Judges of the
      First-tier Tribunal unless there are "very strong grounds supported by
      cogent evidence" to justify a different conclusion (see  SG  (Iraq)  v
      SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [47]  per  Stanley  Burnton  LJ).   Simply
      because a decision is 10 years old does not mean  that  it  loses  its
      jurisprudential status.  However, as a  matter  of  practicality,  the
      passage of time may result in more (or more significant) changes in  a
      country's circumstances and certainly a greater weight  of  subsequent
      background than in a case where a CG decision  is  of  recent  origin.
      The  need  to  scrutinise  anxiously  and  carefully  the   subsequent
      background material is of heightened importance in such cases.

  32. At paras 34-35, the Judge referred to the well-known case  of  Horvath
      [2001] 1 AC 489 and passages cited in the COI Report to which  he  was
      referred as follows:

             34. "The respondent recorded in the refusal letter  that  there
                 existed  in  Albania  a  sufficiency  of   protection   for
                 individuals  suffering  domestic   violence,   noting   the
                 availability of a system of protection of  citizens  and  a
                 reasonable willingness by the state to operate  it,  citing
                 that test to be found in Horvath [2000] UKHL 37 and further
                 noting attempts made to  combat  the  problem  of  domestic
                 violence by the Domestic Violence Law of 2007, resulting in
                 a significant increase  in  reports  of  domestic  violence
                 being made to the  authorities  in  Albania.   The  Amnesty
                 International report cited  in  the  Albanian  COI  records
                 that:  This  civil  law  represented  significant  progress
                 towards the prevention of family violence  in  Albania,  in
                 particular   through   the   introduction   of   protection
                 orders....

             35. The USSD Report 2010 cited within the Albanian COI records:
                 NGOs operated four shelters for battered women  in  Tirana,
                 Vlora, Elbasan, and Gjirokaster.  During the year NGOs  and
                 police noted a substantial increase in reports of  domestic
                 violence, primarily due to increased awareness of  services
                 and more trust in the police."

  33. At para 38 the Judge  also  noted,  again  from  the  refusal  letter,
      evidence concerning  support  for  victims  of  domestic  violence  as
      follows:

           "Further noted in  the  refusal  letter  was  the  provision  of
           assistance to victims of domestic violence in  Albania  operated
           by non-profit organisations, as recorded  in  the  Albanian  COI
           2012.  That the appellant had failed to engage  the  authorities
           or non-government organisations in Albania who may have provided
           assistance and the presence of a system  of  protection  with  a
           reasonable willingness by the  state  to  operate  was  said  to
           further undermine her claim in accordance  with  Horvath  [2000]
           UKHL 37."

  34. At paragraph 40 the Judge concluded:

           "There  is  demonstrated  by  the  background  evidence  to   be
           protection available to victims of domestic violence.  I do  not
           find the reasons advanced by the appellant for failing  to  seek
           such protection plausible away from  her  home  area  plausible.
           That finding undermines the credibility of  her  claim  to  have
           suffered from domestic abuse and violence from which she  needed
           protection."

  35. There is no doubt that the appellant relied upon, and in the essential
      reading  document  referred  the  Judge  to,  a  substantial  body  of
      objective evidence contained within the 66  page  "Objective  Bundle".
      The Judge made no reference to any of this material  in  reaching  his
      finding on sufficiency of protection.  Although he referred  to  a  US
      State Department Report on Human Rights Practices in Albania (at  para
      35 of his determination) that is to  the  report  for  the  year  2010
      whilst the more recent report for 2012 was extracted at pages  1-4  of
      the bundle.  That report provided support to the appellant's case that
      the Albanian authorities would not be willing or able to  provide  her
      with a sufficiency of protection from the domestic violence which  she
      claimed her husband caused her.  At pages 3-4 of the bundle the   USSD
      Report for 2012 is in the following terms:

           "Women

           Rape and Domestic Violence:  The criminal code  penalizes  rape,
           including  spousal  rape.   However,  victims  rarely   reported
           spousal abuse, and officials did not prosecute spousal  rape  in
           practice.  The concept of spousal rape was not well-established,
           and authorities and the public  often  did  not  consider  it  a
           crime.  The law imposes penalties for rape and assault depending
           on the age of the victim.  For rape of an adult, the prison term
           is three to 10 years; for rape of an adolescent between the ages
           of 14 and 18, the term is five to 15 years; and, for rape  of  a
           child under the age of 14, the term is seven to 15 years.

           Domestic  violence  against  women,  including  spousal   abuse,
           remained a serious problem.  During  the  year  police  reported
           cases of domestic violence and the government pressed charges in
           some cases.   The  Department  of  Equal  Opportunities  at  the
           Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, and Equal Opportunity  covers
           women's issues, including domestic violence.

           The government shelter for domestic violence victims  in  Tirana
           assisted 35 women and 37 children from April 2011 to  May  2012.
           However, the shelter could not accept victims  without  a  court
           order.  After inspecting the shelter  in  April,  the  ombudsman
           found  cases  of  repeated  abuse  by  shelter  director  Dodona
           Kalopshi, who  had  reportedly  verbally  degraded  victims  and
           forced some children to sleep on the  floor.   Police  routinely
           denied protection to women  housed  at  the  shelter  when  they
           travelled to court appearances or  to  take  their  children  to
           school, leaving some to be assaulted  by  their  husbands  while
           they were away from the shelter.  After growing criticism and  a
           television expose,  the  government  removed  Kaloshi  from  the
           position several weeks after the ombudsman's findings.

           At the end of 2011, NGOs operated 15 shelters to protect victims
           from domestic violence, six  in  Tirana  and  nine  outside  the
           capital.  Police reported they received 2,349 domestic violence-
           related complaints through their emergency  hotline.   According
           to government  figures  in  2011,  there  were  2,526  cases  of
           domestic violence reported during the year, compared with  2,181
           in 2011.  Police often did not have the training or capacity  to
           deal with domestic violence cases."

  36. There is evidence here that domestic violence including spousal  abuse
      remained a "serious problem"; of an inadequacy of government  shelters
      for victims of domestic  violence  and  of  a  lack  of  training  and
      capacity in the police to deal with domestic violence cases.

  37. The OGN for May 2013 also notes at para 3.13.2 that:

           "Domestic  violence  against  women,  including  spousal  abuse,
           remained a serious problem in 2012."

  38. The OGN goes on to deal with the availability of  government  shelters
      for victims of domestic violence and notes that a shelter  "could  not
      accept victims without a court order" (see para  3.13.13).   The  OGN,
      borrowing from the USSD Report for 2012, repeats the statement that:

           "The police often do not have the training or capacity  to  deal
           with domestic violence cases".

  39. Further, at para 3.13.4, referring to the Amnesty International Report
      2012, it is stated that:

           "Domestic violence remained widespread and  shelters  for  women
           survivors were insufficient to meet the demand."

  40. At para 3.13.6, the OGN continues:

           "The physical  integrity  of  Albanian  women  was  inadequately
           protected.  The  Albanian  constitution  does  not  contain  any
           specific provisions  regarding  domestic  abuse,  spousal  rape,
           sexual harassment or female genital mutilation, although Albania
           law does condemn these practices.   Violence  against  women  is
           very prevalent in Albania as many men, especially in  the  north
           east, still adhere to a traditional code  known  as  Kanun  that
           establishes the authority of men over women."

  41. At para 3.13.7,  quoting  a  March  2011  report  of  the  UN  Special
      Rapporteur, the OGN continues that:

           "Domestic violence was widespread in Albania and  sudden  deaths
           have resulted."

  42. At para 3.13.8, the OGN continues:

           The  criminal  code  penalizes  rape,  including  spousal  rape.
           However, victims rarely reported spousal abuse, and officials do
           not prosecute spousal rape in practice.  The concept of  spousal
           rape was not well-established, and authorities  and  the  public
           often do not consider it a crime."

  43. Mr McGarvey also relies upon the  COI  Report  on  Albania  (30  March
      2012), the relevant passages of which are set out in  the  appellant's
      objective bundle at pages 9-18.

  44. At para 24.27, quoting a Freedom in the World  2011  Report,  the  COI
      states that:

           "Domestic violence, which it is believed to  be  widespread,  is
           rarely punished by the authorities."

  45. At para 24.29, the COI Report deals with  the  Domestic  Violence  Law
      passed in 2006 - which was referred to by the Judge in para 34 of  his
      determination set out above.  This law introduced  measures  "for  the
      prevention of  violence  within  families".   It  defines  the  public
      institutions which are competent to deal with  domestic  violence  and
      also  grants  the  magistracy  the  power  to  put   "protective   and
      restrictive measures" into action in favour of the victims and against
      the perpetrators  of  domestic  violence.   However,  citing  the  OBC
      Report, the COI Report states:

           "An effective application of this law remains a difficult hurdle
           to get over.   Starting  from  completing  and  drawing  up  the
           relevant laws and setting up a budget sufficient enough  to  put
           them into practice.  It is a  matter  of  fact  that  since  the
           beginning of 2011 there have been more cases of women killed yet
           no guilty person in prison.  This clearly shows that the law  is
           not working.  The system and network of help finds obstacles  in
           its way when trying to apply the law, plus there are no shelters
           for victims where they can start to rebuild their lives."

  46. It then continues that:

           "As shown by both official statistics as well as  data  gathered
           by independent world associations, cases of violence are in fact
           on the increase."

  47. It was incumbent upon  the  Judge,  in  my  judgement,  to  take  this
      background material into account in  assessing  whether  the  Albanian
      State provided a "sufficiency of protection" to the appellant.   Given
      that DM was decided (now) 10 years ago, it was particularly  important
      to assess the evidence in order to determine whether there  were  very
      strong grounds supported by "cogent evidence" for reaching a different
      conclusion.  In failing to do so, the Judge fell into error.  I do not
      say that the Judge was bound to reach a  finding  in  the  appellant's
      favour on 'sufficiency of protection'.  It is his  error  of  approach
      that I have  identified.   That  has  two  consequences.   First,  the
      Judge's error undermined his reasoning in para 40 of the determination
      that the credibility of  the  appellant's  claim  that  she  had  been
      subject to domestic abuse and violence was not  plausible  given  that
      protection was available to victims of domestic violence.  Further, it
      is a complete answer to Mr Richards' submission that any error made by
      the Judge in assessing  credibility  could  not  be  material  to  the
      Judge's decision as the appeal was bound to be dismissed on the  basis
      that the appellant had failed  to  establish  that  there  was  not  a
      'sufficiency of protection' in Albania.

  48. In relation to materiality, Mr Richards also submitted that any errors
      relied upon by the appellant were not material as the Judge had  given
      a  number  of  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  credibility,
      including reliance on s.8 of the 2004 Act and other inconsistencies in
      her evidence (see above at para 17).  Mr Richards invited me  to  read
      the determination as a whole and conclude that overall  it  was  sound
      and should stand.

  49. Whilst I accept that the errors I have identified were  not  the  only
      reasons given for the Judge's adverse credibility finding,  I  am  not
      confident reading the Judge's determination overall that without these
      errors he would necessarily have reached the same  conclusion  on  the
      appellant's credibility.  In those circumstances, I am satisfied  that
      the errors were material to the Judge's  adverse  credibility  finding
      and his decision to dismiss the  appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
      protection grounds and under Article 3 of the ECHR.

  50. For these reasons, therefore, that decision cannot stand and I set  it
      aside.  It was accepted by both representatives that, if that  was  my
      conclusion, the appropriate disposal was that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing de novo.

  51. That then leaves Mr McGarvey's submission in relation to  the  Judge's
      finding under Article 8 that it had  not  been  established  that  the
      Hepatitis B vaccination would not  be  available  to  the  appellant's
      second child if she returned to Albania. That vaccination is due  when
      the appellant's child is 12 months old which will  be  in  October  of
      this year.  It is likely, therefore, given that the  appeal  is  being
      remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  that  this  matter  will  become
      academic as the appellant will, most likely, remain in  the  UK  until
      that time.

  52. Nevertheless, the issue remains in relation to the Judge determination
      and whether his decision in respect of Article  8  should  stand.   At
      para 78, the Judge relied upon the Albanian COI Report as follows:

           "...At the date of the hearing only one vaccination will  remain
           outstanding.   The  Albanian  COI  report  records  that   Viral
           Hepatitis is still a problem for the country and records that: -
           There   has   been   good   progress   regarding    communicable
           diseases....Paediatricians, epidemiologists  and  other  doctors
           throughout the country have been trained on new  vaccines.   The
           programme  and  database  of  web  based   national   electronic
           vaccination registry has been  prepared,  including  vaccination
           coverage; stock management and adverse reactions.  There  is  no
           evidence before me that demonstrates  appropriate  vaccine  will
           not be available for [A] as he reaches the age of 12 months."

  53. It was for the appellant to establish that the vaccination  would  not
      be available in Albania.  The grounds, and Mr  McGarvey  in  his  oral
      submissions, argue that the Judge's finding is inconsistent  with  the
      background material he cites at paragraphs 54-59 of his  determination
      which shows that the healthcare system in Albania  is  generally  very
      poor.  The grounds also argue that the evidence was  not  provided  to
      the appellant's representative at the hearing.  Mr McGarvey  accepted,
      however, that the Judge had the COI Report before him at the  hearing.
      From that report, the Judge cited a passage at para 25.35 at  para  78
      of his determination.  The Judge was undoubtedly  correct  that  there
      was no evidence that the vaccine was not available.  The  Judge  cited
      the only relevant material before him on the availability of vaccines.
       In my judgment, it was open to the Judge to find that  the  appellant
      had failed to establish that the required vaccine for the  appellant's
      second child would not be available in Albania.  It was not raised  in
      the appellant's skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal dated
      13 November 2103.  In other words, the appellant does not seem to have
      asserted (and introduced any evidence) that  the  position  was  other
      than that found by the Judge in para  78.   No  other  aspect  of  the
      Judge's reasons leading him to dismiss the appeal under Article 8  has
      been challenged and, as a consequence,  his  decision  in  respect  of
      Article 8 stands.

Decision

  54. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss
      the appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection grounds  and
      under Article 3 of the ECHR involved the making of an  error  of  law.
      That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

  55.  The First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under
      Article 8 stands.

  56. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  remake  the
      decision in respect of the asylum and humanitarian protection  grounds
      and under Article 3.  None of the Judge's findings relevant  to  those
      matters shall stand.  In that regard, the appeal should be reheard  de
      novo by a Judge other than Judge Whiting.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















