
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07894/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 11 April 2016                             |On 14 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     AH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah, Counsel, instructed by Vine Street
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 19 September 2014  refusing  to  grant  her
    further leave to remain and to remove her to Ethiopia.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born in 1947. She entered the UK
    as a visitor on 22 September 2013 and claimed asylum on 11 April  2014.
    She claimed that she was at risk from the authorities because  she  had
    permitted her home to be used for OLF meetings and young men  had  been
    arrested there whilst she was in the UK. The authorities  were  looking
    for her. Two  of  her  brothers  and  a  nephew  had  been  killed  for
    supporting the OLF.

 4. The respondent rejected the claim on credibility grounds.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 14 December 2015. She was represented by  Ms
    Appiah. The judge found that the appellant was  not  credible  for  the
    reasons given at paragraphs 37-47 of the  decision.  Her  evidence  was
    inconsistent, vague and in parts implausible.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 12 February  2012  on  the
    basis that various adverse findings were based upon  issues  that  were
    never put to the appellant and there was a lack of explanation for  the
    description of the appellant's evidence as vague and  hesitant.  Within
    30 minutes of the conclusion of the hearing concerns were raised  about
    the interpreter. The judge was  aware  of  the  concerns  but  took  no
    action.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
    29 February 2016 on the basis that all grounds were arguable.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

 9. Ms Fijiwala conceded at the outset that the  respondent  accepted  that
    questions were not put to the appellant and there was  a  note  in  the
    respondent's record of hearing that concerns had been raised  regarding
    the interpreter. It was not clear how that had been taken into account.

10. I find that the grounds of appeal are made  out.  The  judge  has  made
    adverse findings of fact regarding matters that were never put  to  the
    appellant and there is no adequate reasoning for  the  characterisation
    of the appellant's evidence as vague, hesitant and implausible. That is
    a material error of law.

11. There is a note in  the  record  of  proceedings  about  the  complaint
    regarding the interpreter, which arose  from  the  observation  of  the
    hearing by a friend of the appellant who was fluent in English and  the
    appellant's language. There is no evidence  that  the  judge  took  any
    action and there is no reference to the issue in the decision.  It  was
    incumbent upon the judge to make a decision regarding  the  interpreter
    issue and to explain that decision in the decision. The failure  to  do
    so is a further material error of law.

12. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

13. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

14. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.




Signed   [pic]                      Date 11 April 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
