
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07034/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th August 2015                  |On 8th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     RM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss. A Nizami;  Instructed by Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke;  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Burns promulgated on 29th April 2015, in which she  dismissed  an
    appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of State to  refuse  an
    application for asylum.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on  19th  February  1979.
    He arrived in the UK on 17th December 2008 with valid  entry  clearance
    as a student.  He claimed asylum on 16th April 2014 after his visa  had
    expired, and following his arrest on suspicion of fraud on  15th  April
    2014.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim on 28th August 2014
    for the reasons that are set out in the 'Detailed Reasons for  Refusal'
    that are attached to a letter of the same date.

 4. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was heard on 14th April 2015.

 5. The appellant appeals with permission,  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the Tribunal"), which  dismissed  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent, dated 28th August  2014.
    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge MacDonald on 22nd May 2015, and in doing so he noted;

         "The grounds of application contend that there  was  a  fundamental
         procedural failing by the judge in that the appeal was dismissed on
         matters not put to the appellant in evidence.  [2]

         As the grounds point out the judge found that the appellant had not
         provided an adequate explanation for the delay in providing a  copy
         of the deed but the issue of the delay was not raised by either the
         judge or the presenting  officer  in  the  hearing.  Other  similar
         points were made.  [3]

         The grounds of application do not make  clear  whether  the  points
         taken against the appellant by the judge were points  made  by  the
         Secretary of State in the reasons  for  refusal  letter  as  points
         taken there, would not necessarily have to be put to the  appellant
         at the hearing. However it seems to me that the  points  taken  may
         not be contained in the refusal letter.  As  such  the  grounds  do
         present a case of possible procedural unfairness and permission  to
         appeal is therefore granted.  [4]

 6. A written response was submitted on behalf of the respondent under  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The respondent opposes
    the appellant's appeal and in summary the respondent contends that  the
    Tribunal directed itself appropriately to the evidence,  and  that  the
    decision letter issued by the respondent on 28th  August  2014,  raised
    the concerns that the judge found lacked explanation, by the appellant.

 7. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not the  decision  of
    the Tribunal involved the making of a material error of law.

 8. The appellant contends that the decision of the Tribunal is vitiated by
    a  procedural  irregularity  that  is  capable  of  making  a  material
    difference to the outcome, or the fairness of the proceedings.  Broadly
    stated, the appellant submits that the Tribunal  reached  a  number  of
    crucial conclusions that were not put to the appellant  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge or the presenting officer during  the  hearing  and
    furthermore, they had not been raised by the respondent in the  refusal
    letter. The appellant submits that he therefore had no  opportunity  to
    respond to the matters that were of concern to the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and there was thus a procedural irregularity, or impropriety that
    constitutes an error of law.

    Background

 9. A brief summary of the basis of the appellant's claim for asylum is  to
    be found at [13] to [20] of the decision of  the  Tribunal.   Before  I
    turn to the findings made by the Tribunal and the matters  set  out  in
    the grounds of appeal, it is appropriate to set out what  was  said  by
    the respondent in the detailed  reasons  for  refusal  (Annex  A)  that
    accompanied the respondent's asylum decision dated 28th August 2014.

10. A summary of the appellant's claim and his fear  upon  return  together
    with a chronology of his immigration history is set out  at  paragraphs
    [1] to [12] of Annex A.   The  respondent  accepted  the  identity  and
    nationality of the appellant and then went on to consider the  material
    facts of his claim in the following way;

         "Consideration of the Material Facts of your claim

         21.      The material facts of your claim have  been  examined  and
             either rejected, accepted or they remain  unsubstantiated.  If
             any aspects of your claim are left in doubt  these  have  been
             considered in conjunction with Section 8 of the 2004 Treatment
             of claimants Act, 339L and 339N of the immigration rules.

         22.      The material facts of your claim are considered to be:

                . You owned an annex in Sri Lanka which was  raided  causing
                  an arrest warrant to be issued;

                . Your father was arrested in Sri Lanka.

         Not accepted - you owned an annex in Sri  Lanka  which  was  raided
         causing an arrest warrant to be issued.

         23.      It is not accepted that you owned an annex  in  Sri  Lanka
             which was raided causing an arrest warrant to be issued.

         24.      Firstly, it is considered concerning that  you  have  been
             unable to submit any documents to support your claim that  you
             owned an annex in Sri Lanka  (AIR  Q55).  This  is  concerning
             because  during  your   substantive   asylum   interview   you
             specifically state that you asked your  mother  to  send  your
             documents (AIR Q55). It is concerning that 2 months has passed
             since your interview and no  documents  have  been  submitted.
             Your inability to provide the documents which you  claim  have
             been requested has damaged the credibility of your claim  that
             you owned an annex in Sri Lanka.

         25.      In addition, it is noted that your problems began when you
             let your annex to a Tamil friend (AIR Q40). You state that you
             have known this friend since 2001 and you describe him  as  'a
             very close friend of mine' (AIR Q42).  You  described  him  as
             family to you,  especially  because  his  father,  mother  and
             younger brother also lived in the annex (AIR  Q43).  You  said
             that your friend could have the annex and then he  could  look
             after your parents when you travelled to  the  UK  (AIR  Q46).
             Your account that you  are  close  friends  with  a  Tamil  is
             inconsistent with the objective material below:

             ...

         26.      It is not considered credible that your family will  treat
             your Tamil friend as family,  especially  as  you  state  that
             prior to living in  your  annex  your  friend  was  living  in
             Colombo for more than 10 years (AIR Q96)- Therefore it is  not
             credible that your parents would accept your friend living  in
             the annex without any issues.  Your  inability  to  provide  a
             credible account has damaged the  credibility  of  your  claim
             that you owned an annex in Sri Lanka which was raided  causing
             an arrest warrant to be issued.

         27.      Finally, you state that your mother hired a  solicitor  to
             find out whether you have an arrest warrant  for  you  in  Sri
             Lanka, you specifically claim that your solicitor  found  that
             there is an arrest warrant for you in Sri Lanka  because  they
             believe that as the owner of the property you would have  been
             aware of what was happening in your property (AIR Q84). It  is
             considered concerning that despite knowing that  there  is  an
             arrest warrant  for  you,  you  specifically  stated  in  your
             screening interview that there are no arrest warrants for  you
             (SCR 5.2). It is reasonable to have expected you to be able to
             provide a coherent account regarding whether there has been an
             arrest warrant  against  you,  your  inability  to  provide  a
             consistent account has damaged the credibility of your account
             that your house was raided and now there is an arrest  warrant
             against you in Sri Lanka.

         28.      Therefore in light of the above considerations your  claim
             that you owned an annex in Sri Lanka which was raided  causing
             an arrest warrant to be issued has not been accepted.

         Not accepted - your father was arrested in Sri Lanka

         29.      It is not accepted that your father was  arrested  in  Sri
             Lanka.

         30.      Firstly, you specifically state that when  the  annex  was
             raided your mother was not arrested because they knew that she
             was not involved with the LTTE (AIR Q81). When you were  asked
             to explain why your father was arrested,  if  the  authorities
             did not think your mother was involved, you stated  that  they
             take the male first (AIR Q86).  The  authorities  would  think
             that you would come forward if your father was  detained  (AIR
             Q86). However it is not considered credible that  your  mother
             would be able to avoid detention, especially after your father
             had passed away and you had still not handed  yourself  in  to
             the authorities. When you  were  asked  to  explain  how  your
             mother was able  to  avoid  detention  you  stated  that  they
             arrested your father because they needed information but  they
             have this now (AIR Q121). However, this is  inconsistent  with
             your claim that you are of interest to the authorities. It  is
             not credible that your father would be arrested  in  the  hope
             that this would make you return to Sri Lanka yet  your  mother
             would not be arrested. Your inability to  provide  a  credible
             account has damaged the credibility of your  claim  that  your
             father was arrested in Sri Lanka.

         31.      In addition, you state that when your father was  arrested
             the authorities told your mother that he was going to be taken
             to the police station and then handed to the  CID  (AIR  Q88).
             Your mother was able to visit him 2-3 times in detention  (AIR
             Q97). This is inconsistent with the objective  material  below
             which states  that  families  are  often  not  informed.  Your
             inability to provide a  consistent  account  has  damaged  the
             credibility of your claim that your father was arrested in Sri
             Lanka.

             ...

         32.      Furthermore, you state that when your father was  detained
             he became very sick and he was  admitted  into  hospital  (AIR
             Q98). This is inconsistent with the objective material below.

             ...

         33.      It is not considered credible that your  father  would  be
             detained and tortured by the authorities and then taken to the
             hospital when he became sick.  Your  inability  to  provide  a
             credible  account  which  is  consistent  with  the  objective
             material has damaged the credibility of your claim  that  your
             father was arrested in Sri Lanka.

         34.      Therefore in light of the above considerations your  claim
             that your father was  arrested  in  Sri  Lanka  has  not  been
             accepted.

         ....

         Conclusions

         40.      As noted above the  following  material  aspects  of  your
             claim have been accepted:

                . Your nationality and identity.

         41.      The following aspects of your claim have been rejected:

                . You owned an annex in Sri Lanka which was  raided  causing
                  an arrest warrant to be issued;

                . Your father was arrested in Sri Lanka.

         ...

11. From any proper reading of the detailed  reasons  for  refusal,  it  is
    plain that the respondent challenged the credibility of the  appellant,
    and rejected the two core elements of  his  claim.  That  is,  (i)  the
    appellant owned an annex in Sri  Lanka  which  was  raided  causing  an
    arrest warrant to be  issued;  and  (ii)  the  appellant's  father  was
    arrested in Sri Lanka.

12. Although not before the respondent as the date  of  her  decision,  the
    appellant did provide a number of documents in support of his claim  at
    the hearing of his appeal. The evidence before the Tribunal  is  listed
    at paragraph [7] of its decision. The material documents relied upon by
    the appellant included  a  death  certificate  said  to  be  the  death
    certificate of the appellant's father, the Deeds to the Annexe, and  an
    arrest warrant and summons.  The Tribunal was invited by the respondent
    to consider the documents  in  light  of  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00438. [25]

13. Insofar as the death certificate is concerned,  the  Tribunal  accepted
    that it is proof that the Appellant's father died in hospital  on  21st
    December 2012. However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns found  that  it
    is not proof, to the lower standard, that Mr Siripala died as a  result
    of torture;  [29].  As to  remaining  documents,   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Burns found that the Deeds to  the  Annexe,  arrest  warrant  and
    summons, were not documents upon which reliance should be placed.  [30]
    to [39].

14. The decision of the Tribunal was to the  effect  that  the  appellant's
    account was  not  credible  and  the  Tribunal  did  not  consider  the
    appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution if he is  returned  to
    Sri Lanka. The appellant's humanitarian  protection,  and  ECHR  claims
    were not made out.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

15. The appellant attended the hearing and was represented by  Miss  Nizami
    of Counsel.  I first heard submissions from Miss Nizami and then  heard
    submissions from Mr Clarke. Mr Clarke submitted that there is no  error
    of law in the decision of the Tribunal.

16. Attached to the appellant's grounds of appeal, there are Counsels notes
    of the hearing before the Tribunal.   The notes  record  the  questions
    asked of the appellant, and the answers that he gave.  The  notes  were
    provided by Miss Nizami to establish that the appellant was  not  asked
    about the matters that lead to the findings made by  the  Tribunal.   I
    have carefully read those notes.

The Grounds of Appeal

17. I then turn to the grounds of appeal.  The appellant alleges procedural
    irregularity and or impropriety such as to constitute an error  of  law
    as identified in R(Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ  982.    Miss  Nizami  submits
    that the Tribunal reached a number of crucial conclusions that were not
    put to  the  appellant  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Burns  or  the
    Presenting Officer during the hearing of the  appeal,  and  furthermore
    they had not been raised in the  respondent's  refusal  letter.  It  is
    submitted that the appellant therefore had no opportunity to respond to
    the matters that were of concern to First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns.

18. It was not in issue between the parties that  procedural  fairness  can
    constitute an error of law. In MM -v- SSHD [2014] UKUT 00105, the Upper
    Tribunal, comprising of a panel presided  over  by  the  President,  Mr
    Justice McCloskey confirmed that where there is a defect or impropriety
    of a procedural nature in the proceedings at first instance,  this  may
    amount to a material error of law requiring the decision of  First-tier
    to be set aside.

19. Miss Nizami makes five particular criticisms as to the findings set out
    in the decision  of  the  Tribunal.    The  criticisms  all  concern  a
    procedural irregularity.   In each case the appellant submits  that  he
    was not given opportunity to answer concerns set out in the decision of
    the Tribunal, because they were neither put to  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing of the appeal, nor referred to by the respondent in her initial
    decision.  As the first three criticisms also  concern  the  Tribunal's
    assessment of the documentary evidence relied upon  by  the  appellant,
    those matters can be taken together.

20. First, Miss Nizami submits that the Tribunal finds that  the  appellant
    has not provided an adequate explanation for the delay in  providing  a
    copy of the deed [32] but the issue of the  delay  was  not  raised  by
    either First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns or the Presenting Officer at the
    hearing.  She submits that the appellant therefore had  no  opportunity
    to address the Judge's  concerns  about  the  delay  in  providing  the
    document which  are  set  out  in  paragraphs  [31]  and  [32]  of  the
    determination.

21. Second, Miss Nizami submits  that  concerns  that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Burns raises about the arrest warrant and the arrest summons  set
    out at paragraphs [35] to [38] of his decision, were not raised  during
    the hearing. Again, she submits that the appellant  was  not  given  an
    opportunity to answer the concerns about how the appellant's  solicitor
    managed to obtain a copy of the appellant's arrest warrant.

22. Miss Nizami's third criticism was that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Burns
    finds at paragraph [37] that  "I am not provided with an explanation as
    to the delay in the arrest warrant being sent to the  appellant",  when
    the appellant was not asked to provide an explanation for the delay.

23. In Tanveer Ahmed -v- SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00439, the Upper  Tribunal  held
    that in asylum  and  human  rights  cases,  it  is  for  an  individual
    applicant to show that a document on which he seeks  to  rely,  can  be
    relied on. The decision-maker should consider whether the  document  is
    one on which reliance should properly be placed after  looking  at  all
    the evidence as a whole.

24. It is clear from the extracts from the  detailed  reasons  for  refusal
    (Annex A) that accompanied the respondent's asylum decision dated  28th
    August 2014 that I have set out at paragraph 10 of this decision,  that
    the respondent rejected the appellant's account that he owned an  annex
    in Sri Lanka which was raided causing an arrest warrant  to  be  issued
    and that his father was arrested in Sri Lanka.  The  reasons  given  by
    the respondent for rejecting those aspects of the  appellant's  account
    are set out in paragraphs [23] to [33] of the decision letter.

25. The respondent considered the  appellant's  inability  to  provide  the
    documents which he had claimed to have been requested from his  mother,
    damaged the credibility of his claim that he  owned  an  annex  in  Sri
    Lanka.  At the hearing before me, Miss Nazami  sensibly  accepted  that
    the appellant was aware prior to the hearing of  his  appeal  that  the
    delay in providing the documents would require explanation.   The  only
    explanation for that delay put forward by the appellant is set  out  at
    paragraph 9 of his witness  statement.   In  her  decision,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Burns states;

         "I am concerned by this delay. This is explained by  the  appellant
         at paragraph 9 in his statement that there had been a delay on  the
         part of a lawyer in Sri Lanka. The appellant does not elaborate. It
         is apparent from the face of the deed that it is dated on 27th June
         2000 so the appellant cannot be referring to a delay  in  the  deed
         being executed. The deed is written in English  and  thus  did  not
         require translation.   [31]

         The appellant has not provided an adequate explanation  as  to  the
         delay in providing a copy of the  deed,  particularly  because  his
         evidence at interview  was  that  the  deed  was  in  his  mother's
         possession prior to leaving for the UK. I cannot  conclude  that  I
         have been given any reasonable explanation for  the  delay  in  the
         provision of this document.  Assessing the evidence  in  the  round
         with regard to the deed for the Annex I am not satisfied that  this
         is a document on which reliance should be placed.  [32]"

26. Put simply, the appellant was aware that there was a concern about  the
    delay in providing a copy of the deed from the outset.  He put  forward
    the simplest of explanations, without any  elaboration.   The  Tribunal
    considered that explanation but it was found to  be  lacking.   It  was
    properly open to First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns to find that  she  was
    not satisfied that this is a  document  on  which  reliance  should  be
    placed.  There was no procedural  irregularity  or  impropriety  giving
    rise to any unfairness in reaching that decision.

27. It is equally clear from the extracts from  the  detailed  reasons  for
    refusal (Annex A) that accompanied the  respondent's  asylum  decision,
    that the respondent was concerned as to whether  there  was  an  arrest
    warrant for the appellant.  The respondent noted that  despite  knowing
    that there was an arrest warrant for him,  the  appellant  specifically
    stated in his screening interview that there was no arrest warrant  for
    him. The respondent considered it reasonable to expect the applicant to
    be able to provide a coherent account regarding whether there has  been
    an arrest warrant issued against the appellant, and that his  inability
    to provide a consistent account damaged the credibility of his  account
    that there is an arrest warrant against him in Sri Lanka.

28. The appellant had provided an inconsistent account of  whether  or  not
    there was an arrest warrant for him.  During  the  screening  interview
    completed on 16th April  2014,  he  was  specifically  asked  "Are  you
    subject to an arrest warrant or wanted by any law enforcement authority
    for an offence in any country?.  He answered "No"; (Q.5.2).  During the
    asylum  interview  completed  on  25th  June  2014,  the  following  is
    recorded;

         Q. 82    so was an arrest warrant given for you?

         A. my mother said she presumed there was an arrest warrant out  for
         me. So I told her to contact a solicitor to find out.

         Q.83     Which Solicitor?

         A. Nihal Fernando Liyanage

         Q.84     did the Solicitor find out if there was an arrest warrant?

         A. Yes

         Q.85     do you have documentary evidence of this arrest warrant

         A. No but I have asked my mother to send all documents to me

29. Miss Nizami submitted that none of the concerns that  are  set  out  in
    paragraphs [35] to [38] of  the  Tribunal's  decision  were  ventilated
    during the hearing  of  the  appeal.  She  submitted  that  unless  the
    appellant has had an opportunity to put his case, it may not be easy to
    know what case he could or would  have  put  forward,  if  he  had  the
    chance.

30. Mr Clarke on behalf of  the  respondent  submitted  that  the  Tribunal
    clearly considered the documents and the letter  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    lawyer against the background material and it was open to the  Tribunal
    to find that the warrant of arrest and summons are documents upon which
    reliance could not be placed. Mr Clarke, conceded  that  the  delay  in
    providing the arrest warrant and summons had not been previously raised
    by the respondent in her decision letter.

31. Criticism is made  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Burns  states  at
    paragraph [37] that he was not provided with  an  explanation  for  the
    delay in the arrest warrant being sent  to  the  appellant.  It  is  of
    course unsurprising that the arrest warrant and summons is not referred
    to in the respondent's detailed reasons  for  refusal.   The  documents
    were sent to the appellant on 18th of October 2014, almost  two  months
    after  the  respondent's  decision.   To  put  matters  into   context,
    paragraph [37] of the decision of the Tribunal must be read as a whole.
     The Tribunal stated;

         "Of greater concern are the delays in the appellant  obtaining  and
         disclosing these documents. The appellant says at paragraph  13  of
         his statement (page 4) that he asked his mother subsequent  to  his
         asylum interview to enquire whether there was  an  arrest  warrant.
         However in his asylum interview in response to question 82 he  says
         that he had already asked his mother to contact a solicitor to find
         out about whether there was an arrest warrant. At paragraph  13  of
         his statement he says that she found out that there was  an  arrest
         warrant "after a few days". If I accept  the  appellant's  evidence
         given at question 82 that his mother  had  already  been  asked  to
         enquire about the arrest warrant before 25th June 2014 and that she
         found out about it a "few days after" and it is said to be dated 28
         August 2012, I am not provided with an explanation as to the  delay
         in this being sent to the appellant (18th October 2014  page  33A).
         The importance of providing this document as  quickly  as  possible
         was clear to the appellant who in response to question one  of  his
         interview had said that he was getting documents from  his  mother.
         The respondent had requested that the documents be submitted within
         10 days at the interview on 25 June 2014.

32. It was for the appellant to show  that  the  documents  upon  which  he
    sought to rely, could be relied on. Whilst the specific  concerns  that
    are set out at paragraphs [35] to [38] may not have  been  put  to  the
    appellant, either by First-tier  Judge  Burns,  or  by  the  Presenting
    Officer in cross-examination, procedural fairness does  not  require  a
    Judge to put to an appellant, the concerns that the Tribunal has, as to
    the evidence before it.  The appellant was aware from  the  matters  at
    set out in the reasons for  refusal  (Annex  A)  that  accompanied  the
    respondent's asylum decision, that there was an issue as to whether  or
    not an arrest warrant had been issued.  The  Tribunal  was  obliged  to
    consider whether the documents  were  ones  on  which  reliance  should
    properly be placed, after looking at all the evidence as  a  whole  and
    did so, after carefully considering all of the evidence before it.  The
    Tribunal  carefully  considered  the  documents  relied  upon  by   the
    appellant against the background material and was plainly  entitled  to
    find that it was not satisfied that the warrant of arrest  and  summons
    are documents upon which reliance  should  be  placed.   There  was  no
    procedural irregularity or impropriety giving rise to any unfairness.

33. The fourth criticism that Miss Nizami makes  of  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal is that at paragraph [41], the Tribunal finds  that  the  "the
    Appellant does not explain why his parents needed looking after at all.
    He does not explain why his parents did not need looking after when  he
    first left Sri Lanka but did 12 months thereafter".  She  submits  that
    the appellant was not asked for an explanation during the  hearing.  In
    the grounds of appeal this extract from the decision of the Tribunal is
    described as a finding. The sentences relied upon by the appellant  are
    not findings, but concerns that the Tribunal had  as  to  the  evidence
    before it, and form part of the reasoning of the Tribunal.    However a
    careful reading of paragraphs [41] to [43]  of  the  decision  make  it
    plain that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Burns  carefully  considered  the
    appellant's evidence that  he  was  the  owner  of  an  annex  and  the
    relationship between the appellant and his  friend,  Karthink.   Having
    considered all of the evidence, the Tribunal found, at  paragraph  [43]
    that the evidence that the appellant gave that he rented the  annex  to
    Karthik so he could look after his parents is  not  plausible.  Such  a
    finding might be set aside as  an  error  of  law  on  the  grounds  of
    perversity, if it is  irrational  or  unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury
    sense, or  one  that  is  wholly  unsupported  by  the  evidence.   The
    Tribunal's finding at [43] was one that was open to it.  No part of the
    reasoning has been undermined in this appeal.

34. Finally, Miss Nizami submitted that it was procedurally unfair for  the
    Appellant not to be given the opportunity to explain  why  he  had  not
    claimed asylum when he spoke to his solicitors in December  2013.   The
    appellant's claim is misconceived. It is apparent from paragraphs  [35]
    to [39], of the detailed reasons for refusal (Annex A) that accompanied
    the respondent's asylum  decision  dated  28th  August  2014  that  the
    respondent considered that the appellant's failure to  make  an  asylum
    and human rights claim before being arrested, damaged  his  credibility
    under s8(6) Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimant's,  etc)  Act
    2004.  At paragraphs  [46]  to  [49]  of  its  decision,  the  Tribunal
    considered the delay in claiming asylum, and  in  the  absence  of  any
    explanation for the delay in making an asylum claim, it was open to the
    Tribunal to find, as it did, that the appellant has not made his  claim
    at the earliest possible time and has not demonstrated good reason  for
    not having done so.

Decision:

35. A careful reading of the determination fairly and as a whole  makes  it
    plain that the findings reached by the tribunal were properly  open  to
    it, on the evidence before it.  The findings reached are  not  vitiated
    by  any  procedural  unfairness   or   procedural   irregularity.    In
    considering whether any reliance  can  be  placed  upon  the  documents
    relied upon by the appellant, the Tribunal properly directed itself  as
    to the law and reached findings that were properly open to it.

36. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law affecting the outcome of the decision.

37. The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.  The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal, dismissing his appeal on  all
    grounds, shall stand.

38. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and that  direction
    shall continue to stand.


Signed:     Date:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
