

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07153/2013
                                                               AA/07154/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|on 9th September 2014                         |on 11th September 2014       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BW
                                     YA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mangion - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Jackson instructed by J McCarthy Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andonian,  promulgated  following  a
        hearing at Taylor House on 2 June 2014, in  which  he  allowed  the
        appeals of this husband-and-wife against the  direction  for  their
        removal to Afghanistan.


     2. The Secretary of State's grounds assert  the  Judge  erred  in  two
        respects; the first of  which  is  failing  to  adequately  provide
        reasons for accepting the credibility of the appellants account and
        failing to deal  with  the  assertion  that  their  credibility  is
        damaged by the failure to claim asylum in either  Spain  or  France
        where they spent substantial periods and,  secondly,  that  it  was
        argued that even  in  the  event  that  the  account  is  true  the
        appellants could safely relocated to Kabul.  The grounds allege the
        Judge failed to deal with this issue which is stated to be a  clear
        material error of law.


     3. The grounds of lack merit. The Judge clearly  considered  the  fact
        the appellants failed to claim asylum in Spain  or  France  and  in
        paragraph 15 of  the  determination  refers  to  the  Secretary  of
        State's opinion that this damaged their credibility.  A failure  to
        claim  asylum  at  the  earliest  opportunity  is  relevant  to  an
        assessment of  credibility  under  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
        Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 but it is settled
        law that it is not determinative. The key finding made by the Judge
        in paragraph 16 is that throughout this time they  were  under  the
        control of an agent and  therefore  had  no  opportunity  to  claim
        asylum elsewhere. Whilst this may be considered by  some  to  be  a
        generous finding if the appellants spent a considerable  period  of
        time in Spain or France it has not been shown  to  be  outside  the
        range of findings the Judge was entitled to make on  the  evidence.
        Even if such a finding was irrational the failure to  have  claimed
        asylum earlier  will  not,  in  itself,  be  determinative  of  the
        credibility issue.


     4. The Judge accepted that the appellants are from Afghanistan  rather
        than elsewhere  as  alleged  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  in
        paragraph 13, having referred to the burden of proof, stated:  "...
        I must also state here also as to their claim for asylum  which  on
        the lower standard I found to  be  well  founded.  They  both  gave
        evidence and their evidence corroborated what each one had said.  I
        also found them to be credible  witnesses".   As  the  account  was
        found to be true that is a good reason for accepting  it  as  being
        credible.


     5. The second ground regarding relocation fails to take account of the
        reasons why the Judge accepted that this is not  a  viable  option.
        The Judge accepted the evidence of the country expert who is of the
        opinion that the account the appellants had given about their  fear
        of returning to Afghanistan was plausible. In paragraph 23  of  his
        report the experts states:


     23.  In summary, it is my opinion that [BW] account of his  experiences
   in              Afghanistan  is  plausible  given  my  knowledge  of  the
   dynamics at             play at the  relevant  times.   No  part  of  his
   account  strikes  me  as                  inherently  unlikely.   If  his
   account is true, he is certainly likely to face             serious  harm
   (most likely honour killing) if he returns to Afghanistan            now.
    It  is  likely  that  his  entry  to  the  country  would  initially  go
   unnoticed,  but  as  soon  as  he  seeks  employment   or   accommodation
   the  family  will  be  aware  of  it;  and  they  would  then  have   the
   information necessary to go after him.


     6. The weight to be  given  to  the  evidence,  including  the  expert
        report, was a matter for the Judge. The Court of Appeal  have  made
        it abundantly clear that the Upper Tribunal must not interfere with
        findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal  unless  there  is  clear
        evidence of material legal error. In this case it  cannot  be  said
        that such error has  been  shown  to  exist  for,  based  upon  the
        acceptance of the credibility of the account and the country expert
        report, the conclusions reached by the Judge are within  the  range
        of permissible findings he was entitled to make on the evidence. No
        legal error material to the decision to allow the appeal  has  been
        made out.


Decision

     7. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     8. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10th September 2014












