
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07086/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 September 2015                 |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                        MR MOHAMED ABDULLAHI MOHAMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Anyene, instructed by Calices Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                       ERROR OF LAW DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Somalia, born on 10 September 1986.  He
arrived in the United Kingdom on 14th  April  2014  and  claimed  asylum  on
arrival. The basis of his claim was that he had  been  running  a  cosmetics
shop in Hamar Weyne and had been targeted by Al Shabaab  as  a  result.  His
application for asylum and leave to enter was refused by the  Respondent  on
29th August 2014 and an appeal was lodged against this decision.

2.    The appeal came before First Tier Tribunal  Judge  S.  J.  Clarke  for
hearing on 11th November 2014. In a decision dated 20th  November  2014,  he
dismissed the appeal. An application for permission to appeal was  made  one
day out of time on the basis that the Judge's credibility findings were  not
based on proper evidence, in particular relating to the shop  ownership  and
no sufficient consideration was given  to  the  country  situation  and  the
Judge failed to take  into  account  relevant  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
evidence: [26], [28], [29] and [30] of the  decision  refer.  Permission  to
appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 27th  April  2015  on
the basis that it was  arguable  the  Judge's  finding  in  respect  of  the
ownership of the shop should have been reasoned  and  it  was  unclear  that
documentary evidence would have been readily  available  given  the  country
situation in Somalia [26]; it was arguable that the Judge further  erred  in
his consideration of credibility at [28] and that no consideration had  been
given to the Appellant's witness statement at [10];  it  was  arguable  that
the Judge erred at  [29]  as  to  his  finding  regarding  the  build-up  of
harassment given the lack of clarity on this issue at interview.  The  Judge
considered  these  errors  to  be  arguably  material  in  respect  of   the
credibility findings and that, given evidence was submitted that post  dated
the country guidance decision in MOJ CG [2014]  UKUT  442  it  was  arguable
that the credibility findings affected the ultimate outcome of  the  appeal.
She also extended time to admit the application given the very minor  degree
of lateness and the weight of the issues involved.

Hearing

3.    At the hearing before me, the  Appellant's  representative  sought  to
adopt reasoning of Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley. He  submitted  in  respect
of the fact that First Tier Tribunal Judge Clarke took issue with  the  lack
of supporting documentation as to whether the  Appellant  had  a  shop  that
there should have been some  accommodation  of  the  country  situation  and
there was  nothing  directly  or  indirectly  to  suggest  that  a  shop  in
Hamarweyne  would  have  to  be  registered.  In  respect  of  the   alleged
inconsistencies in respect of the Appellant's father and whether or  not  he
was able to run a shop himself this was a misunderstanding on  the  part  of
the Judge. The Appellant's father was  more  like  a  wholesaler.  When  the
Appellant married he had a  need  to  support  his  family  and  needed  his
father's assistance. At [29] the Judge found that the build up  of  interest
by Al Shabaab had not been alluded to earlier. In his interview at  Question
117 the Appellant was asked: "Have you any previous experience  with  them?"
It is not clear that this means  harassment,  it  is  ambiguous.  The  Judge
further erred at [35] in the manner in  which  he  interpreted  the  country
guidance decision in MOJ. If the Appellant were to return there would  be  a
proper basis on which Al Shabaab  could  pick  him  up:  see  29-36  of  the
Appellant's bundle.

4.    In response, Mr Clarke submitted that there was no material  error  of
law. He submitted that the Appellant's credibility had been damaged  by  his
failure to corroborate ownership of a cosmetics shop: is there  a  shop  and
did his father assist in setting it up? In MOJ at 334 and 349  reference  is
made to business activity and  that  is  the  backdrop  to  the  finding  in
respect of the shop. The Judge criticizes the lack of evidence  in  relation
to the shop on two counts both as the Appellant has a  family  in  Mogadishu
who could provide evidence  and one would expect  access  to  book  keeping,
rental payments, lease, written agreements, suppliers  and  a  landlord.  It
was reasonable to expect the Appellant to have acquired that  and  for  such
documentation to exist.  He  further  submitted  that,  in  respect  of  the
finding at [28], at [14] it was quite clear the Judge  was  mindful  of  the
evidence that the Appellant's father gave him funds  to  open  the  shop  to
support his wife. In light of the country guidance decision, the  idea  that
the Appellant was compelled to pursue a dangerous venture is not  consistent
with the economic boom that exists in Mogadishu. The Judge was  entitled  to
place negative weight on that inconsistency. In  respect  of  the  assertion
that there had been no build up of harassment and threats as  this  was  not
mentioned in interview and that no question had been put regarding  previous
visits, the interview clearly evidences  that  Al  Shabaab  came  once,  the
Appellant refused to assist them and he then went to his  parents  and  left
immediately: question 99 onwards. Nothing about  that  suggests  a  build-up
and there had been ample opportunity for the Appellant to put this  forward.
The Judge at [31] was concerned about the Appellant changing his account  to
a build-up rather than one occasion. In  respect  of  the  country  guidance
decision MOJ, there was further evidence provided at  29-36  but  Mr  Clarke
submitted that this was insufficient to depart  from  the  country  guidance
decision. He referred me to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  DSG  &
Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure  from  CG)  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  00148
(IAC) at [20] where it cites from the Practice Direction and  also  at  [26]
and [24]. He referred me to MOJ at [398] and submitted that the  Appellant's
evidence at [29] does not identify when specific  attacks  took  place.  MOJ
identifies Al Shabaab is a crippled  organization.  There  are  attacks  but
they are targeted and civilians would be able to avoid  them.  He  submitted
that Articles 3 and 15C are not engaged. In respect of the article  at  page
31,  this  identifies  Al  Shabaab  as  a  reduced  force  which  has   been
infiltrated  and  there  is  nothing  about  what  has  happened  since  the
infiltration was identified and it does not identify  anything  to  show  Al
Shabaab is in control of areas of Mogadishu. In respect of  the  article  at
page 33, he submitted that this was not even Mogadishu but  105  miles  away
and does not warrant the cogent evidence envisaged in SG (Iraq) [2012]  EWCA
Civ 940 at [47]. He submitted that it was not enough  to  warrant  departure
from the country guidance decision in MOJ and in light  of  the  credibility
findings there was nothing here to suggest a risk per se  to  the  Appellant
or to evidence of the kind of risk to a shop owner that is being asserted.

5.    In response to Mr Clarke, Mr Anyene,  the  Appellant's  representative
submitted that the passages in the interview I had been taken  through  show
no buildup but a constant threat does not show a number  of  visits  to  the
shop and so this was immaterial and cannot properly found a  submission  the
Appellant has  changed  his  evidence.  He  submitted  in  response  to  the
documentation issue that the Appellant had said in his  interview  he  would
hide the cosmetics and  why  would  anyone  be  advertising  that  they  are
selling skin lightening creams given Al Shabaab? In respect of  the  country
guidance decision and whether or not there had been  a  durable  change,  he
submitted that the Appellant is someone who is known by Al Shabaab.  He  had
been requested to do a service and turned it down so he is in  the  category
of a targeted person. His wife and children have left Somalia and  he  would
be of interest in any event.

Error of law decision and reasons

6.    I reserved my decision in order to consider the  parties'  submissions
in light of the relevant documents and jurisprudence.

7.    In respect of the first ground of appeal, First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Clarke considered the issue of whether or  not  it  was  credible  that  the
Appellant owned or ran a shop at [26]-[28]  of  his  decision.  At  [26]  he
states: "I note that despite having parents still living  in  Hamarweyne  he
has never provide (sic) any supporting documentary evidence to confirm  that
he had his own shop. This would have been readily available to him  and  the
parents were in contact with UK family members."  At  [28]  he  states:  "My
observation is that there is inconsistent evidence about the father  helping
him to open the shop but not wanting him to open the shop, the father  being
afraid of selling creams because of Al Shabaab but at the same time  helping
the Appellant work in the shop, when the Appellant was telling customers  of
his hidden creams, and it is implausible to open a  shop  selling  forbidden
items if his own father was threatened by and scared of Al Shabaab."

8.    Whilst the Judge has framed his findings on the basis that he  "noted"
and "observed" the issues he sets out, they are clearly his findings on  the
material matters.  In  respect  of  the  first  issue  at  [26],  the  point
regarding ownership of the shop and documents  to  show  ownership  was  not
raised in the Respondent's refusal letter, nor does it appear to  have  been
raised by  the  Respondent  during  cross  examination  or  submissions.  It
appears to have been raised for the first time in the form of a  finding  by
the Judge, without the Appellant having had the opportunity  to  respond  to
the point in his evidence or  in  submissions  through  his  representative.
This is procedurally unfair and constitutes a material error in law. I  also
accept the specific grounds raised on behalf of the Appellant ie.  that  the
Judge's finding in respect of the ownership of the  shop  should  have  been
better reasoned and it was unclear in any event  that  documentary  evidence
would have been readily available given the country situation in Somalia.

9.    In respect of the second point, at [28] of  the  Judge's  decision,  I
have considered the record of  the  Appellant's  evidence  at  [14]  of  the
Judge's  decision,  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  at  [2]  and   the
interview record at questions 13-26  and  74-87.  I  have  also  taken  into
account that in his response to questions  about  his  clan,  the  Appellant
stated that they are business people selling cosmetics, clothes, sweets  and
snacks and they were a minority clan and lacked protection [Q's 26 and  31].
I find that the Judge erred materially in law in  that  I  do  not  consider
that  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  respect  of  his  father's   role   is
inconsistent, in that the fact  that  both  the  Appellant  and  his  father
worked selling cosmetics - the father via wholesale and the  son  through  a
shop, is consistent with membership of  the  Shanshiyo  minority  clan.  The
Appellant clearly stated that he did not have to hide perfumes and  shampoos
because they could be sold from the  shelves,  but  skin  lightening  creams
were hidden. Even if his father had had problems  with  Al  Shabaab  in  the
past it is not implausible that the Appellant would open  a  cosmetics  shop
given that this was effectively the family's business and a common  business
for members of his clan and given that many  people  had  problems  with  Al
Shabaab for a variety of reasons.

10.   In respect of the  Judge's  finding  at  [29]  that:  "in  the  asylum
interview there is no build up to this entrance into his shop, no  build  up
of harassment and threats" which was not what he was told  at  the  hearing,
and at [31] that: "the Appellant has changed his account  of  what  he  said
happened to him by trying to build up a period of harassment before the  one
isolated incident he first complained  of"  I  find  that  the  Judge  erred
materially in law due to the lack of clarity on this issue at interview.  At
Q.117 the Appellant was asked: "Had you any experience with them?" to  which
he replied "No." The difficulty is that whilst it is clear from  Q.115  that
the Appellant was being asked about Al Shabaab the  question  is  ambiguous,
particularly given that the interview was conducted through an  interpreter.
The Appellant was not asked in interview whether he had previously  received
any threats from or harassment by Al Shabaab but he did raise  this  clearly
in his statement at [3] and in his oral evidence at [15] and  [16]  yet  the
Judge gave no weight to the consistency of his evidence on this issue.

11.   Consequently, the Judge's finding at [32] that the Appellant  was  not
credible and was not targeted by Al Shabaab is unsustainable.

12.   In respect of the risk on return in  light  of  the  country  guidance
decision in  MOJ  CG  [2014]  UKUT  442,  whilst  clearly  country  guidance
decisions must be followed, there was evidence before the Judge  that  post-
dated that decision and may have made a material difference  had  the  Judge
found the Appellant to be credible. Mr Clarke took issue with the  substance
of that evidence, but given that I have found that the Judge's  findings  on
credibility affected the ultimate  outcome  of  the  appeal,  assessment  of
credibility in light of the  country  guidance  decision  and  any  evidence
postdating that decision will be a matter for the First  Tier  Tribunal  re-
hearing the appeal.

Conclusion

13.   For the reasons set out above, I find that First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Clarke erred materially in law in dismissing the appeal  and  that  decision
is set aside. In light of the  fact  that  the  Judge  did  not  accept  the
credibility of the Appellant's account there  will  need  to  be  a  further
hearing in order that the Appellant and any witnesses upon which  he  wishes
to rely can give oral evidence. I remit the appeal for a hearing de novo  on
all issues by the First Tier Tribunal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

19 November 2015
