
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07616/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th May 2014                                |On 2nd  July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     RM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Reece instructed by Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal A M Black promulgated on 11th September 2013 in which the
    judge dismisses an appeal brought by the Appellant against  a  decision
    of the Respondent dated 26th July 2013 refusing his  claim  for  asylum
    and making a decision that he should be removed.   There  has  been  no
    application before me to change the issue in respect of  anonymity  and
    accordingly I direct  that  anonymity  should  continue  for  the  same
    reasons as the order was made, namely the  sensitivity  of  the  asylum
    issues dealt with in the appeal.

 2. Mr Reece for the Appellant made an application for  an  adjournment  on
    the basis of the outstanding judgment from the Court of Appeal  in  the
    country guidance case of GJ.  I refuse that application  on  the  basis
    that the grant of permission clearly indicates that the Court of Appeal
    has directed that the Upper Tribunal should continue to make  decisions
    but not with exclusive reference to the risk factors set out in GJ  and
    accordingly if it was anticipated that all  of  the  Upper  Tier  cases
    should be held in abeyance then that direction would not have followed.

 3. Mr Reece invited me to find nothing  adverse  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant here today and that is a position with which I  concur.   The
    Appellant has indicated to those he instructs  that  he  is  unable  to
    attend today due to  ill  health  and  although  no  evidence  of  that
    position is put before me I am satisfied that in light of the fact that
    there has been no application for additional evidence in the event that
    I should decide that there is an error nothing flows from  the  absence
    of the Appellant and the Respondent's representative did  not  seek  to
    persuade me that I should draw any adverse inference.

 4. Both of the parties' representatives were agreed that in the event that
    I should find error in the First-tier Tribunal's determination I  would
    be in a position today to remake the decision on the evidence as it was
    before the First-tier Judge.  Permission was granted by a Judge of  the
    Upper Tribunal on 23rd October 2013 in the following terms:

         "It is, just about, arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         placed too high a burden of proof upon the Appellant  in  appearing
         to require documentary evidence to support assertions made by  him.
         This in turn may have led to an imbalance in the  weight  given  to
         elements  of  the  evidence  before  him.   When  the  evidence  is
         considered in the round it may be that the reliance on the lack  of
         corroborative evidence resulted in factual findings that cannot  be
         substantiated.  It remains however that it is  only  just  possible
         that the findings of the judge are perverse or irrational  and  the
         Appellant should not consider this grant of permission as  anything
         more than that."

 5. Mr Reece renewed all of the grounds of the application  for  permission
    before me and made detailed submissions in respect of every  point.   I
    also  heard  submissions  from  Mr  Nath  who  took  me   through   the
    determination in similar  fashion.   I  have  found  it  convenient  to
    consider the grounds by reference to the individual paragraphs  of  the
    judge's findings and by a review of the total of all of those  findings
    and I am setting them out for convenience in the order as they are  set
    out in the determination rather than by reference to the detail of  the
    numbering of the grounds.

 6. The first challenge is to paragraph 30 of the judge's determination and
    the challenge is made on the basis that the judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant had  taken  a  sudden  interest  in  assisting  the  LTTE  is
    fundamentally contrary to the evidence that was before  the  judge.   I
    find no merit in that ground because on a detailed consideration of the
    evidence that was put before the judge and referred to  in  the  ground
    there is nothing which can be said to be contrary  to  the  conclusions
    drawn by the judge.  Firstly,  in  the  Appellant's  witness  statement
    nowhere does he describe any involvement or interest in  supporting  or
    working for the LTTE or even being broadly in support of their aims.

 7. Secondly the letter from the uncle which is referred to in the  grounds
    at 21 of the Appellant's bundle states that the uncle understands  that
    his nephew supported the  LTTE  in  Sri  Lanka  too  but  there  is  no
    indication as to whether that was a support prior to 2007 so it  cannot
    be said of itself to be contrary to the position taken by the judge  or
    found by the judge.

 8. The final point  raised  in  the  grounds  is  that  the  Appellant  is
    originally from the North of Sri Lanka.  Again, I am not satisfied that
    that of itself establishes evidence which is contrary  to  the  judge's
    finding.  The grounds then refer to the Appellant's UK membership  card
    but as that is post-arrival in the United Kingdom, again that cannot be
    a piece of evidence which can be said to be contrary to  the  issue  of
    whether  there  was  involvement  prior  to  2007.   Counsel  made  the
    additional point before me that insufficient weight had been  taken  of
    the fact that the Appellant had been studying abroad for two and a half
    years prior to 2007 and that would  explain  his  inability  to  pursue
    support for the LTTE prior to his return to Sri Lanka.  However,  there
    is nothing in the evidence which could be said to be  contrary  to  the
    finding that the interest arose for the first time in 2007 and that  is
    an absence of evidence which cannot be explained simply by an Appellant
    being out of the country during that time, particularly in light of the
    fact that the Appellant's own evidence does not speak to  any  interest
    prior to that time, whether here or in Sri Lanka.

 9. The judge's findings  at  paragraph  31  are  challenged  as  being  an
    irrational rejection of the Appellant's evidence  of  speaking  to  his
    friends in Sri Lanka about his UK sur place activity.  The  point  made
    in the grounds  is  that  because  the  Appellant's  friends  were  not
    political there was nothing implausible or unlikely about him  speaking
    to them and Counsel made the point  today  that  the  reality  is  that
    people speak to their friends in personal circumstances without  regard
    to risk.  I am satisfied that there is nothing in this  ground  either.
    Indeed it seems to me that it is perhaps a bit of a red  herring.   The
    first point is that the Appellant is himself speculating as to  how  it
    is that he finds that the authorities had any interest in  him  at  all
    saying that he thought that the interrogators were probably told  about
    his sur place activities here as a result of information  that  he  had
    given to friends in Sri Lanka.  There is an inconsistency in the  sense
    that that does not sit very well with his statement in the grounds that
    his friends had no political interest but in any event the  point  that
    the judge was making was that it would be unlikely that someone who  is
    an educated and intelligent person as the Appellant  was  found  to  be
    would talk to people without regard to the issue of risk.

10. In terms of the judge's  determination  at  paragraph  32  the  grounds
    challenge that paragraph on the basis that it is  the  requirement  for
    corroborative evidence in the context of the Appellant's claim that his
    father had suffered persecution  in  Sri  Lanka  in  2012  and  on  two
    subsequent occasions.  I find that the grounds misdescribe  the  import
    of that paragraph.  It is clear when you read the paragraph as a  whole
    that what the  judge  was  considering  here  was  the  timing  of  the
    Appellant's claim and the issue of the lateness of claim, and the judge
    says in effect that if the Appellant's  father  had  been  arrested  as
    claimed then one would have expected an earlier  application  from  the
    Appellant, particularly in light of his having relatives here  familiar
    with the asylum process, and it is only in that context that the  judge
    points out that there is a lack of supporting  evidence  in  connection
    with the arrest of the father, whether  from  Sri  Lanka  or  from  the
    relatives in the United Kingdom, and I note here that  the  Appellant's
    uncle's statement does not make reference to the  asserted  history  of
    persecution of the Appellant's father.

11. At paragraph 33 the judge notes that there is no  documentary  evidence
    supporting the Appellant's account of having been  beaten  with  sticks
    and having been hit by his interrogators whilst in detention.  That  is
    a statement of fact and I find that the grounds' characterisation of it
    as a requirement for corroboration is misconceived in much the same way
    as the note of the absence of corroboration at paragraph  32  does  not
    amount to a requirement for corroboration.

12. Paragraphs 34 and 35 concerning the  medical  evidence  have  not  been
    challenged and  the  next  relevant  paragraph  is  that  of  36.   The
    challenge to this paragraph arises from  a  description  of  the  judge
    requiring  or  believing  rather  that  the  Appellant   had   received
    professional advice from the agent.  In fact,  reading  that  paragraph
    what I note is that what the judge is in fact saying is that  this  was
    an Appellant who arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  explicit
    intention of claiming asylum and that in that context and in  light  of
    his intelligence and education then it is not so  difficult  to  expect
    him to have come with evidence and have it in mind to  make  his  claim
    and provide evidence of  his  claim  as  soon  as  possible.   That  is
    particularly the case because as the judge noted the Appellant  arrived
    shortly after he had sustained injuries,  which  from  the  Appellant's
    description would have been physically obvious and  amenable  to  being
    photographed or being considered by a medical expert.  The  judge  also
    is surprised, rightly so in my view, that the Appellant did not talk to
    his uncle, himself a refugee, about those injuries.

13. At paragraph 38 the grounds assert that the judge was wrong to find the
    Appellant's claim  in  respect  of  his  sur  place  activities  to  be
    undermined by the absence of evidence beyond the issue of  an  identity
    card from the British Tamil Forum which by the time of hearing was  two
    or three months stale.  The judge noted that the card  itself  did  not
    evidence the Appellant's attendance at meetings or gatherings and  that
    in light of the failure of anyone to attend and support his  appeal  or
    to provide witness evidence by way of letters and statements  that  the
    assertions of sur place activities were weak.  I find that is a  matter
    which was open to the judge to decide in that way.

14. The judge went on at paragraph 39 in  any  event  to  also  give  other
    reasons for the rejection of the Appellant's sur place claim.

15. There are other issues concerning the Appellant's credibility which are
    not covered in the grounds at all but which give succour to the finding
    of the judge  that  the  Appellant's  account  was  not  credible.   In
    particular there was the issue of the late claim and the  query  as  to
    why the Appellant should have made a false student claim in the context
    of a period of time when he was residing with an uncle who had  already
    made  a  successful  claim  for  asylum  and  was  well  aware  of  the
    procedures, and that is an issue that the judge deals with at paragraph
    41.  The issue of course in respect of the uncle is not that the  uncle
    cannot give evidence of something about which he  was  not  told.   The
    issue is the implausibility of the Appellant not raising with his uncle
    the injuries that he had allegedly suffered.

16. The judge also sets out issues at 42 concerning the position in respect
    of the Appellant's uncle, making the point that in light of the uncle's
    position one would have expected the Appellant to have made  his  claim
    at an early point and his claim  is  undermined  as  a  result  of  his
    failure to do that.

17. Finally the judge at paragraph 43 notes that the  Appellant's  evidence
    as stated of his uncle's knowledge of his sur place activities  in  the
    United Kingdom is inconsistent in light of the lack  of  evidence  from
    the uncle and that in the event that the Appellant had told  his  uncle
    as claimed then that is something that  one  would  have  expected  the
    uncle to have mentioned in significant detail in a way in which he  has
    not in his witness statement.

18. It is also significant that this is a case where applying the  guidance
    of TK (Burundi) there  would  have  been  evidence  available  to  this
    Appellant by way of the relatives in the United Kingdom,  both  closely
    related to his father and apparently with evidence as to  his  position
    on return to Sri Lanka and his arrest and return to the United  Kingdom
    to have attended to give evidence at least in connection with the uncle
    whose statement is dated 9th December 2013.

19. For all of the reasons that I have  set  out  above  I  find  that  the
    individual challenges to the Immigration Judge's  determination  cannot
    be sustained so that when one reads the decision as a whole it is quite
    clear that this is not a case where there has been an imbalance in  the
    weight given to elements of the evidence before the judge as  initially
    thought on a cursory examination of the application and the grounds  as
    drafted.

20. It follows that I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge revealed no material error of law requiring me to  set  it  aside
    and  that  the  decision   dismissing   the   Appellant's   appeal   on
    international protection grounds stands.  No other grounds were  raised
    before me and accordingly the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 25.06.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


