

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07630/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 4 May 2016                                 |On 11 May 2016               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              KAMIL KARIM KADER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Martin, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on 14 April 1984.  It  appears
    that he is Kurdish and from the area of Tikrit.  On findings reached in
    previous proceedings, he speaks at least some Arabic.  He first  sought
    asylum in the UK on 26 February 2009, which the respondent refused.

 2. Judge Wood dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  that  refusal  by
    determination promulgated on 13 August 2009.  The judge  accepted  that
    the appellant might be at risk on account of imputed political  opinion
    as someone who had been providing support to the coalition forces,  and
    that in absence of a sponsor he could not relocate to the KRG (the area
    of the Kurdish Regional Government, also referred to in  various  parts
    of the papers on file as the IRK, or as Iraqi Kurdistan).   However, he
    could relocate in central or southern Iraq.

 3. The appellant had exhausted his appeal rights by 19th November 2009. He
    was granted discretionary leave until 12 April 2014.

 4. In further submissions through his solicitors he renewed his protection
    claim.

 5.  The respondent made a further decision dated 23  April  2015,  holding
    that country circumstances had not deteriorated so as  to  entitle  the
    appellant to asylum or  humanitarian  protection;  that  relocation  to
    Baghdad or the south, while not ideal,  remained  available;  and  that
    there were no family and private life or other circumstances warranting
    a grant of leave, in or out of the immigration rules.

 6. The appellant appealed  to  the  FtT  on  lengthy  grounds,  contending
    essentially as follows, using the numbering of those grounds:

      (i) he was a  target  of  terrorists;  he  would  be  in  danger  from
      insurgents throughout Iraq; it was settled that he  could  not  go  to
      Tikrit or to the KRG; he could not be expected to relocate anywhere;

      (ii) in any event,  indiscriminate  violence  throughout  the  country
      entitled him to protection under article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
      Directive;

      (iii) - (iv) articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR  provided  protection,  for
      similar reasons;

      (v) based on his relationship with a UK citizen partner,  he  met  the
      requirements of the immigration rules;

      (vi) in any event, he had a right to leave to  remain,  based  on  the
      ECHR articles 2, 3 and 8.

 7. Designated Judge Macdonald dismissed the appellant's appeal by decision
    and reasons promulgated on 30 December 2015.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT, which was  refused
    by the FtT, but granted by the UT.  He contends essentially as follows,
    again using the numbering of his lengthy grounds:

      (i) the judge applied country guidance, resulting in injustice to  the
      appellant; his case was to be set  apart  from  the  majority  of  the
      population; he was "of interest to ISIS, who are a caliphate and  have
      significant reach and resources"; he was not trying to show risk  from
      indiscriminate  violence;  he  had   established   a   specific   risk
      "disregarded all too lightly by the judge with reliance placed on  the
      country guidance";

      (ii)  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  could  go  to   the   KRG
      contradicted the earlier determination, and in any event the appellant
      proved that he would be at specific risk there;

      (iii) there was a risk  from  indiscriminate  violence,  going  beyond
      country guidance;

      (iv) the judge was wrong  to  find  that  the  appellant  speaks  some
      Arabic, and it would be unduly harsh to  expect  him  to  relocate  in
      central or southern Iraq;

      (v)  the  judge  ought  to  have   found   that   removal   would   be
      disproportionate, in terms of article 8 of the ECHR.

 9. Mr Martin relied upon the grounds.

10. Mrs Saddiq submitted as follows.  It was not an error to apply  country
    guidance, there having been no background evidence  or  analysis  which
    might  displace  it.   The  judge  had  correctly   taken   the   prior
    determination as a starting  point.   The  group  which  the  appellant
    feared, Ansar Al-Islam, had transformed into ISIS.  The judge correctly
    went on to find at paragraph 55 onwards  that  the  appellant  had  the
    option of relocating in central or southern Iraq.  That was the  effect
    of the country guidance.  The  appellant  does  not  dispute  that  the
    respondent holds his expired Iraqi passport.  It is settled that  there
    is no  such  risk  from  indiscriminate  violence  as  to  qualify  the
    appellant for protection.  There was nothing to lead  the  judge  to  a
    different conclusion.  The appellant had  the  further  alternative  of
    relocation to Baghdad City.  There  was  no  more  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to consider regarding internal flight.  The appellant  insists
    again at paragraph 4 of his grounds that he speaks no  Arabic,  but  he
    showed no error of law in that conclusion, and was not entitled to have
    his case considered on that basis.  Both judges had concluded  that  he
    does  speak  at  least  some  Arabic,  and  the  grounds  contained  no
    proposition of legal error  going  to  that  finding.   In  any  event,
    ability to speak Arabic was only  one  element  in  assessing  internal
    relocation.  Regarding ground 5 (the Article 8 ECHR claim)  Mrs  Saddiq
    adopted what was  said  by  Designated  Judge  Manuell  when  initially
    refusing permission, "The  judge  gave  all  proper  attention  to  the
    Article 8 claim, again on the basis of the current situation,  and  his
    conclusions were inevitable on the basis  of  law  and  statute."   The
    claim was based on private life only.  It would have been extraordinary
    if any judge had thought that the appeal could succeed on that basis.

11. Mr Martin responded thus.  He acknowledged  that  country  guidance  is
    generally to be followed, but pointed out that  the  appellant  asserts
    that he  is  outside  the  general  category  of  those  at  risk  from
    indiscriminate violence.  He had shown a specific risk as  a  perceived
    collaborator of high army  rank  working  closely  with  the  coalition
    forces, who have since withdrawn.  His home town is Dubs, which is in a
    contested area, and it is accepted that he cannot return there.   Judge
    Wood found that he could not relocate to the KRG, but that he could  go
    to central or  southern  Iraq.   Judge  Wood's  finding  regarding  the
    appellant's home area and any Kurdish area remains sound.   Judge  Wood
    found that Ansar Al-Islam was active in the KRG.  Judge  Macdonald  was
    wrong in finding that the  appellant  could  relocate  there.   Country
    guidance did not say that the KRG was entirely free of  violence.   The
    guidance was about indiscriminate not targeted violence.  At  paragraph
    51 Judge Macdonald  accepted  that  ISIS  had  issued  further  threats
    against the appellant and his brother.  Such risk in Iraq had increased
    exponentially.  ISIS was not restricted to the appellant's home area or
    to the KRG, and had formed a caliphate since June 2014.  The judge  was
    wrong at paragraph 58 to find that the appellant could be  returned  to
    the KRG or to Baghdad without facing a real risk.   There  should  have
    been found to have been such a risk, given the deterioration  in  Iraq,
    the withdrawal of the coalition forces and the rise of ISIS.   However,
    Mr Martin did not seek a  finding  based  on  indiscriminate  violence,
    which he accepted was precluded by the country guidance.  He said  that
    the error was one  of  a  failure  to  examine  a  risk  based  on  the
    appellant's facts and circumstances being Kurdish, having served  as  a
    sergeant in the army and closely co-operated with the coalition, having
    been specifically targeted,  and  now  being  westernised  and  a  self
    illuminating target perceived to be wealthy if  he  returned.   It  was
    significant that the respondent had conceded in the refusal letter that
    return to Baghdad was not ideal.  The judge should have found that  the
    risk existed throughout Iraq and could  not  be  excluded  by  internal
    relocation to any part of the country.  Ground 5 was also relied upon.

12. I indicated that in my view there was plainly no  merit  in  Ground  5.
    Beyond that, I reserved my decision.

13. The grounds amount in substance only to insistence that the judge ought
    to have found that risk to the appellant extended throughout Iraq,  and
    there was no area where  he  would  be  safe;  or  alternatively,  that
    because he cannot speak Arabic his relocation elsewhere would be unduly
    harsh.

14. Those are factual  issues,  well  settled  in  the  decision  by  Judge
    Macdonald in accordance with current guidance.  While  the  appellant's
    representative strove again to make the most of his case,  the  grounds
    do not disclose any legal error.   The submissions for  the  respondent
    were generally sound.  Little more needs to be said.

15. Judge Wood's finding that the appellant could not relocate to  the  KRG
    was based on country guidance ruling at that time which suggested  that
    there was difficulty for a  Kurd  from  another  area  settling  there,
    although safety could be found among significant Kurdish communities in
    central and southern Iraq.  Updated  country  guidance  does  not  find
    there to be any  barrier  to  returns  to  Iraqi  Kurdistan,  which  is
    virtually violence free.  There  was  no  error  in  Judge  Macdonald's
    declining to find that a risk  to  the  appellant  from  ISIS  extended
    throughout the whole of Iraq.   Such  a  risk  did  not  run  in  Iraqi
    Kurdistan or in Baghdad.

16. Although Mr Martin in submissions described the appellant  as  of  high
    rank in the army, he was a sergeant, and the description by Judge  Wood
    at paragraph 37 of his decision is accurate - not a  particularly  high
    profile, rather a relatively small cog.

17. The finding of Judge Wood that the appellant speaks Arabic is based  on
    the appellant's evidence that he found an Arabic speaker  in  order  to
    obtain directions to the respondent's office in Liverpool.  That  is  a
    sensible reason which discloses no error.  Judge Macdonald was entitled
    to adopt it at paragraph 60.   The  appellant  continues  to  deny  the
    point, perhaps  because  he  thinks  he  must  stick  to  his  original
    statement, but it is inherently  unlikely  that  someone  educated  and
    literate as he is, born in 1984 and going to  school  in  Iraq  at  the
    usual ages, would not have been taught in Arabic or at least taught  to
    speak Arabic.  Findings in fact should  not  be  preserved  by  finding
    reasons which are not in the original decision, but both decisions  are
    sensible, and any further investigation is not likely to go  in  favour
    of the appellant's contention.

18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            5 May 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




