
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07183/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th February 2016                 |On 19th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     s c
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    O'Malley, promulgated on 2nd  October  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 26th August 2015.   In  the  determination,  the  Judge
    allowed the appeal on human rights grounds whereupon the  Secretary  of
    State applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Sri Lanka, who  was  born  on  3rd
    July 1988.  She is a Tamil.  She appealed against a decision dated  4th
    September 2014,  refusing  to  grant  her  asylum  and/or  humanitarian
    protection and/or protection against abuses amounting  to  breaches  of
    Articles 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim  is  that  she  was  associated  with  the  LTTE,
    involved in printing, and producing pro-LTTE documents at  the  Eastern
    University in Sri Lanka.  The ICT Director found pro-LTTE documents  on
    her computer and on 5th March 2010, she was detained, beaten,  tortured
    and raped and questioned about the LTTE.  She confessed to  involvement
    with the LTTE.  She was then released on the payment of a bribe on  9th
    March 2010, admitted to hospital for three days, and then moved to stay
    in Wattala.  A student visa application was made in her  name  and  she
    travelled on her passport  to  the  UK.   Thereafter,  the  Appellant's
    parents' home was visited in December 2013 and  the  Appellant  claimed
    asylum subsequently.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The Judge accepted the Appellant's  evidence  that  she  supported  the
    LTTE, and on attending  Eastern  University  to  work  within  the  ICT
    Department,  she  met  other  LTTE  supporters,  and  printed  pro-LTTE
    leaflets for distribution (paragraph 71).  The Judge observed that  the
    university would be looking to identify the source of the leaflets  and
    that the Appellant was discovered as being responsible because  of  the
    computer being used  (paragraph  72).   The  Judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was detained on her way from work to her home  on  5th  March
    2010 (paragraph 73).  The Judge accepted that the Appellant  was  raped
    during her detention and that she was ill-treated (paragraph 75).   The
    Judge also accepted that the Appellant was able to leave Sri  Lanka  on
    her own passport without any difficulty, having arranged a student visa
    through an agent (paragraph 81).

 5. The major bone of contention, as far as this appeal is  concerned,  was
    the Appellant's  claim  that  she  lost  her  passport,  "...  and  had
    submitted that there is an additional danger to her in having to obtain
    new travel documents if  she  is  required  to  return  to  Sri  Lanka"
    (paragraph 83).  The Judge went on to observe that, "...  having  given
    the matter anxious scrutiny along the lower standard, I accept that the
    Appellant has lost her passport" (paragraph 83).   The  Judge  did  not
    accept that the Appellant  sought  asylum  in  March  2014  because  of
    threats arising out of visits to her family in December 2013 (paragraph
    84).  He did not accept that the Appellant's parents have been  sent  a
    CD or DVD of abuses to other girls (paragraph 86).  He did  not  accept
    that the family had telephone calls enquiring about the whereabouts  of
    the Appellant or her brother (paragraph 88).

 6. The Judge did  accept  the  country  guidance  case  of  GJ,  that  the
    government of  Sri  Lanka  had  sophisticated  intelligence  which  can
    identify those who have links to LTTE  (paragraph  89).   However,  the
    Judge did not accept, even on the lower standard, that the Appellant is
    of interest to the government of Sri Lanka, "... either because she  is
    an absconder, because of an arrest warrant, ... or because of  interest
    in her  because  of  peace  dealings  or  connections  with  the  LTTE"
    (paragraph 91).

 7. However, when the Judge went  on  to  consider  the  human  rights  and
    humanitarian aspect of the claim, he observed  that  the  Appellant  no
    longer had her passport and would have to obtain new travel  documents,
    and the Judge observed that, "... in light of the conclusion  that  she
    left travelling under her own passport and on a student  visa  and  has
    overstayed I conclude that she  is  at  risk  of  being  questioned  on
    arrival in Sri Lanka" (paragraph 94).  Given this,  the  Appellant  was
    likely to be examined on the basis of her past history  of  arrest  and
    detention in 2010.

 8. The Judge observed  that,  "...  there  is  a  risk  that  she  may  be
    questioned because of the need to obtain new documents for  travel  and
    they investigate her history of risk,  detention  and  because  of  the
    perceived support for LTTE" (paragraph 95).  In this respect, the Judge
    went on to say that,
         "I accept the conclusion of Dr Persaud,  that  her  current  mental
         health may lead to her being 'distracted and confused'  if  she  is
         questioned and that in those circumstances she would be at risk  of
         attracting unwanted interest and/or leading to a detention  if  she
         does not answer questions" (paragraph 95).

 9. For this reason, the Judge observed that "... there are good reasons to
    conclude that, if the  Appellant  is  detained  the  abuse  and  sexual
    violence that occurred during the arrest and detention in 2010 will  be
    repeated" (paragraph 96).

10. The Judge ultimately concluded that,
         "I find that the conclusions in GJ  that  there  are  no  detention
         facilities at the airport which means that those who are questioned
         will be transferred to a prison or detention centre is  a  relevant
         consideration  here  and  I  find  that  the  Appellant's   current
         vulnerable  mental  health  is  likely  to  deteriorate   in   such
         circumstances and therefore the risk of serious harm is to both her
         physical and mental health" (paragraph 96).

11. The Judge allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application state that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  have
    allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds because there are
    extensive adverse findings of fact,  and  a  dismissal  of  the  asylum
    appeal in the light of  GJ.   The  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian grounds would appear to be at odds with the guidance given
    in GJ, and the adverse findings made in relation to the asylum  appeal.
    Also it was not clear why the  Judge  should  have  accepted  that  the
    Appellant would be undocumented given the adverse credibility  findings
    and the bold claim that she had lost her Sri Lankan passport.   If  the
    Sri Lankan  passport  was  previously  issued  to  her,  then  all  the
    Appellant needed to do was to simply ask for a replacement from the Sri
    Lankan authorities and it would be given.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 5th February 2016, Mr Walker, appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent emphasised the  grounds  of  application.   He
    submitted that the third ground was  the  strongest  because  here  the
    Judge accepted at paragraph 83 that the Appellant had lost her passport
    but no identifiable reasons were given for this finding, which was made
    in the context of the Appellant having fabricated evidence in order  to
    bolster her claim to be at risk.  Second, ground  1  was  important  in
    that the Judge had misdirected  himself  in  relation  to  GJ  and  the
    returns process, because the Judge allowed the appeal on the basis that
    the Appellant had lost her passport which  would  require  a  temporary
    detention.  This would require her to  be  questioned  at  the  airport
    which on account of her mental health, would lead to yet further  risk.
    This  was  unwarranted  as  a  conclusion.   Finally,  the  Judge   was
    irrational in having placed reliance upon the report of Dr Persaud  (at
    paragraph 95) that the Appellant's current mental health  may  lead  to
    her being distracted and confused: because at paragraph  65  the  Judge
    had already concluded that he is unable to place significant weight  on
    the report's conclusions, and this was inconsistent with the view  that
    the Judge took in relation to the findings at paragraph 95.

14. For his part, Mr Singer relied upon his skeleton argument and submitted
    that this was an  appeal  where  some  of  the  Appellant's  claim  was
    accepted and some of it was not.  However,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    entire case was based upon the findings in relation to the  Appellant's
    claim that she had lost her passport and would now be returning  as  an
    undocumented person, unless she made a request for the  replacement  of
    the documents, which would place her at risk.  However, the  conclusion
    on humanitarian  protection  was  open  to  the  Judge  and  cannot  be
    criticised.  It was a reasoned judgment  and  well  considered  in  his
    findings.  The Judge looked at the evidence and concluded that he would
    accept the claim as made.  His conclusions were  within  the  range  of
    reasonable responses that were open  to  the  Judge.   The  finding  in
    relation to the passport was one such reasonable  finding.   The  Judge
    did not say that the Appellant was  a  liar.   He  said  that  she  was
    mentally  unstable  and  that  further  questioning  would  cause   her
    condition to deteriorate  given  her  vulnerable  mental  health.   The
    report of Dr Persaud was partly accepted and  partly  not.   The  Judge
    said that the Appellant did not come within the risk factors of GJ, but
    it was open to the Judge to say that she would  still  be  at  risk  in
    other respects (see paragraphs 307 to 308 of GJ).  In short  the  Judge
    had found that the Appellant was a supporter of the LTTE, was  detained
    as a result of that, was ill-treated on account  of  that  association,
    and all this was entirely consistent with GJ.

15. In reply, Mr Walker submitted that at the end of paragraph 65 the Judge
    said that he did not attach weight to Dr Persaud's report and this  was
    contrary to what the Judge had said at paragraph 95.  It was not  clear
    what the Judge accepted and what he rejected.  There was  an  error  of
    law.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  Judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (See Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision.   The  test  for
    "perversity" is a "very high hurdle", as confirmed by Brooke  LJ  in  R
    (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

17. The Judge here did not allow the appeal on asylum grounds.  He  allowed
    the appeal on the grounds of humanitarian protection, and did so on the
    basis that, given the case of GJ,  and  that  there  are  no  detention
    facilities at the airport, for those who would be questioned, resulting
    in the Appellant being transferred to a  prison  or  detention  centre,
    that this
         "...  is  a  relevant  consideration  here  and  I  find  that  the
         Appellant's  current  vulnerable  mental  health   is   likely   to
         deteriorate in such circumstances and therefore the risk of serious
         harm is both to a physical and mental health" (paragraph 96).

18. That conclusion was open to the Judge.  In GJ  [2013]  UKUT  00319  the
    Tribunal observed that
         "Sri Lankans returning without a Sri Lankan passport would  require
         an emergency travel document for which they need to  apply  at  the
         SLHC  in  London.   Full  disclosure  of  all   relevant   identity
         information is given  in  the  process  of  obtaining  a  TTD.   An
         applicant  completes  a  lengthy  disclosure  form  and   is   then
         interviewed at the  Sri  Lankan  High  Commission  in  London;  the
         information received is sent to the Ministry  of  External  Affairs
         and the Department of Immigration and Emigration in Colombo.  Files
         are created and there 'verified'; if the authorities agree to issue
         a TTD, the NEA in Colombo emails the document  to  the  Sri  Lankan
         High Commission in London where the TTD is  stamped,  a  photograph
         added, and issued to the applicant" (see paragraph 307).

19. The case of GJ also goes on to say that, "during  the  re-documentation
    process in the United Kingdom, or at the airport on  return,  a  forced
    returnee can expect to be asked about his own  and  his  family's  LTTE
    connections and sympathies" (paragraph 308).

20. Rather than the Judge having arrived at an irrational conclusion,  what
    the Judge embarked upon was a sophisticated process of reasoning at the
    nuances of the country guidance case of GJ [2013] UKUT 00319,  and  the
    conclusion that was reached in relation  with  the  passport,  was  not
    simply on account of the fact that the Appellant would  have  to  apply
    for the passport having earlier lost it, but on the basis that she  was
    in a very vulnerable mental state, as confirmed by the medical reports,
    and that this condition would be exacerbated to such an extent that her
    circumstances were "likely to deteriorate ... and therefore the risk of
    serious harm is to both her physical and mental health" (see  paragraph
    96 of the determination).

21. Accordingly, there is no error of law.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  Judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    13th February 2016
