
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07173/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th March 2016                           |On 15th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     ZL
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwncyz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the  Appellant  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  "the
    Secretary of State."  I shall refer to the Respondent before the  Upper
    Tribunal as "the Claimant."   She  has  the  benefit  of  an  anonymity
    direction made by me in response to Mr Hussain's application.   I  have
    made the direction because of the sensitive nature  of  this  case  and
    because the Claimant has a young child.

 2. The Claimant, who was born on [ ] 1987, is a national of Albania.   She
    entered the UK in a clandestine manner and claimed asylum.  She  has  a
    daughter who was born on 13th December 2008, who is with her in the UK,
    and who was a dependant upon the asylum  claim.   On  1st  April  2015,
    however, the Secretary of State decided to refuse to grant  asylum  and
    to remove her and her daughter from the  UK.   The  Appellant,  though,
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  Her  appeal
    was heard by that Tribunal (Judge N P Dickson hereinafter "the  judge")
    on 10th July 2015 and was  allowed.   Subsequently,  the  Secretary  of
    State obtained permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   This,
    therefore, is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3.  The  Claimant,  having  given  an  initial  account  of   the   events
    underpinning her claim for asylum, went on to revise  her  claim.   The
    claim as revised, in summary form, was  to  the  effect  that  she  had
    previously resided in a small village in the area of Mirdite  which  is
    located in northern Albania.  She says that she was brought up  by  her
    parents in a strict manner with respect  to  custom  and  religion  and
    experienced some pressure, from her father, to enter into  an  arranged
    marriage at the age of 14.  However, her mother managed to persuade her
    father that she was too young to marry at that time.  At a later point,
    she met a man I shall simply refer to as Z who was significantly  older
    than her and was to become her husband.  They married in  January  2007
    but Z had some problems in Albania connected  to  a  blood  feud.   The
    Claimant  became  pregnant  and  the  couple  moved  to  Greece.   They
    experienced some financial difficulties in Greece and, in  due  course,
    they went to Sweden where Z claimed asylum, as I understand it  on  the
    basis of the blood feud, but that claim was  unsuccessful.   They  then
    returned to Albania but only for a period  of  some  months  as  Z  was
    afraid to remain there.  So, in September of 2013  they  went  back  to
    Greece.  They encountered difficulty in obtaining employment and Z went
    to Italy saying he would send for the Claimant and the child at a later
    date.  However, the Claimant says  that,  whilst  in  Greece,  she  was
    kidnapped by some men, was beaten and was told she had to work for them
    as a prostitute and that, if she refused, she and her daughter would be
    killed.  She also says she was forced, at gunpoint, to telephone Z  and
    tell him that she had met another man.  The Claimant, though, says that
    eventually she was able to escape her captors and that, having done so,
    she went to Italy because she knew her sister was living there, albeit,
    illegally.  Her sister, though, did not want her in Italy and  thought,
    despite what had happened her (that  is  the  sister's)  husband  would
    react badly and disapprovingly  to  the  breakdown  of  the  Claimant's
    marriage.  Unwelcome  then  in  Italy  the  Claimant  says  that,  with
    assistance, she travelled via France  to  the  UK.   The  Secretary  of
    State,  though,  did  not  believe  the  account  and  did  not  think,
    therefore, that she would be at risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm
    upon return to Albania.

 4. Both parties were represented before the judge at the hearing  of  10th
    July 2015.  He heard oral evidence from the Claimant and from a  person
    I shall simply refer to as RMF who  works  for  a  charity  called  the
    Ashiana project which had been  supporting  the  Claimant.   The  judge
    noted that RMF had been working with female victims of abuse  for  some
    23 years and that she managed  Ashiana's  trafficking  project.   After
    hearing oral evidence the judge received  oral  submissions  from  each
    representative.

 5. The judge, in fact, decided that, to the applicable standard  of  proof
    (sometimes referred to as the "real risk test") the revised account  of
    the Claimant was a truthful one.  He indicated, at paragraph 28 of  his
    determination,  that  he  found  the  account  to  be  plausible.    He
    indicated, at paragraph 33, that he found the evidence of RMF, although
    he did not directly express it in this way, to  be  supportive  of  her
    claim to have suffered past trauma.  He noted that  the  Claimant  came
    from an area of Albania which was widely recognised as practising  what
    is known as "kanun law," he took into account what had been said in the
    country guidance decision of AM and BM (Trafficked  Women)  Albania  CG
    [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) and concluded that she would be  at  risk  in  her
    home  area.   He  also  concluded,  by  implication,  that  given   his
    acceptance that she had been disowned  by  her  family,  that  she  had
    limited education and that she had a young daughter, that she would not
    be able to take advantage of an internal flight alternative.   On  that
    basis he allowed her appeal on asylum grounds.

 6. That was not the end of the  matter  because  the  Secretary  of  State
    applied, successfully, for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    There were two grounds although Mr Diwncyz indicated, before me, he was
    not pursuing the first one.  For completeness, though, the first ground
    was effectively an assertion that the judge was  bound  to  accept  the
    findings of the Competent Authority which had decided that the Claimant
    had not been trafficked.  The second ground was to the effect that  the
    judge had not adequately explained his conclusion that  the  Claimant's
    account was truthful and had failed to consider whether she could  take
    advantage of an internal flight alternative or would have a sufficiency
    of protection within Albania.

 7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted, principally, on
    the basis of the points made in Ground 2.  Permission was not  formally
    refused on the basis of Ground 1 but, as I  say,  Mr  Diwncyz  did  not
    pursue it before me and, therefore, it is not necessary for me  to  say
    anything further about it other than to observe that it is obvious  the
    judge was entitled to make his own mind up as to the trafficking  issue
    on the basis of the material before him.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Diwncyz said he would rely upon Ground 2 as
    drafted.  Much of  the  argument  at  the  hearing  focussed  upon  the
    question of whether or not the judge had dealt  adequately  or  at  all
    with the sufficiency of protection  issue.   As  I  understand  it,  Mr
    Hussain's contention as to that aspect was that, since  the  judge  had
    referred to the relevant country guidance decision of  AM  and  BM,  he
    must have had sufficiency of protection in mind and  can  be  taken  to
    have concluded that there was no sufficiency of protection available.

 9. As I explained to the parties, I decided that the proper course was  to
    set aside the judge's determination but to preserve  the  findings  and
    conclusions and then to effectively go on to complete the determination
    by addressing the sufficiency of protection issue which I found had not
    been addressed at all.  In that context, it seemed to me that  although
    the judge's reasoning could be fuller, he had adequately explained (and
    it is adequacy no more than that which is  the  standard)  why  he  was
    prepared to accept the Appellant's account.  Clearly he  was  aware  of
    the fact that she  had  changed  or  revised  her  account  because  he
    specifically mentioned that and indicated he had been "troubled" by it.
     Nevertheless, he explained that he did find the revised account to  be
    a plausible one and he clearly did take the view that the  evidence  of
    RMF was supportive in the sense that  it  suggested  she  had  suffered
    trauma which, of course, is likely to have been the case had  she  been
    treated as she claimed. So it provided some corroboration.   The  judge
    did not, it is true, specifically refer to Section 8 of the Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimant's, etc) Act  2004  but  he  did,  at
    paragraph 28, address issues as to why  the  Claimant  might  not  have
    wished to claim in Italy and, in any event,  Section  8  considerations
    are not, of themselves, determinative.   Putting  everything  together,
    therefore, I conclude that the judge did not err in deciding to  accept
    the Claimant's account as  a  truthful  and  credible  one  even  if  a
    different judge might have taken a different view on the same evidence.

10. As to the question of an internal flight  alternative,  the  judge  did
    refer to matters and make findings about matters relevant to that issue
    at paragraph 30 of his determination.  He did not specifically say that
    he was taking those factors into account in the context of an  internal
    flight alternative but it is reasonable to suppose, in context, that he
    did so.  He also had in mind concerns about the usefulness of  an  "IOM
    package" which might have been available to her to aid in resettlement.
     It is clear, despite what is said in the grounds, that the  judge  did
    accept that there might be difficulties with such a  package  and  that
    there were budgetary limitations.  Overall, whilst to some  extent  the
    judge may have  conflated  some  different  issues  and  may  not  have
    explained his thought processes as clearly as would have been ideal,  I
    conclude  that  he  did  make   sufficient   findings   regarding   the
    availability or otherwise of an internal flight alternative and that he
    did, in effect, conclude for the reasons set out at paragraph 30 and 33
    of his determination that to expect  the  Claimant  to  relocate  to  a
    different part of Albania would be unduly harsh.

11. The above, then, explains why I have, despite setting aside the judge's
    decision, preserved his  findings  and  his  conclusions.   As  to  the
    sufficiency of protection point, though, despite Mr  Hussain's  valiant
    attempts to persuade me otherwise, it is simply the case that the judge
    has not reached any conclusions about it  or  reached  any  conclusions
    that might be said to be specifically relevant to it.  Accordingly,  on
    that limited basis, the judge's decision must be set aside.  My further
    task, therefore, in these circumstances, is effectively  to  go  on  to
    complete the determination by considering the sufficiency of protection
    issue and resolving it one way or the other.  I do  not  remit  to  the
    First-tier tribunal for that to be done because it seems to me my doing
    so myself is more expeditious and because there is no need for  further
    evidence or findings of fact.

12. I received oral submissions as to sufficiency of  protection  from  the
    representatives. The sorts of considerations to be taken  into  account
    are set out in AM and BM and also in the more recent case of TD and  AD
    (Trafficked Women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC).  The latter decision did
    note that the Albanian  government  had  made  significant  efforts  to
    improve its response to trafficking and did also decide that there is a
    general "Horvath-standard sufficiency of protection" but that  it  will
    not be effective in every case.   The  particular  circumstances  of  a
    victim of trafficking must be considered in that regard.

13. The Appellant, according to the judge's preserved findings, was  indeed
    a victim of trafficking.  She had suffered trauma as a  result  of  her
    experiences which is, of course, entirely what one would  expect.   She
    was from an area where kanun law was practised and was said to override
    religious convention  and  civil  law  (see  page  34  of  the  judge's
    determination).  The judge found that her father adhered to  kanun  law
    and had accepted, as noted above, that he had sought to marry  her  off
    in an arranged marriage when she was only 14 years of age.   The  judge
    concluded that the Claimant would be at risk on return in the home area
    from her father and from others in the community.

14. Mr Diwncyz did not direct me to any specific passages in either of  the
    above country guidance determinations.  He accepted that  the  question
    of sufficiency of protection would turn upon  individual  circumstances
    and I certainly agree with him about that.  He said, having  made  that
    point, that he was content to leave it to the Upper Tribunal to  decide
    matters without his making any further points.  The Claimant  will,  in
    my judgment, experience difficulty  in  securing  effective  protection
    from the authorities, sufficient to meet the Horvath standard,  in  her
    particular circumstances.  She is, as the judge concluded, at risk from
    her  father  in  her  home  area  and,  notwithstanding   the   general
    improvements in terms of assistance available to trafficked  women  and
    the authority's greater willingness to seek to address the issue, it is
    quite difficult to see how the authorities, in an area where kanun  law
    is practised, would be able to practically ensure that her father would
    not be able to harm her, and that is what he wants to do  according  to
    the preserved findings, if she were to  return  to  her  home  area  of
    Albania.  There is, in addition, the risk of re-trafficking  which  she
    will have to be protected from, such risk being identified in  both  of
    the above country guidance cases, it being stated in TD and AD that re-
    trafficking is a reality,  and  there  is  little  in  this  Claimant's
    background to  indicate  that  she  might  not  be  vulnerable  to  re-
    trafficking or to being forced into other exploitative situations.  So,
    in her case, she would need to be effectively protected from  different
    sorts of threats.  Even if she has initial assistance  from  a  shelter
    she will, at some point, have to seek to re-establish herself and  will
    then be prone to ongoing risk at the hands of her father and,  to  some
    extent, forms of exploitation.

15. In light of the above I conclude,  in  re-making  this  decision,  that
    there will not be a sufficiency of protection for the Appellant if  she
    is returned to her home area of Albania.  I  have  concluded  that  the
    judge had decided, in effect and on the  basis  of  sufficient  factual
    findings, that requiring her to relocate would be unduly  harsh.   That
    is on the basis of personal circumstances to her and the  problems  she
    would face with resettlement as opposed to her being at risk away  from
    the home area.  Since that is so it is not  sufficiency  of  protection
    which is the issue in that regard and it is not,  therefore,  necessary
    for me to consider whether she would have a sufficiency  of  protection
    away from the home  area  because  it  has  already  been  decided,  in
    preserved findings, that for unrelated reasons it would be unduly harsh
    to expect her to relocate.

16. The upshot, therefore, is that in re-making the decision  I  allow  the
    Claimant's appeal because I am satisfied  that  there  will  not  be  a
    sufficiency  of  protection   for   her   upon   return   to   Albania.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error  of  law.   I  set
aside that decision.  In re-making  the  decision  I  allow  the  Claimant's
appeal on asylum grounds and also on human rights grounds (Article 3 of  the
European Convention on Human Rights).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

