
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07914/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2016                              |On 8 April 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AE
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, AE, was born in 1975 and  is  a  citizen  of
    Cameroon.  She appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Turnock)
    against a decision of the respondent to  remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom having refused her  application  for  asylum.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 28  October  2015  dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum and Articles 2/3 ECHR grounds but allowed it  "to  the
    extent that a lawful decision remains outstanding under  Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights".  The Secretary of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant attended in person with her children.   Her  English  was
    good enough for me to communicate with  her  without  the  need  of  an
    interpreter.  The issue may be briefly stated.  The appellant  has  not
    appealed against the decision of the judge to dismiss  her  asylum  and
    Articles 2/3 appeal.  Likewise, she  has  not  challenged  the  judge's
    decision  that  she  was  not  entitled  to  humanitarian   protection.
    However, following the hearing the judge received a  fax  communication
    [97] which indicated that the appellant had given birth  to  a  British
    child.

 3. I find that the judge has taken the wrong course of action in remitting
    the matter to the Secretary of State to consider Article 8 ECHR.   What
    Judge Turnock should have done is to have reconvened the hearing in the
    First-tier Tribunal at which the issue of the child and Article 8  ECHR
    might have been addressed by the  parties/  their  representatives.   I
    therefore set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    preserve the findings of fact.  I dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
    human rights (Articles 2/3) grounds, I find that the appellant  is  not
    entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.  Otherwise  the  appeal
    is returned to the First-tier Tribunal before Judge Turnock sitting  in
    Bradford on a date to be fixed which he may  determine  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.  Mrs Pettersen, for  the  respondent,  told  me
    that the respondent accepted that the claimed father of the child  (VY)
    is a British citizen.  I told Mrs Pettersen that it would be helpful if
    her colleagues would take a view on  the  paternity  of  the  child  in
    advance of the  next  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing;  if  paternity  is
    challenged, it may  be  necessary  for  the  appellant  to  obtain  the
    necessary DNA tests.  I do not expect  the  respondent  to  attend  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing without  having  first  agreed  or  clearly
    raised as an issue the question of the child's paternity.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  28
    October 2015 is set aside.  Findings of fact are preserved.   I  remade
    the decision to the extent that the appeal is dismissed on  asylum  and
    Article 2/3 ECHR grounds.  The appellant is not entitled to a grant  of
    humanitarian protection.  The appeal  is  returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Turnock) so that that Tribunal may remake the  decision
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 24 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

