
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07124/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date sent                    |
|On 9 July 2013                                |On 15 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     S H

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Rudd, instructed by Howe & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  us  to
    rescind the order and we  continue  it  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 1 May  1990.   On
    18 March 2012, she left Albania travelling by lorry to the UK where she
    arrived three days later.  On 22 May  2012  she  claimed  asylum.   The
    basis of her  claim  was  that  she  had  been  trafficked  for  sexual
    exploitation and  forced  to  work  as  a  prostitute  in  Italy.   Her
    trafficker regularly beat and  raped  her.   When  her  trafficker  was
    arrested, with the help of another prostitute  (referred  to  below  as
    "L"), she escaped and returned to Albania travelling by ferry with "L".
     She stayed with her grandmother but her grandmother did not  want  the
    appellant to live with her when she discovered  she  had  worked  as  a
    prostitute and her grandmother made arrangements for her to  travel  to
    the UK.  At that time, she was eight months pregnant and gave birth  to
    a daughter in the UK shortly after arriving.

 3. On 13 July  2012,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for asylum, humanitarian protection, and under Art 8 of the
    ECHR.  The Secretary of State did not accept  that  the  appellant  had
    been trafficked to Italy in order to work as a prostitute and,  in  any
    event, there would be a sufficiency of protection by the authorities in
    Albania from the appellant's claimed  traffickers.   Further,  internal
    relocation within Albania was open to the appellant.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 5 March 2013, Judge Buckwell dismissed the appellant's appeal  on
    all grounds.  In relation to the appellant's  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds, the judge made an adverse credibility  finding  and
    rejected the appellant's account that  she  had  been  trafficked  from
    Albania to Italy to work as a prostitute.

 5. On 21 May 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hemingway)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the  following
    basis:

         "5.  The determination is a full and in  many  respects  thoughtful
             document which does  not  suffer  from  the  lack  of  clarity
             suggested.  However,  it  is  arguable  the  Judge  failed  to
             adequately explain  why  he  attached  little  weight  to  the
             psychiatric report of Dr Hajioff and the expert country report
             of Antonia Young.  It is further arguable that  he  failed  to
             adequately explain his view that people traffickers would  not
             ill-treat the appellant.  It is also  arguable  that  he  fell
             into speculation when dealing with the question of whether the
             appellant could not have undertaken  a  boat  journey  with  a
             claimed trafficker from Albania to Italy."

 6. Thus, the appeal came before us.

 7. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Rudd adopted the grounds of appeal which
    he elaborated upon in his submissions.  In essence, he relied upon  the
    matters upon which Judge Hemingway had granted permission.

 8. First, he submitted that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons
    in para 68 of his determination for not giving "significant weight"  to
    the psychiatric report of Dr Hajioff who had diagnosed the appellant as
    suffering from chronic PTSD.

 9. Paragraph 68 of the judge's determination is in the following terms:

         "68. With respect to the psychiatric report prepared by Dr Hajioff,
             although I note his diagnosis that the Appellant  has  chronic
             PTSD and symptoms of depression, together with his  view  that
             scarring evidence is consistent with the account of an  injury
             caused by a knife to the foot of the Appellant,  I  note  also
             that Dr Hajioff in his diagnosis  of  the  conditions  of  the
             Appellant does not  appear  to  take  into  account  that  the
             Appellant was capable, notwithstanding her  stated  condition,
             to make a lengthy journey, whilst eight months pregnant,  from
             Albania to the United Kingdom on a lorry.  Notwithstanding the
             issues considered and the views expressed by him in  paras  33
             to 43 of his report, I do not find that  the  ability  of  the
             Appellant to  make  decisions  and  undertake  a  particularly
             challenging journey have been taken into account in  assessing
             the overall condition of the Appellant.  For such reasons I do
             not give significant weight to the report."

10. As regards the appellant's scarring, Judge Buckwell  returned  to  this
    issue in para 75 of his determination where he said:

         "[Dr Hajioff] found the scar on her foot to be consistent with  her
         account as to how an injury  had  previously  been  inflicted.   Of
         course such an injury could have been caused for reasons other than
         those which the appellant claimed  to  have  taken  place.   Little
         weight is given to her account of scarring."

11. Ms Martin submitted that the judge was entitled to treat  Dr  Hajioff's
    report in the way that he did in para 68.  Dr Hajioff  had,  Ms  Martin
    submitted, not considered the fact of the appellant's journey to the UK
    whilst she was eight months pregnant.  The finding in relation  to  the
    scarring on her foot was also, Ms Martin submitted,  properly  open  to
    the judge.

12. Whilst Ms Martin's submission may well be correct in  relation  to  the
    issue of scarring, we do not accept it in relation to the  findings  of
    Dr Hajioff in relation to the appellant's  psychiatric  condition.   We
    see no  rational  basis  upon  which  Dr  Hajioff's  opinion  that  the
    appellant suffered from chronic PTSD - which would support  her  having
    experienced the traumatic events that she claimed - on the  basis  that
    Dr Hajioff had not considered the appellant was capable of undergoing a
    lengthy journey (she  claims  some  three  days)  whilst  eight  months
    pregnant, travelling in a lorry from Albania to the United Kingdom.  We
    simply do not see the relevance of that issue to Dr Hajioff's diagnosis
    and that her PTSD was, at least, consistent with the appellant's  claim
    to have undergone the ordeal of trafficking  and  ill-treatment  whilst
    being forced to work as a prostitute in Italy.  In  our  judgment,  the
    judge's reasons do not justify his view that Dr Hajioff's report should
    not be given "significant weight" by which it is clear the judge  meant
    no weight at all.

13. Secondly, Mr Rudd submitted that the judge had failed properly to  take
    into account the expert report of Antonia Young.  She is  a  recognised
    expert in cases of this sort.  The judge  dealt  with  that  report  at
    paras 69-70 as follows:

         "69. With respect to the report of Ms Young, I note  that  she  did
             not interview the Appellant and I understand that  her  report
             is  produced  on   the   basis   of   her   consideration   of
             documentation.  Ms Young is not in a  position  to  express  a
             definitive view on the credibility of  the  Appellant  but  of
             course she was in a position to express her own assessment  of
             credibility based on  the  documentation  before  her  and  in
             consideration of objective evidence and caselaw.  Ms Young  of
             course considered the account as set out by the Appellant,  in
             terms of the records from  the  application  process  and  the
             Appellant's  statement  of   evidence,   together   with   the
             representatives'  letter  of  instruction.   Those   are   the
             documents specific to the  Appellant  which  Ms  Young  viewed
             (listed at page 2 to her report).

         70.  Specifically Ms Young refers to  clarifications  made  by  the
             Appellant, at section 7 of her  report.   The  manner  of  the
             Appellant's travel to Albania is remarked upon in  the  second
             paragraph at page 30  of  the  Report.   The  general  ban  on
             speedboats crossing from Vlora to Italy was said by  Ms  Young
             to have  'enormously  impacted'  that  manner  of  trafficking
             people to Italy.  However, she  found  it  entirely  plausible
             that an occasional speedboat, taking extreme care in  complete
             darkness,  would  be  able  to  make  the  crossing  with  the
             passengers  being  kept  in  complete  darkness  and  silence.
             Specific  evidence  was  not  given  in  that  regard  by  the
             Appellant but it is understood that her claimed  crossing  was
             not easy (paragraphs 17 to 19 of her appeal  statement).   The
             Appellant described there being high waves on  the  sea.   The
             Appellant indicated that it had been a really small boat.   In
             such circumstances, and taking into account the very nature of
             a speedboat, it was likely that a relatively  powerful  engine
             would have been required.  That would create noise in  itself,
             even if passengers were silent.  In rough waters it is  highly
             likely that a boat would have needed a powerful engine, either
             inboard or outboard."

14. It is not entirely clear to us what weight the judge gave to Ms Young's
    report.  The bulk of  the  report  is  concerned  with  the  background
    situation in Albania and in relation to,  in  particular,  trafficking.
    Ms Young turns to the specifics of the appellant's case at pages  29-33
    of her report.  Quite properly, Ms Young did  not  seek  to  usurp  the
    judicial function of determining whether the  appellant's  account  was
    true.  In her conclusion, she did state that the appellant's fears were
    "credible" concerning the threats from her family as well as  from  her
    boyfriend's network.  That future assessment of risk  was,  of  course,
    based upon a premise that the appellant's account was true.   Ms  Young
    did not take a view on the appellant's credibility but,  accepting  her
    account, assessed the risk to her on return.  It is not entirely  clear
    to us, therefore, why in para 69 - effectively as part of a preamble to
    para 70 - the judge appears to remind himself that Ms Young was not  in
    a position to express a "definitive view  on  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant":  she had not interviewed the appellant  and  she  had  only
    produced her report based on the documentation and objective  evidence.



15. Perhaps, however, the crucial point concerning Ms Young's report is  in
    para 70  of  the  judge's  determination.   There,  he  considered  the
    appellant's evidence that when she had been trafficked from Albania  to
    Italy she had been taken to Italy in a boat.  The evidence  before  the
    judge,  and  this  was  accepted  before  us,  was  that  the  Albanian
    authorities  had  banned  speedboats  (it  appears  owned  by  Albanian
    nationals) from its coastal waters in order to tackle drugs and  people
    smuggling.  In relation to that Ms Young expressed the  following  view
    at page 30 of her report:

         "It is true that the ban on speedboats from  crossing  the  coastal
         waters from Vlora to Italy has enormously impacted on that mode  of
         trafficking.  I find it completely  plausible  that  an  occasional
         one, taking extreme  care  to  travel  on  a  dark  night,  keeping
         passengers in complete darkness  and  silence,  may  still  achieve
         their aim to make  the  illegal  crossing  (just  as  several  have
         managed to enter the  UK  despite  stringent  policing  of  the  UK
         borders)."

16. That was an opinion which Ms Young was entitled  to  put  forward.   In
    rejecting that, in para 70 the judge  doubted  whether  that  could  be
    achieved because, in effect,  a  speedboat  would  require  a  powerful
    engine to negotiate the rough waters and would therefore create  noise.
    With respect to the judge, there was no evidence before him that  could
    justify that reasoning.  The evidence was only concerned with a ban  by
    the  Albanian  authorities  on  speedboats,  presumably  within   their
    territorial waters.  Although the appellant described in her  statement
    that the waves were "coming up very high" even though  it  was  a  calm
    day, there was no evidential basis for the judge to question  the  view
    of Antonia Young (which might well be thought to reflect common  sense)
    that an occasional speedboat  could,  despite  the  ban,  slip  through
    undetected in darkness.  The judge's comment that it is  highly  likely
    that a boat would need a powerful engine which would  create  noise  in
    itself was pure speculation and did not justify, if this be  the  case,
    his rejection of Ms Young's opinion.

17. Thirdly, Mr Rudd submitted that  a  number  of  the  judge's  findings,
    particularly in paras 71-75 were irrational.  We  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to consider all of Mr Rudd's submissions in this regard.   We
    consider it sufficient to identify two aspects of the judge's reasoning
    which in our view cannot stand.

18. In para 71, the judge doubted the appellant's claim that she  had  been
    forced to work as a prostitute but at the same time had been mistreated
    by her trafficker.  She claimed that she had been beaten and raped.  At
    para 71 the judge said this:

         "71. The Appellant claims that she was  handed  over  by  boyfriend
             Artur in Rome to a man named Toni.  Her account is that he was
             effectively running a brothel service by providing  women  who
             were detained in a four bedroom property and transporting them
             to a hotel where sexual services could be  purchased.   If  so
             then the Appellant would in effect have been considered  as  a
             commodity under the control of that individual and would  have
             been a valuable commodity in the eyes  of  a  person  so  mis-
             treating the individual.  For the account of the Appellant  to
             be credible, the  Tribunal  finds  that  those  would  be  the
             circumstances which would have applied to  the  regime  within
             which the Appellant was forced to live."

19. Initially, Ms Martin sought to defend the  judge's  reasoning  in  this
    paragraph on the basis that it was open to him to find that, in effect,
    it was unlikely that the appellant's claimed trafficker would  mistreat
    her as she was a "valuable commodity".  However, during the  course  of
    Ms Martin's submissions, we drew her attention to the Upper  Tribunal's
    country guidance decision in AM and BM (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG
    [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) at [148]-[150].   Those  paragraphs  set  out  the
    surrounding circumstances to trafficking in Albania.

20. We begin, however, with [142] where it is said that the: "Relationships
    between the women and the traffickers .... is often violent ....".

21. At [148] the Upper Tribunal noted that at the "most violent end" of the
    trafficking spectrum:

         "The initial period  involves  'breaking  in'  of  the  victims  of
         trafficking by their abductors including  multiple  rapes,  extreme
         violence and imprisonment.  It is likely that many of  these  women
         are from poorer backgrounds and may well be virgins  who  have  had
         little contact with men other than fathers and brothers before they
         were trafficked.  Their abduction is likely to have  been  violent.
         Once trafficked the victims of trafficking are likely to be  denied
         freedom of any sort and are forced to have  sexual  relations  with
         men with whom they would not willingly have entered into  any  form
         of relationship.  There is a likelihood that such treatment will go
         on for some considerable time."

22. Then at [149] the Upper Tribunal continued:

         "It is therefore not difficult to see  that  such  treatment  would
         make those victims of trafficking feel dehumanised and it is little
         wonder therefore that, as found by Dr Agnew-Davis in  these  cases,
         that they  are  likely  to  suffer  complex  post-traumatic  stress
         disorder and psychological damage."

23. We note in passing the  reference  there  to  PTSD  and  therefore  the
    potential relevance of Dr  Hajioff's  report  in  this  appeal.   As  a
    consequence of considering this material from a country guidance  case,
    Ms Martin accepted that the judge had erred in para  71  in  concluding
    that it was not credible that the appellant would be mistreated if  she
    had indeed been trafficked for prostitution.

24. The final matter we identify in the judge's reasoning is  in  para  72.
    There, he considered the appellant's account that she escaped from  her
    trafficker, crossing from Italy to Albania, by ferry.  As part  of  his
    reasoning for doubting that the appellant had travelled as she claimed,
    the judge said this at para 72:

         "72. .... The appellant claimed that [L] assisted her to deal with,
             or perhaps avoid immigration procedures when the ferry arrived
             in Albania.  Although there have been certain changes  in  the
             immigration requirements of Schengen  countries  for  Albanian
             nationals who possess a biometric passport, those changes were
             not in force when the Appellant entered Italy in August  2010.
             There was  also  no  indication  that  the  Appellant  was  in
             possession of  appropriate  Albanian  documentation  when  she
             returned to Albania one year later  with  [L].   The  Tribunal
             does not find there to be a credible explanation as to how the
             Appellant could have re-entered Albania when she  had  claimed
             to travel on a ferry which was covering an international route
             from Italy to Albania."

25. As regards the first part of the Judge's reasoning, Mr  Rudd  submitted
    that the immigration arrangements for Albanian nationals travelling  to
    Schengen countries had no relevance when the appellant entered Italy in
    August 2010 as they were not then in force.  That, is of  course,  what
    the judge said in his determination.  However, Mr Rudd  also  submitted
    that the judge had no basis for doubting the appellant's claim that she
    entered Albania from Italy on a ferry with the aid of "L".   Ms  Martin
    submitted that the judge was entitled to make the finding that  he  did
    because there was no  evidence  that  the  appellant,  as  an  Albanian
    national, had any travel documents such as a passport, which would have
    allowed her to enter Albania.  Even if the judge did  not  confuse  the
    Schengen  country  arrangements  for  entry  into  those  countries  by
    Albanian nationals when considering the appellant's  entry  to  Albania
    from one of those countries, in finding that  there  was  no  "credible
    explanation" as to how the appellant could re-enter Albania, the  judge
    did not deal with the appellant's evidence  that  "L"  dealt  with  the
    officials and she does not know what documents (if  any)  she  had  and
    also the  background  evidence  concerning  the  widespread  nature  of
    corruption in Albania set out for example in the COI Report for Albania
    (30 March 2012) at section 19.

26. As we have indicated, we do not consider it necessary to deal with  the
    totality of Mr Rudd's  submissions  concerning  the  remainder  of  the
    judge's findings in paras 73-76 of his determination.  In our judgment,
    the failure properly to consider the psychiatric report of  Dr  Hajioff
    and the expert report of Antonia Young  in  themselves  undermined  the
    judge's adverse credibility finding  such  that  it  could  not  stand.
    Added to that, there is the accepted error in para 71 where  the  judge
    wrongly doubts the core of the appellant's claim - namely that she  was
    trafficked to be a prostitute in Italy - on the basis that it  was  not
    credible that she would be mistreated as  she  claimed.   Further,  the
    Judge's reasoning in para 72 cannot stand.  These  errors  sufficiently
    undermine the judge's adverse credibility finding  such  that,  in  our
    judgment, it cannot stand.

Decision

27. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds involved  the
    making of an error of law.  That  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
    aside.

28.  Both  representatives  indicated  that,  in   that   eventually,   the
    appropriate course was to remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a de novo  hearing.   Bearing  in  mind  para  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement, and having regard  to  the  nature  and
    extent of the fact-finding required on a rehearing,  in  our  judgment,
    this is the proper course.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be reheard by a judge other than Judge Buckwell.






                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

