

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07681/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 21st March 2014                           |On: 20th June 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                         ABBAS IBRAHIM ABBAS KHALIL
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Santamera, Broudie Jackson and Canter


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sudan date of birth 10th April 1978.  On
    the 31st October 2013 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Edwards) dismissed
    his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to remove him from
    the United Kingdom pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum
    Act 1999.   That decision had followed a rejection of  the  Appellant's
    claims to international protection.


 2. Permission was granted to appeal against  Judge  Edwards  on  the  29th
    November 2013 and  on  the  5th  February  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chalkley set the determination aside in its entirety. The reason  given
    in Judge Chalkley's written decision is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in failing to consider all of the evidence  in  the  round:  "the
    judge makes what are effectively negative credibility findings and only
    having made them did he then  consider  expert  evidence  from  country
    expert Mr Verney and medical evidence from Dr Lord".  The  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was therefore set aside. The  matter  has  come
    before me for re-making.




    Basis of Claim


 3. The Appellant states that he has a well-founded fear of persecution  in
    Sudan for reasons of this  ethnicity,  imputed  political  opinion  and
    membership of a particular social group.  He  claims  to  be  from  the
    Berti tribe of Southern Sudan.  He states that in 2003 he was called up
    to perform military service in Darfur. He refused to do this on grounds
    of conscience. He was detained and tortured and was shot in the leg  by
    an officer.   He has sustained numerous scars as a result of this  ill-
    treatment. Whilst in military hospital he  managed  to  escape.     The
    Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004 and claimed asylum  but
    was returned to Greece. He has spent ten years living rough  in  Greece
    but he submits that he cannot now be returned to Sudan where  his  life
    would be in danger.




    Reasons for Refusal


 4. The Respondent notes that when the Appellant claimed asylum in 2004  he
    claimed to be from the Tunjur tribe. The Appellant's  explanation  that
    he was afraid that he would be returned to Sudan is noted but rejected.
    The  Respondent  cannot  rely  on  the  Appellant's   evidence.     The
    Respondent does not accept that  the  Appellant  is  either  Tunjur  or
    Berti.  Other elements of the claim are not accepted.   The  Respondent
    does not find it credible that the Appellant would be able to escape by
    jumping from a hospital window and running away if he had been shot  in
    the leg.




    Legal Framework


 5. The burden of proof is  on  the  Appellant  who  must  show  it  to  be
    reasonably likely that he has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  or
    serious harm in Sudan if returned there today.


 6. Mr McVeety accepts that if the  Appellant  discharges  that  burden  in
    respect of his ethnicity then he is a refugee: AA (non-Arab Darfuris  -
    relocation) Sudan CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00056.   Conversely  Ms  Santamera
    accepts that if the Appellant does not discharge that burden his appeal
    will necessarily fail, since I would be rejecting the  truthfulness  of
    his claim.


    The Evidence

 7. The  Appellant's  evidence  is  set  out  in  the  transcripts  of  his
    interviews with UKBA staff dated 30th June  2013  (screening)  and  the
    22nd July 2013 (substantive).  He  has  further  sworn  and  adopted  a
    witness statement dated 25th October 2013. He gave oral evidence before
    me a full note of which can be found in the record of proceedings.


 8. In addition to his own evidence the Appellant  relies  on  three  other
    documents. The first is a letter from the Chairperson of the Berti  and
    Tunjour Community in the United Kingdom, Dr Salah Osman, who writes  to
    state that having personally interviewed the Appellant for over an hour
    he is of the firm opinion that the Appellant is from the Berti tribe in
    North Darfur state.  The second is a  report  by  Mr  Peter  Verney,  a
    recognised expert on the Sudan, who has reached  the  same  conclusion.
    The third is a report by Dr Lesley Lord  who,  in  summary,  finds  the
    Appellant to bear numerous scars on  his  body.  I  will  consider  the
    evidence of all three of these witnesses in detail in my findings.


 9. The Respondent relied on the transcript of the interview given  by  the
    Appellant on the 27th September 2004.  This is evidenced to  prove  the
    uncontested assertion that the Appellant had  then  claimed  to  be  of
    Tunjur ethnicity.  The Respondent further relies on the account offered
    by the Appellant in the current claim, which is said to be  implausible
    and inconsistent.

10. I have read and considered all of the evidence before me including that
    which is not expressly referred to herein.


    My Findings

11. The Respondent does not accept that the Appellant is Berti because when
    he claimed asylum in 2004 he said he was Tunjur  [paragraph  12  RFRL].
    The Appellant was interviewed about his claimed ethnic origins and  the
    Respondent found his replies to be vague; the information he  was  able
    to recite  was  all  readily  available  in  the  public  domain  [13].
    Moreover the Respondent considered  that  the  Appellant's  account  of
    detention, ill-treatment and escape was not credible [14-17].


12. Lying to the immigration services is not behaviour to be  condoned.  It
    is very likely to leave  the  liar  in  the  situation  in  which  this
    Appellant now finds himself, with any subsequent evidence  rejected  as
    untrue. It indicates a willingness to tell untruths  to  get  what  you
    want.  To that extent it diminishes the weight that can be attached  to
    the Appellant's evidence. That said, I  accept  that  as  a  matter  of
    logic, one lie does not necessarily mean that all  subsequent  evidence
    is untrue. The Appellant has said that he was advised to  say  that  he
    was Tunjur back in 2004 by other members of the Darfuri community,  and
    terrified of return to Greece, he took that advice[1].  He would not be
    the first asylum seeker to have misguidedly followed "advice"  of  this
    sort.   Although the 2004 claim cautions me in  my  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's current evidence, it cannot in itself be  determinative  of
    this appeal.

13. In respect of the Appellant's knowledge of the Berti tribe I have three
    sources of evidence: that of Dr Osman, Mr Verney and of  the  Appellant
    himself.

14. The letter dated 6th August 2013 from Dr Osman is brief. It is  on  the
    headed notepaper of the 'Berti and Tunjour Community  in  the  UK'  and
    full contact  details  including  a  telephone  number  and  email  are
    provided.   Dr Osman writes that his  organisation  provide  supporting
    letters for "genuine refugees" from the Berti  and  Tunjour  tribes  of
    Darfur. He writes:

          "the community will conduct  a  thorough  investigation  and  test
         history, knowledge, events and conduct an  interview  in  order  to
         confirm ethnicity or where do people come  from  in  Sudan.  We  do
         allocate a  panel  of  expertise  native  speakers  of  the  region
         according to where the claimant come from and what language does he
         /she speaking. We have very strict policies so as  to  ensure  that
         the evidence we collect to identify Darfur's and prepare the letter
         of support is exact. I interviewed him  by  asking  very  important
         information  about  the  Berti  tribe  in  Darfour  after  an  hour
         interview I can say that Mr Abbas Khalil is indeed from Berti tribe
         and is from Malitte in North Darfur State"

15. As one would expect of an expert witness, the report  of  Peter  Verney
    dated 28th October 2013 is rather more  comprehensive.    In  order  to
    prepare his report  Mr  Verney  had  regard  to  all  of  the  relevant
    documents in the Appellant's case including his interviews, statements,
    the  refusal  letter  and  the  medico-legal  report  of  Dr  Lord.  He
    personally interviewed the Appellant using  Sudanese  Arabic  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter where necessary.

16. The report covers various issues including general  country  background
    information and  specific  commentary  on  the  non-Arab  Darfuris  and
    military conscription. On the subject of the  Appellant'  ethnicity  Mr
    Verney concludes:


    . That the Appellant was able  to  correctly  identify  Berti  sub-clans
      [paragraphs 13-20]
    . He gave "detailed answers" about his tribe [60], for  instance  giving
      "competent  knowledge"  of  the  Malik,  Nazir  and  Omda   [68]   and
      identifying the current Malik or King, and the fact that the last King
      had died in 2005 [69]
    . That the Appellant was able to give  details  about  the  harvest  and
      preparation of traditional Darfuri foods [70-79] and in doing so  used
      "very specific local language unknown  outside  the  non-Arab  Darfuri
      community" [73-74]
    . The Appellant was able to give detail about  the  specific  traditions
      that take place over the course of a three day Berti  wedding  [80-90]
      including that the groom carries the branch of the laboub tree on  the
      third day to represent fertility [86] and that  the  bride  and  groom
      spray each other with milk at the wedding breakfast [89]. He was  also
      able to describe and imitate the various combinations of clapping  and
      leaping involved in traditional wedding dances [90].

17. Mr Verney notes that a Berti who grew up  in  the  city  might  not  be
    expected to have the same level of knowledge as  one  who  grew  up  in
    rural Darfur [64] but despite  this  finds  the  Appellant  to  have  a
    detailed knowledge of Berti culture.  In  respect  of  the  information
    provided by the Appellant about food preparation Mr Verney states  that
    he has not met any Sudanese from outside Darfur  who  would  recognise,
    much less eat, these foods.  In respect  of  the  information  provided
    about Berti weddings he notes "it is significant that  the  interpreter
    acknowledged that she had not heard of  most  of  these  practices  and
    terms. These practices and terms are largely exclusive to  the  Berti".
    He concludes that the Appellant has given detailed and correct  answers
    concerning matters outside the public domain. He  coped  well  with  Mr
    Verney's frequent digressions from the narrative and gave answers  that
    appeared spontaneous  rather  than  rehearsed  [190];  he  displayed  a
    "convincing familiarity" with traditions of the Berti tribe [191],  and
    his evidence overall is consistent with Mr Verney's  knowledge  of  the
    political situation in Darfur and Sudan.

18. The answers recorded by Mr Verney are to be contrasted with  the  brief
    and vague replies about "culture and traditions" given by the Appellant
    at his asylum interview. Mr McVeety pointed to the respective dates  of
    those meetings and suggested that following refusal the Appellant could
    have 'learned' the information he subsequently gave to Mr Verney.  That
    is always a possibility, and in the case of  someone  who  has  already
    admitted to having lied comprehensively in pursuit of an asylum  claim,
    it is a submission with even more force. I have therefore considered it
    carefully.

19. The Appellant himself  states  that  he  found  the  questions  at  the
    interview hard to respond to because they were "very  broad".   I  note
    his evidence that in his culture, questions tend to be specific if they
    are requesting specific answers[2].   I would agree that the  questions
    put were broad. The interviewing officer addresses  this  matter  twice
    during the course of the interview and at neither point asks  specific,
    or follow up, questions to the information offered. For instance at Q91
    the interviewing officer said "tell me about Berti tribe, all you  can,
    anything" to which the Appellant replied "what sort of things, customs,
    traditions?". When the question was repeated  -  not  clarified  -  the
    Appellant said "the Berti are a  very  peaceful  tribe  got  harmonious
    (illegible) with other tribes, got customs and traditions".  No  follow
    up question is asked about what those customs and traditions might  be.
     The tone of the interview - given the history - is  fairly  hostile[3]
    and it gives the impression that the  officer  was  not  interested  in
    finding out what the Appellant had to say about the  Berti.  Again,  at
    Q101 he asks "what can you tell  me  about  the  Berti"  to  which  the
    Appellant replies "got customs and traditions, concerning weddings  and
    (illegible) as well as harvest".    Instead  of  then  being  asked  to
    describe harvest for the Berti, the Appellant is next asked  about  his
    escape from detention.  I find this method of  interviewing  of  little
    assistance in determining  whether  the  Appellant  did  in  fact  know
    anything about Berti harvest traditions that day.


20. That the Appellant might have learned all he later told  Mr  Verney  is
    clearly something that Mr Verney himself is very aware of.   He  states
    that he bears in mind that  there  are  many  Sudanese  asylum  seekers
    falsely claiming to be Berti and that he is concerned to identify  such
    claims: "this is especially important in view of  the  infiltration  of
    the Sudanese community abroad by agents  or  stooges  of  the  Sudanese
    government" [paragraphs 96, 128].   He is alert to the possibility that
    the answers being given have been memorised or learnt [112-117] and  as
    a result he does not use a standard formula to interview  subjects:  he
    will digress from the narrative to investigate the subject's  knowledge
    and manner of speaking. He draws a distinction between "wooden" answers
    from which the subject cannot expand  and  "spontaneous,  illuminating"
    responses which contain "small but significant details". In this way he
    has on several occasions identified a number of subjects who are making
    false claims to be Darfuris, including persons not even from Sudan  but
    from West Africa [120]. I  note  that  in  his  conclusions  Mr  Verney
    specifically records that the Appellant coped well with his digressions
    from a pro-forma and that he gave good levels of  detail.   He  clearly
    does not consider that the Appellant is faking Berti ethnicity.


21. Overall I found Mr Verney's report to  be  extremely  helpful.   It  is
    prefaced by statements confirming that he understands his  role  as  an
    expert; in his submissions Mr McVeety expressly accepted that Mr Verney
    is an expert on Sudan.  I accept that Mr Verney has  the  expertise  to
    comment on the  Appellant's  ethnicity  and  that  he  understands  and
    applies the Ikarian Reefer principles.   I accept his evidence that  he
    is "concerned to filter out opportunists" [126] and as such accept that
    he has made an objective assessment of the Appellant. I  place  a  good
    deal of weight on Mr Verney's reports and its conclusions. He has  been
    at pains to explain how his  methodology  protects  against  fraudulent
    claims, and I accept that he is an objective and expert witness. He has
    given several examples of matters  known  to  the  Appellant  that  are
    peculiar to the Berti and are not widely known outside that  community.



22. Mr Verney's conclusions are supported  by  those  drawn  by  Dr  Osman.
    Although Dr Osman is clearly not a native English speaker, and  I  have
    not been provided with a transcript of the questions  answered  by  the
    Appellant during his interview with the organisation, I  feel  able  to
    place some weight on  this  evidence.  The  writer  has  provided  full
    contact details and since the Respondent has been in possession of this
    letter since at least October 2013  (when  the  Appellant's  First-tier
    Tribunal bundle was served) verification checks could have  been  made.
    The writer is at pains to point out that he, and the organisation  that
    he represents, do not simply support anyone claiming to be of Berti  or
    Tunjur ethnicity. As the letter explains, such a letter of support will
    only be forthcoming if the claim of the individual concerned  has  been
    examined with care.  I have no reason to doubt Dr Osman's evidence that
    he is satisfied as to the Appellant's claimed ethnicity.

23. The final report relied upon by the Appellant is that of Dr Lord.    No
    issue is taken with  Dr  Lord's  expertise  in  identifying  scars  and
    evaluating them within the context  of  the  Istanbul  protocol.   Upon
    examination she has found numerous scars on the Appellant's head, neck,
    arms, trunk, back and legs.   Two scars to the Appellant's head, one on
    the back of the skull the other  on  the  forehead,  are  found  to  be
    diagnostic of healed lacerations caused  by  blunt  force:  this  could
    either have been through hard falls to the floor or being hit  with  an
    blunt object.    Since  falling  would  mean  having  fallen  twice  in
    different directions, Dr Lord finds the scars to be  highly  consistent
    with the Appellant's account of being hit with a stick.   The scars  to
    the Appellant's arms and back  are  diagnostic  of  healed  burns.  The
    pattern indicates that they were caused by a solid hot object and  that
    the Appellant was likely restrained at the time.  A scar to  his  elbow
    is diagnostic of a healed incised wound; the  shape  indicates  a  stab
    rather than a slash and this is in keeping with his claim to have  been
    stabbed with a bayonet.  On the Appellant's leg Dr Lord found  a  large
    healed scar on the outer left knee diagnostic of a full thickness  skin
    injury. This is where the Appellant claims to have been  shot,  and  to
    have subsequently had an operation. Since there is no bullet  entry  or
    exit wound it would appear that the bullet hit the skin at an angle and
    travelled across the area causing a furrow or tunnel in the  skin.  The
    shape has been modified by the operation to  remove  fragments  of  the
    bullet and damaged tissue.


24. Against all of this evidence are three factors. The  Respondent  relies
    first on the Appellant's  previous  willingness  to  rely.  As  I  have
    already noted this is a factor of great significance but it  cannot  be
    determinative. Mr McVeety and Mr Verney both commented on the fact that
    there has never been any distinction in  asylum  case-law  between  the
    Tungur and the Berti,  so  any  deceit  was  pointless.  The  Appellant
    himself points out that he could have simply maintained the lie that he
    was Tungur and would not now find himself in the predicament that he is
    in; he submits that he now claims to be Berti because that is  in  fact
    the truth.   Looking at the evidence of  ethnicity  in  isolation  that
    would indeed seem the most likely  explanation.  Mr  Verney  has  given
    powerful evidence as to why the Appellant's  current  claim  should  be
    accepted, and that finds support from Dr Osman and the  association  he
    represents.  I cannot however look at that  evidence  in  isolation.  I
    must assess it in the round with all remaining matters.

25. The second point advanced by the  Respondent  concerns  issues  arising
    under section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants
    etc) Act 2004. I am obliged by statute to  find  that  the  Appellant's
    previous behaviour in failing to claim asylum in Italy, Greece,  France
    or any of the other European countries  that  he  might  have  been  in
    before  his  arrival  here,  necessarily  diminishes  his  credibility.
    Doubts must also exist about the way in which the Appellant  travelled,
    since he has given inconsistent account of what passport  he  used  and
    when.  I have given those factors due weight.

26. The final point concerns the overall plausibility of  the  account.  Mr
    McVeety concentrated his submissions on this. He asked me  to  consider
    carefully the Appellant's account in the  context  of  his  history  of
    deceit and "asylum shopping".   He asked me to find it incredible  that
    the Appellant would be living rough in  Greece  for  approximately  ten
    years but then be able to make his way back to  the  UK.  He  submitted
    that the Appellant has  likely  returned  to  the  UK  because  of  the
    economic problems in Greece: he is an economic migrant.   The Appellant
    claims to have married a Sudanese Arab  woman  in  Greece:  Mr  McVeety
    questioned why she or her family  would  agree  to  marry  a  penniless
    African, given the history  of  enmity  between  those  two  population
    groups. As to the claimed events before the  Appellant  left  Sudan  Mr
    McVeety submitted that they are  entirely  implausible.  The  Appellant
    claims to have been shot for refusing to undertake military service, to
    have been tortured and detained, but then the authorities  offered  him
    treatment. It is said that he managed to escape with relative ease, run
    away and board a bus all  with  a  gunshot  wound  to  the  leg.    The
    Appellant may have many scars to his body, but  since  it  is  accepted
    that he comes from Sudan, a country  with  a  long-running  and  brutal
    conflict, there are many ways in which  these  scars  could  have  been
    sustained: they may for  instance  have  been  caused  during  military
    service.  There is no evidence that the  Appellant  had  any  of  these
    scars when he first claimed asylum in 2004; they may equally have  been
    sustained on the streets of Greece.


27. I have weighed all of these points  in  the  round  with  the  evidence
    overall.  Mr McVeety is quite correct to point to  plausibility  issues
    about the Appellant's account of ill-treatment and escape in Sudan.  He
    is also right to emphasise the section 8  issues  and  the  Appellant's
    admission to lying in a previous claim. The fact remains that if he  is
    indeed Berti, none of that matters.   As it  stands  I  find  that  the
    powerful evidence  before  me  of  the  Appellant's  claimed  ethnicity
    prevails over all of these concerns.  Having read again the evidence of
    Dr Osman and Mr Verney I cannot accept that either of  these  witnesses
    would have the wool pulled over their eyes. Both have a  keen  interest
    in making sure fraudulent claims do not succeed, not least  because  of
    well-founded concerns about the  Darfuri  community  in  the  UK  being
    infiltrated by agents from Khartoum.   I find that having  weighed  the
    evidence as a whole, the Appellant has discharged the burden  of  proof
    in showing himself to be of Berti ethnicity. Mr McVeety  accepted  that
    if that was my finding, the appeal should be allowed.



      Decisions

28. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


29. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows:

   i) The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds;
  ii) The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  a
      refugee;
 iii) The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

30. I make no direction for anonymity, since none was requested and  I  see
    no reason to make one.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               4th June 2014


-----------------------
[1] Paragraph 14, witness statement dated 25th October 2013
[2] Paragraph 15, witness statement dated 25th October 2013
[3] The Appellant is asked repeatedly to set out in detail "all the lies he
told" in 2004. Since the interviewing officer no doubt had access to the
relevant documents, and the Appellant had volunteered from the outset that
he had lied in that application, these questions have the appearance of an
exercise in humiliation.  They are entirely pointless; contrary to the
assertion of the interviewing officer, they offer no assistance in
determining this claim.

