
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07261/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Judgment given orally at hearing on  |On 23 November 2015                  |
|10 September 2015                    |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                     IS
                         (anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Young, Solicitor instructed by Montaque
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Albania,  born  on  28  June  1998.
    Significantly, he was aged 17 at the date of  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and is still a minor.  He arrived in the UK  on  10
    May 2013 and made a claim for asylum on 22 May 2013.  That  application
    was refused but he was granted discretionary leave  to  remain  and  he
    still has that leave.

 2. The decision to refuse asylum was a decision which  was  appealable  as
    what is known as an 'upgrade' appeal.  His appeal before the First-tier
    Tribunal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Newberry on  6  October
    2015 whereby the appeal was dismissed.  The significant  background  to
    the First-tier Judge's decision  is  that  his  determination  was  not
    signed until 1 March 2015 and was promulgated sometime later  in  March
    2015.  In the circumstances of this case that was a considerable period
    of time after the appeal had been heard.

 3. The bare background to the appellant's appeal  and  the  basis  of  his
    claim as advanced before the First-tier Tribunal was  a  fear  that  he
    would face mistreatment on return having been subjected to  abuse  from
    his father who forced him to work from a young age.  He started working
    for what he described as a youth gang who made him take bags  from  the
    entrance to  a  port,  to  ships.  Those  bags  contained  drugs.   The
    appellant remained living with his family throughout that time although
    said that he sometimes slept outside.   Sometimes  he  would  be  paid,
    sometimes not. He asserted that he would be beaten if he  was  late  or
    tried to refuse to help.  Ultimately, he left Albania and came  to  the
    UK.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal make a number of complaints
    about the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  One of them we think we
    can dispose of very simply.  That complaint is about the  reference  by
    the judge at [30] of the decision to the appellant having departed from
    Afghanistan, whereas of course the appellant is from Albania  and  left
    Albania to come to the UK.  It is said that that is a  material  error.
    In our judgement it is obviously an error, but nothing more than a slip
    of the pen and we find no substance in the suggestion that that  is  an
    error of law either on its own or in combination of any  other  factors
    requiring the decision to be set aside. Having said that, it  does,  we
    think, betray some lack of care on the part of the First-tier Judge.

 5. It is also argued in the grounds that although the  judge  referred  to
    the Joint Presidential Guidance in relation to  minors  and  vulnerable
    people, the judge did not have that guidance in mind when  he  came  to
    his conclusions.  We stated at the outset that the appellant's age  was
    a significant matter and it is.  It is significant not only in terms of
    the requirement for age  to  be  taken  into  account  when  making  an
    assessment of credibility, but the difficulty inherent in that  process
    is heightened in circumstances where the credibility  findings  on  the
    face of it appear to have been made some five months after the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. It is also submitted, to summarise, that the credibility  findings  are
    inadequate in terms of their detail.  We can take the  matter  shortly.
    Ms Pettersen did not resist the grounds, although she did  not  concede
    the appeal on behalf of the respondent.  It was also pointed out to  us
    that the judge had referred to the standard of proof to be  applied  as
    being a balance of probabilities, a matter which we for  our  own  part
    had also noticed, although it was not  in  the  grounds  as  originally
    pleaded. We permitted the grounds to be amended to include that  aspect
    of the determination, the suggestion being that the judge  had  applied
    the wrong standard of proof.

 7. We are satisfied that the First-tier Judge  did  err  in  law  for  the
    reasons contained in the grounds and which can be summarised.

 8. The appellant's age was a significant factor.  We do not see  from  the
    determination  any  adequate  recognition  in  the  reasons,   of   the
    appellant's age in the credibility findings.   We  conclude  that  that
    error was compounded  by  the  fact  that  the  determination  was  not
    promulgated until some five months or so after the hearing.  It is  not
    evident from the  determination  whether  or  not  the  appellant  gave
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal but it appears to  us  that  he
    did.  There is no readily discernible reference to the appellant's oral
    evidence in the determination from which credibility findings could  be
    said to spring.

 9. We were not referred by the parties to any authority on the question of
    how long after a hearing it is reasonable for a judge to  promulgate  a
    decision where credibility is in  issue  but  we  have  regard  to  the
    decision in Jeyakumaran Sambasivam v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2000] Imm AR 85.  In that case, to summarise, it  was  said
    that the Special Adjudicator's determination had not  been  promulgated
    until nearly four months after the hearing and the submission was  that
    he had failed to mark the file to show how long after the  hearing  the
    draft had been sent for typing.  The Court of Appeal held that normally
    the Tribunal would remit for a hearing de novo a case where  the  delay
    between  hearing  and  promulgation  was  more  than  three  months  if
    credibility was in issue,  although  the  circumstances  of  each  case
    needed to be considered.

10. We find that the First-tier Judge erred in law in the respects to which
    we have referred in terms of the credibility  findings,  combined  with
    the interval of time between the hearing and the  promulgation  of  the
    decision.

11. Furthermore, having considered the determination as a whole, we are not
    satisfied that the judge has demonstrated the basis on which  he  found
    the appellant's account  incredible,  with  reference  to  sufficiently
    detailed findings.  We consider that the reasons given by the judge for
    rejecting the credibility of the appellant's account  are  not  legally
    sustainable in terms of the depth of their analysis, particularly  when
    having regard to the age of the appellant.

12. We are also satisfied that the judge erred in law in his application of
    the standard of proof.  At [11] of the determination  it  was  said  as
    follows:

         "The burden of proof is on the Appellant who must prove his case to
         the standard of the balance of probability.  There must be  a  real
         possibility  of  persecution  amounting  to   serious   injury   if
         returned."

13. Of itself, if that was the only basis of the self-direction we probably
    would not find that the judge had erred in law in  his  application  of
    the standard of proof.  However, looking at [32], in the summary of the
    judge's conclusions on the appellant's  credibility,  it  was  said  as
    follows:

         "I find therefore that the Appellant was not,  on  the  balance  of
         probability,  a  drug  runner,  and  a  person  whose  journey  was
         planned."

    It seems to us clear  that  the  judge  there  has  applied  the  civil
    standard and not the appropriate lower standard to be applied in asylum
    appeals.

14. In all these circumstances we conclude that the errors of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal are such as to require the decision
    to be set aside.

15. We heard submissions from the parties about whether it was  appropriate
    for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  or  for  the
    decision to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.  We are  mindful  of  the
    fact that the appeal had already been before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    prior to its having been heard before Judge Newberry.  First-tier Judge
    W. Grant heard the appeal on 2 January  2014.   Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Lewis at a hearing on 1 April 2014 found an error of law in Judge
    Grant's decision, set the decision aside and remitted it to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

16. Notwithstanding that the matter has already been before the  First-tier
    Tribunal on two occasions, having regard to the Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2 we consider that because of the nature and extent of  the
    credibility findings that need to be made, it is  appropriate  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Newberry.

17. No findings of fact are to be preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  18/11/15

