
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07846/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th February 2016                          |On 29th March 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                   ms N R
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, instructed by Inayat Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier  Tribunal,  that  is  Ms  N  R  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The respondent appeals, with permission, against the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  26th  November  2015  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    the appellant  asylum, humanitarian protection and protection under the
    European Convention.  The Secretary of State's  decision  was  made  on
    24th April 2015.  The background to the decision is that the  appellant
    is, and this was accepted by  the  respondent,  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence.  The appellant married in 1998 and separated from her husband
    on 23rd September 2014 when she reported  him  to  the  UK  police  for
    domestic violence.  Her husband was currently in  Sri  Lanka  where  he
    returned following his release from  imprisonment  in  the  UK  on  5th
    November 2014.  The appellant did not know her husband's whereabouts in
    Sri Lanka but she knew that he used to  live  in  Pannipitiya  and  his
    father, now retired, worked as the director of customs in Colombo.  The
    appellant maintained that her husband had many relatives in the  police
    and also in the CID (police).  One of her  husband's  maternal  uncles,
    SC, was a politician with the United National Party [Questions 53 to 58
    of the appellant's asylum interview].  Those details were  recorded  in
    the respondent's reasons for refusal letter.

 3. In the application for permission to appeal, the  Secretary  of  State,
    asserted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to provide  adequate
    reasons as to why the appellant would be unable to internally  relocate
    within Sri Lanka  and  why  the  appellant  would  not  be  afforded  a
    sufficiency of protection on return.

 4. The Immigration Judge failed to provide any adequate reason as  to  how
    the appellant's husband would be able to trace the appellant and it was
    noted that the judge failed to make any findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's husband's sphere of influence and therefore it was  unclear
    as to how the appellant could trace her.

 5. The judge records, at paragraph 49, that the  appellant's  husband  may
    locate her through registering for schools and  hospitals  and  through
    mutual contacts and relatives but the judge failed to provide  adequate
    reasons as to why the appellant  would  be  required  to  disclose  her
    location to mutual relatives or friends in order that her husband would
    locate her.  This would defeat the object of relocation and  the  judge
    had failed to provide adequate reasons.

 6. The judge had failed to provide an evidence based finding as to why the
    appellant's husband would  be  interested  in  pursuing  the  appellant
    noting there had been no contact from her husband or his family.  There
    was no adequate reasoning as to why the appellant's husband would  seek
    the appellant out when the evidence appeared to point that there was no
    further interest in her from the  husband  since  he  left  prison  and
    returned to Sri Lanka.

 7. A second ground raised in the application for permission, was that  the
    judge had made perverse or irrational findings  on  matters  that  were
    material to the outcome.  The judge had made speculative findings;  for
    example, at paragraph 45 of the determination the judge stated:

         "I took account of the appellant's evidence that she had not  heard
         directly from her husband or his family since he  returned  to  Sri
         Lanka.   However  I  was  prepared  to  accept  that  there  was  a
         reasonable degree of likelihood that when she was returned  to  Sri
         Lanka, the husband would seek her out in order to inflict  harm  on
         her with a view to restoring his honour."

 8. The Judge accepted, at paragraph 47 of  the  determination,  there  had
    been no contact or threatening behaviour from the husband  towards  the
    appellant or her family in any way despite the fact  that  the  husband
    was aware of her location.  The judge , however, at paragraph 49  found
    that the husband would seek to harm her as soon as she returned to  Sri
    Lanka and would seek the children if registered at school or  hospital.
    Therefore, the judge had made findings which were contradictory and not
    supported by the evidence of the  appellant  and  therefore  materially
    erred.  That the appellant's husband would locate  her  through  mutual
    contacts or family  members  was  speculative.  The  whole  purpose  of
    internal relocation was to ensure the appellant's whereabouts were  not
    known to her husband.

 9. Further the judge had failed to take into account or resolve  conflicts
    of fact on material matters such as the appellant's husband's sphere of
    influence and therefore her ability to relocate on her  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.

10. At the hearing before me Ms Sreeraman confirmed  that  it  was  not  in
    dispute that the appellant was a victim of domestic  violence  but  the
    central issue was whether internal flight was open to her.   The  judge
    had accepted that there was no direct contact between the appellant and
    her  husband.    Ms  Sreeraman  relied  on  the  written  grounds   for
    permission to appeal.

11. Mr Aslam submitted that there was no material error  when  reading  the
    decision as a whole.  The two issues which were accepted, were that the
    appellant  was  a  victim  of  domestic  violence  and  there  was  not
    sufficiency of protection from the state authorities.   The  judge  had
    accepted the appellant had already received threats by text and  letter
    on 7th April 2015 and 29th July 2015.  There may have  been  no  direct
    contact but there was still a  threat.   The  judge  has  set  out  his
    findings at paragraph 45 to 51 and I was invited to read  paragraph  20
    together with paragraphs 49 and 50 and conclude that it was open to the
    judge to find it was reasonably likely  that  through  the  family  and
    friends in Sri Lanka that the husband was likely  to  track  her  down.
    Even  if  the  husband  did  not  use  his  contacts  because  of   the
    insufficiency of protection that the appellant would be at risk.

12. In conclusion, I am not persuaded  that  the  judge  made  perverse  or
    irrational findings.  It  was  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant had been a victim of domestic violence whilst in the  UK  and
    it was accepted that her husband had  been  imprisoned  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a result, and, on his release, had returned to Sri Lanka  as
    recently as 2014.  It was the appellant's evidence, as recorded in  the
    reasons for refusal letter, that the husband had many relatives in  the
    police and also in the  CID  police  and  that  one  of  her  husband's
    maternal uncles was a politician with the United National  Party.   The
    judge at paragraph 44 found both the appellant and her daughter  to  be
    credible witnesses and noted that  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant's subjective fear was genuine given the incidents of domestic
    violence.  The judge had regard, as indicated at paragraph 45, that the
    respondent's position was that there was  no  objective  rationale  for
    fear given that she  had  not  heard  from  him  directly.  To  assert,
    however, that because she had not heard from him  directly  whilst  she
    was in the UK and the appellant was in Sri  Lanka  is  not  surprising.
    The judge had found the appellant credible and she had  given  evidence
    of indirect threats.  The judge gave reasons as to why her husband  was
    capable of violence towards her by the very virtue of the fact  of  the
    criminal conviction and it is not speculative to surmise that it  would
    be "surprising if the husband was not harbouring  anger  or  resentment
    towards her given that she has reported him to the authorities  and  he
    has served a jail term as a result".

13. As Mr Aslam pointed out the judge records the  appellant's  claims,  at
    paragraph 21, that she had already received a large number  of  threats
    from her husband by way of text messages and there appeared  to  be  no
    challenge to this.  That the judge at [44] surmised  that  the  husband
    would seek her out in order to inflict harm on her for 'tarnishing  his
    honour' should she return to Sri Lanka was a plausible finding of  fact
    particularly on the lower standard of proof.   This is not  speculation
    but part of the assessment of risk and it is incumbent upon  the  judge
    to undertake  that  assessment  of  the  facts.  That  indeed  was  the
    appellant's case and which the  judge  accepted.   Motive  will  be  an
    element of that assessment of credibility.

14. It may be the case that the judge  did  not  specifically  resolve  the
    issue relating to the appellant's husband's sphere of influence but, as
    I have stated, and the respondent sets out in the reasons  for  refusal
    letter, the appellant's evidence was consistent that  the  husband  was
    possessed of relatives in the police, [question 53 AIR to 56 AIR].  The
    judge did record at paragraph 23 that she knew that her husband was  in
    Sri Lanka because he had been to her father's house to threaten him and
    she confirmed that she had "no documents to support her assertion  that
    her husband or his girlfriend had connections in the  CID  and  in  the
    police or with politicians" but the judge nonetheless at  paragraph  44
    found her to be a credible witness and thus by implication accepts  her
    evidence.

15. Even if that were not the case, the judge has set out, in  response  to
    the Home Office submission that in a country of 21 million  people  the
    husband would not easily  locate her, in a finding open to him, that it
    was a relatively small country and  that  the  children  were  able  to
    register for schools and hospitals then he would be able to find  them.
    This is the judge's reasoning  and,  to  my  mind,  is  adequate.   The
    threshold for the finding of facts in relation to an asylum claim is to
    the lower standard of proof. Assessment of risk is required and is  not
    the same as speculation.  The particular point raised by the  judge  at
    paragraph 49 and as submitted by the appellant's representative at  the
    First-tier Tribunal, is that the appellant would not be expected to  go
    into hiding or disguise herself.  As the judge identified she  will  be
    relocating with children and it is not speculation  but  assessment  of
    risk that it "seems inevitable that, if he had a mind, to he would find
    out from mutual friends, relatives or contacts that  she  had  returned
    and where she was living".  The judge would  appear  to  conclude  that
    there was a strong chance that she would be identified whether  or  not
    the husband sought her out.  The risk does not have  to  be  inevitable
    merely a 'reasonable likelihood' to the lower standard. At paragraph 49
    I find that the judge, and it was open to him,  reasonably  found  that
    there was a possibility which is sufficient in terms of the standard of
    proof in relation to asylum claims that the appellant might be found.

16. With regard sufficiency of protection, the judge did make a finding  at
    paragraph 50 that:

         "The appellant made much in her  evidence  of  the  fact  that  her
         husband has contacts with politicians and that  his  girlfriend  is
         rich and influential and therefore could use those contacts to help
         locate them and to ensure the authorities would not take  steps  to
         protect her".

17. Having accepted the appellant's evidence he found that as a woman,  and
    even without the additional issue of the husband's links in Sri  Lanka,
    she would not easily find protection from  the  authorities  [paragraph
    51].  The judge set out at paragraphs 51 and 52 that:

         "research shows that less than 1% of women who experience  domestic
         violence will seek protection as it is viewed as a remedy  of  last
         resort.  This is because:

             'dominant social and cultural norms in Sri Lanka which tend to
             privilege the family unit  over  a  women's  right  to  bodily
             integrity  clearly  discourages  women  from   seeking   legal
             recourse for violence ... Violence is to be  endured  silently
             and not to be disclosed to the public'".

18. Under paragraph 53:

         "The 1% who do seek the protection of the courts,  'are  confronted
         with the fact that familial ideology manifests itself  in  ...  the
         trivialising and minimising of violence, the dismissal of  violence
         as a private matter to be dealt with within the family unit and not
         to be resolved in a court of law'".

19. As such the judge had explained and given  reasons  why  the  appellant
    would not  be  able  to  relocate  and  why  she  would  not  be  given
    sufficiency of protection on  return,  not  least  by  citing  relevant
    background material in the form of the Home Office  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report for Sri Lanka dated 7th March 2012. As such  I  find
    that the grounds in the application for permission to appeal are merely
    a disagreement with the findings of the judge.

20.  The decision of Judge Robison discloses no material legal error of law
    and the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 10th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

