

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA /07147/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 January 2015                            |On 13 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |AS                                                |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER CONTINUED)                       |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Respondent   |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. E. Darkin, of Counsel, instructed by Duncan
Lewis & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The appellant, a national of Afghanistan, has been  granted  permission
    to appeal the determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pirotta
    who, following a hearing on 22 October 2014, dismissed  his  appeal  on
    asylum, human rights and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  against  a
    decision of the respondent of 4 September 2014 to remove him  from  the
    United Kingdom having refused his asylum claim for reasons given  in  a
    letter dated 3 September 2014.

 2. At the hearing,  Mr.  Tufan  accepted  that  the  judge  had  made  the
    following errors of law:

    i)     At [19] of the determination, the judge had  erred  by  ignoring
         the background material when she said that the appellant's evidence
         of the delivery of the night letters was not credible.

    ii)    In the first sentence of [21], she had erred by  misapprehending
         the  appellant's  evidence  when  she   said   his   evidence   was
         inconsistent. She had misapprehended  his  evidence,  in  that  his
         evidence was that the attack had taken place on 24  February  2014,
         the date of the third night letter.

    iii)   At [32], the judge had erred in stating that it was not credible
         that the Taliban would have sent the applicant night  letters.  Mr.
         Tufan  accepted  that  the  judge  had  overlooked  the  background
         material in this respect.

 3. However, Mr. Tufan did not accept that  the  judge  had  erred  in  her
    treatment of the intelligence report. The judge dealt with this  report
    at [25] where she referred to it as a police report. She considered  it
    lacking in credibility that the appellant had made a complaint  to  the
    police given his evidence that he had not made a compliant  because  he
    was afraid that the police were complicit with the Taliban. She did not
    find it credible that the applicant would have provided his new address
    to the police if he had believed that  they  were  Taliban  members  or
    informants.

 4. The English translation of the intelligence report is at A117 and A119.
    Although A117 is a report compiled by an officer  of  the  "Intelligent
    Department of Langhman Province", A119  (which  is  also  part  of  the
    report) is the application made by the appellant. It is addressed:  "To
    the Honourable Directorate of General Intelligence of  the  Police".  I
    therefore agree with Mr. Tufan that  the  judge  did  not  err  in  her
    reasoning at [25].

 5. In addition, Mr. Tufan did not accept that the judge erred at  [28]  in
    taking into account, against  the  appellant's  credibility,  that  the
    Taliban had not  shown  any  interest  "in  his  brother-in-law,  whose
    details appeared in the documents and whose family, also related to the
    appellant, lived in  Pakistan,  though  he  is  British".  The  grounds
    contend that the judge had erred in that she had failed  to  take  into
    account the fact that  the  appellant's  brother-in-law  did  not  have
    conduct of the business and did not attend military  bases.  Mr.  Tufan
    submitted  that  the  Taliban  would  not  differentiate  between   the
    appellant and his brother-in-law on this basis. I agree with Mr.  Tufan
    that the judge's reasoning was open to her on  the  evidence,  for  the
    reason given by Mr. Tufan.

 6. Mr. Tufan submitted that the errors that I have summarised at my para 2
    above are not material. I do not agree. I cannot  say  that  the  judge
    would  inevitably  have  taken  an  adverse  view  of  the  appellant's
    credibility if she had not made these errors.  Furthermore, if she  had
    not made these errors, she might have accepted his evidence that, after
    he had left his home area and gone to Kabul, he  received  a  telephone
    call from the Taliban informing him that they knew  where  he  was  and
    that he ought to surrender to them. The credibility  of  this  evidence
    was relevant to an assessment of the safety of relocation to Kabul.

 7. Accordingly, I have concluded that the judge's  determination  must  be
    set aside and the decision on the appellant's appeal be re-made on  the
    merits by another Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

    Decision


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside
    in its entirety. This case is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    the decision on the appellant's appeal to be re-made by a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Pirotta.



Signed      Date: 11 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
