
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07185/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th August 2017                    |On 20th September 2017               |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [T R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malcolm, promulgated on 6th March 2017, following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 7th February 2017.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, and was born  on  13th
    August 1977.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    10th April 2015, rejecting his application for asylum and  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is  that  whilst  he  was  in  Sri
    Lanka, he had agreed to let his property to three people, who had given
    him one year's rent in advance, and these three people were  to  remain
    in his property until 2014.  However, on 2nd February 2011 he came  to
    the UK as a dependant on his wife's visa.  In April 2014 he learnt that
    two of the people to whom he had rented the property had been  arrested
    and it was subsequently discovered that they were members of the  LTTE.
    Then in April 2014 also some six or seven police officers came  to  the
    Appellant's home in Sri Lanka inquiring  about  his  whereabouts.   The
    police came in July and then in February 2015 as well.   The  Appellant
    accordingly fears return to Sri Lanka on account of mistreatment due to
    his imputed political opinion.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The  judge,  in  an  extensive  determination,  set  out  the  relevant
    documents before him (at paragraph 13), which included letters  from  a
    lawyer in Sri Lanka by the name of B. R. P. Jayasinghe.  He  heard  the
    Appellant's explanation for why he had not claimed asylum early because
    the Appellant was unaware of any problem until April 2014.  He had,  in
    any event,  a  visa  valid  until  October  2014  (see  paragraph  51).
    Particular consideration was given to a summons  issued  in  Sri  Lanka
    because a document verification report (DVR) had  concluded  that  this
    was not a genuine document (see paragraphs 116 to 124).

 5. The judge dismissed the appeal.

 6. On 3rd July 2017, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it
    was arguable that  the  judge  had  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
    documentary evidence that had been produced.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 10th August 2017, Mr Coleman, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, laid particular emphasis on the fact that  the
    judge had given insufficient reasons  for  why  she  had  accepted  the
    Respondent's document verification report.  In particular (at paragraph
    121) the judge had noted  that  there  had  been  no  investigation  or
    verification of the two different  letters  written  by  two  different
    lawyers in Sri  Lanka.   These  letters  evidence  an  ongoing  adverse
    interest in the Appellant from the Authorities.  The  letters  attested
    to the genuineness of the court summons and were entitled to  be  given
    sufficient weight.  Importantly, Mr Coleman submitted that  unlike  the
    Respondent's DVR evidence, these letters were  signed  and  were  fully
    attributable to the lawyers who had sent them.  Second, Mr Coleman also
    emphasised that (at paragraph 123) the  judge  had  failed  to  note  a
    letter  from  B.  R.  P.  Jayasinghe  of  17th  January   2017,   which
    specifically refers to the Appellant's court file being in existence in
    Attanagalla Magistrates' Court.  Given that this was the case, and that
    a file in the Appellate court had been  known  to  exist,  this  wholly
    verified the evidence that the Appellant was relying upon.   The  judge
    was wrong to say (at paragraph 123) that, "the letter accordingly  does
    not provide any further  documentation  other  than  to  say  that  the
    efforts  which  have  been  made  to  obtain  information  have  proved
    unsuccessful".

 8. Finally, the judge also fell in error (at  paragraph  124)  in  finding
    that it was not material as to whether the letters from  the  attorneys
    in Sri Lanka were genuine  because  she  had  already  found  that  the
    summons was not genuine.

 9. There were two fundamental  reasons  for  why  this  was  an  erroneous
    approach.  First, the evidence must be looked at in  the  round.   This
    was, as Mr Coleman phrased it, a "Mibanga error", because it was rather
    like saying that, because one did not find the Appellant's oral account
    to be credible, there was no need to consider the medical  evidence  in
    support of his claim.  Second, the approach was erroneous  because  the
    attorney's letters were highly relevant, in that if they were  accepted
    as genuine then they cast a flood of light on the unreliability of  the
    DVR.   Mr  Coleman  emphasised  that  the  lawyer's  letters  were  not
    subjected to verification by the Respondent Secretary of State  at  any
    stage.  Therefore, it was up to the judge to  make  a  finding  on  the
    letters herself.  The provenance and credibility of these  letters  was
    central to the whole appeal.  The judge ended inevitably (at  paragraph
    125) by noting that there was a "lack of any other evidence" in support
    of the claim that the tenants were LTTE members.  He asked me to make a
    finding of an error of law and to remit the matter back to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a reconsideration.

10. For his part, Mr Kotas submitted that there was no error of law.   This
    was for the following  reasons.   First,  there  had  been  an  initial
    submission by the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  that  there  were
    directions issued on 31st August to the effect that  further  documents
    had to be lodged by 1st November 2016, but the additional documents had
    only just been received the day before, and the Presenting Officer  had
    on the day in question submitted that "little or no  weight  should  be
    accorded to these documents"  (paragraph  15).   I  have  to  say  that
    looking at this  submission,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  Mr
    Coleman's submission on the day in question as well, which was that  he
    was "happy to agree to an adjournment if  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer considered that this was  necessary  to  verify  the  documents
    which had been lodged" (paragraph 17).

11. Second, and in any event submitted Mr Kotas,  the  Appellant  had  then
    provided further documents from lawyers on  28th  October  2016  and  a
    further letter on 17th January 2017, which was after the DVR assessment
    had been carried out.  If the Appellant's side were producing documents
    in dribs and drabs, a decision had to be taken on  them,  and  this  is
    what the judge did, and the judge cannot be faulted for this.

12. Third, the suggestion that the DVR has been heavily redacted is  simply
    not true.  Mr Kotas handed up a copy of the DVR  for  me  to  consider.
    There is a statement there that, "a name and address redacted  copy  of
    the summons document was  faxed  to  the  attention  of  the  registrar
    Attanagalla Magistrates' Court via fax tel [ ] (as shown below)".  This
    was dated 25th April 2016.  Then the  DVR  goes  on  to  say  that  the
    registrar has been contacted on telephone number [ ], and he has stated
    that, under case number B/[ ]/MC14 it is the case that, "the accused is
    namely [SANN]" and that this "case relates to a  matter  concerning  an
    'assault of an individual' and that 'the case has now been concluded'".



13. Accordingly, this summons did not relate to the Appellant at  all.   It
    related to an entirely different person and in  an  entirely  different
    criminal case.  In fact, submitted Mr Kotas,  case  number  B/[  ]/MC14
    does not relate to the Appellant at all and the DVR  makes  this  quite
    clear.  It goes on to say that this is a  "falsified  document  and  is
    verified as not genuine".

14. Third, it was difficult to see how this  could  be  called  a  "Mibanga
    error".  If the Appellant had submitted a falsified document  then  the
    judge was entitled to take the view that  the  claim  as  put  was  not
    proven.

15. Finally, it is being suggested that the registrar had  not  provided  a
    statement confirming what had  emanated  from  his  office.   This  was
    unarguable because the  assistant  helping  the  lawyer  had  also  not
    provided a statement confirming exactly how he came  to  verifying  the
    information that he had submitted.

16. In reply, Mr Coleman submitted that it  had  been  open  to  the  judge
    below, on the invitation of himself as the lawyer appearing on the  day
    in question, to ask for an adjournment, and this had not been accepted.
     If all  that  the  Respondent  was  complaining  about  was  that  the
    documentation from the Appellant's side had not been verified, they had
    been given ample opportunity to do  so  and  had  chosen  not  to.   Mr
    Coleman submitted that he would have to accept that the  judge  had  to
    come down one way or the other but she  still  had  to  decide  if  the
    lawyer's letters were genuine or not, and simply to  say  that  because
    the DVR had been accepted by her, she need not look at the authenticity
    of the lawyer's letters, was the wrong way of approaching the matter.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA  2007),  notwithstanding  Mr  Coleman's  commendable  efforts   to
    persuade me otherwise.  My reasons are as follows.

18. First, it is not the case that the judge was  dependent  entirely  upon
    the lawyer's letters for her  assessment  of  the  reliability  of  the
    Appellant's claim.  She also had to look at the oral evidence  and  the
    surrounding circumstances.  In this regard, she concluded (at paragraph
    125) that she was "not satisfied from the information in  the  evidence
    produced  that  the  tenants  were  LTTE  members  as  claimed  by  the
    Appellant" because the  evidence  relied  upon  was  "simply  based  on
    information provided to him by his father and his friend".  Given  that
    the "LTTE connections of the tenants is also an important part  of  the
    Appellant's case" there had been a  "lack  of  any  other  evidence  in
    support of this claim (for example at the very least a  statement  from
    the Appellant's friend) ..." (paragraph 125).

19. Second, the registrar is under no obligation  to  provide  a  statement
    from the Attanagalla Magistrates' Court confirming his understanding of
    the summons being fraudulently produced.  It was  for  the  lawyers  to
    make their case and having made it on the basis that  case  number  B/[
    ]/MC14 related to the Appellant, the DVR confirmed that this related to
    an entirely different person for an entirely different  offence.   This
    is what the purpose of document verification stands for  and  it  is  a
    process which in  this  case  cannot  be  criticised  for  having  been
    improperly conducted.

20.  Any  suggestion  that  the  relevant  information  was  "redacted"  is
    untenable because the material details are all  too  clearly  set  out,
    more than once in the DVR, for any person to note.   The  analogy  with
    medical evidence that was put before me is not the correct analogy.

21. It is one thing to say that a decision maker has not found an Appellant
    to be credible and therefore need not look at the medical evidence from
    a medical practitioner.  It is an entirely different matter to say that
    a decision maker is not persuaded  by  the  veracity  of  a  claim  put
    forward because key documentation in relation to  a  court  summons  is
    fraudulently  contrived  and  submitted,  in  contravention  of   clear
    directions that were issued on 31st  August  for  documentation  to  be
    submitted some three months later, but had  still  not  been  timeously
    submitted until just a day before the hearing.

Notice of Decision

22. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017


