
IAC-AH-LEM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07989/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 June 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            Siphithiphithi Mabhena
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Siphithiphithi Mabhena, was born on 2 December 1976  and
    is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  The appellant had appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge T Jones) against the decision of the  respondent  dated
    12 December 2014 to refuse him asylum and to refuse him leave to  enter
    the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal deal, inter alia, with the  judge's  analysis  of
    the evidence and his assessment of credibility of the appellant.  I was
    grateful to Ms Patel,  Counsel  for  the  appellant,  for  her  helpful
    submissions.  I am satisfied that the judge made a series  of  mistakes
    in his treatment of the evidence;

      i) At [21], the judge wrongly referred  to  the  respondent's  refusal
         letter as having identified  "inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
         account" to which Judge  Jones  "subscribed."   A  reading  of  the
         refusal letter of 17 September 2014, shows that, in relation to MDC
         (Movement for Democratic Change) activism  and  membership  and  in
         respect of  a  claimed  arrest  in  January  2013,  the  respondent
         considered that the appellant's claims were  internally  consistent
         but not "corroborated by external  evidence."   Applying  paragraph
         339L of HC 395 (as amended) this had led the respondent to consider
         the claim to be "unsubstantiated."  What the refusal letter did not
         do is to identify inconsistencies in the appellant's account.

     ii) Dealing with the appellant's interview record (questions 95  -  97)
         the judge wrongly stated that the  appellant  had  been  unable  to
         "mention when the elections took place."  The appellant had  stated
         [95] that the election had been conducted in July; the remainder of
         his answers to the questions specified by the judge do not  concern
         the date of the election.

    iii) At [22] the judge wrote that "there was no medical evidence (I note
         there is no need legally  for  the  appellant  to  corroborate  his
         claim) which attributes the weakness he reports in his hand to "ill-
         treatment."  At [9(5)], the judge had noted the contents of a  GP's
         letter which had dealt with the weakness in  the  appellant's  left
         hand and, whilst that letter does not confirm that the weakness was
         as a result of physical ill-treatment, the judge  here  appears  to
         have been seeking evidence which  the  appellant  had  been  in  no
         position to provide.  It  was  unclear  from  the  judge's  remarks
         whether he gave any weight at all to the appellant's claim to  have
         suffered ill-treatment to his hand.

     iv) The judge deals with a letter in support of the  appellant's  claim
         from the MDC [at  23].   He  writes,  "the  information  as  to  an
         internet link said to give the  letter  provenance  is  of  limited
         weight."  I am not certain what that sentence means.   He  proceeds
         in the same paragraph to note that "Mrs Patel (sic) was careful  to
         say she had no submissions to make or assert that an arrest warrant
         is part of her client's claim."  The refusal  letter  records  that
         the appellant claimed to have been arrested  and  detained  for  30
         days in January 2013.

 3. Much of the judge's analysis of the evidence is expressed in convoluted
    language which it is difficult to understand.  Likewise,  I  also  find
    that the refusal letter of the respondent to be somewhat unsatisfactory
    where it deals with the credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim.   The
    repeated refrain of "this part of your claim is  internally  consistent
    but not corroborated by external evidence" is, in my opinion, a  rather
    lazy approach to the assessment of credibility;  the  letter  makes  no
    attempt properly to apply paragraph 339L or to  give  coherent  reasons
    for rejecting the truth of the appellant's  account.   If  this  appeal
    turned on the judge's assessment of credibility, then  I  find  that  I
    would set aside the determination.  However, both  the  refusal  letter
    and Judge Jones have gone beyond an assessment of  the  credibility  of
    the evidence and have assessed whether the appellant is at real risk on
    return to Zimbabwe in the alternative basis that his  account  of  past
    events in Zimbabwe is true and accurate.  At [13],  Judge  Jones  noted
    that the appellant is from Bulawayo.  He considered the extant  country
    guidance case of CM [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC)  and  recorded  that,  "...
    even taking the appellant's claim at its height, it  is  submitted  [by
    the respondent] that the claim should fail.  Reference is also made [in
    the refusal letter] to  the  option  of  relocation  available  to  the
    appellant with his wife as to relocation without the same being  unduly
    harsh (Januzi [2006] UKHL  5)."   The  judge  returns  to  the  country
    guidance of CM at [25]:

         "Even if I were in error as to  my  rejection  of  the  appellant's
         claim concerning the claim arising to his fears on return (sic) the
         respondent's position as to return with regard to  the  appellant's
         return is still sound (sic) I find taking account of  the  decision
         in CM as recounted by the respondent in the refusal letter."

 4. Once again, the prose is somewhat garbled but  it  is  clear  that  the
    judge has taken the view that the appellant could not  succeed  in  his
    claim, even if his account of past events was true and accurate.

 5. Risk on return is dealt with in the refusal letter at [6].  The  letter
    quotes from a Country of Information (COIS) Report for Zimbabwe  dating
    from 12 September 2014 (that is postdating CM).  The report notes  that
    Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum had  not  "come  across  any  cases  of
    returnees from the UK being mistreated and would expect to know of  any
    such cases because its member organisations are represented across  the
    country."  The report goes on to note that "the  forum  considers  that
    the abolition of hate speech against asylum seekers returning from  the
    UK is central to creating a more conducive environment."  Quoting  from
    CM, the letter notes that "a returnee to Bulawayo will in  general  not
    suffer the adverse attention of Zanu-PF including the  security  forces
    even if he or she  has  a  significant  MDC  profile."   The  appellant
    claimed that he had been local chair in 2011 of a youth  group  of  the
    MDC, and organisation which he claimed to have joined in 2007.   Whilst
    the appellant claims to have had  a  profile  within  the  MDC,  it  is
    difficult  to  see  how  that  might  be  described  as  "significant".
    Following the guidance of CM, it would appear that the appellant  would
    not be at real risk upon return to his home area of  Bulawayo.   If  he
    were at risk there, then, as the refusal letter  notes,  the  appellant
    would be able to relocate  to  Harare  where  he  would  not  face  any
    "significant difficulties".  CM  is  also  significant  in  noting  the
    general disappearance in Zimbabwe of the so-called "loyalty test" which
    might expose a stranger relocating outside his  or  her  home  area  to
    possible persecution at the hands of Zanu-PF or the need  to  dissemble
    in order to avoid such persecution.

 6. I raised this point with Ms Patel at the Upper Tribunal  hearing.   She
    said that the appellant relied on material in his bundle  of  documents
    which  indicates  that  the  security  position  for  returning  asylum
    seekers/members of MDC has deteriorated since the  assessment  made  in
    CM.  She was unable to take me to specific examples in this  background
    material which had been raised directly with Judge Jones in the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I have considered the evidence  myself  and  I  am  not
    persuaded that the risk which this appellant  would  face  either  upon
    return to Bulawayo or elsewhere within Zimbabwe is such that  I  should
    depart from the current country guidance of CM.   More  importantly,  I
    find that Judge Jones, notwithstanding the errors and lack  of  clarity
    of his analysis, was correct to find that the appellant's claim,  taken
    at its highest, did not establish that the appellant would face a  real
    risk of ill-treatment upon return to Zimbabwe.  Because  he  made  that
    alternative finding, I have decided to refrain from setting  aside  the
    determination because of Judge Jones's errors  and  omissions  are  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.  In consequence, the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

