
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07830/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 4 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                     N N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert (Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                   DECISION AND REASONS - RESUMED HEARING

1.   This matter comes before the Tribunal as a resumed hearing to  consider
    Article 8 private life.  The matter was originally  dealt  with  as  an
    error of law hearing on 22 September 2015 where the Tribunal upheld the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appellant's asylum  claim
    and otherwise concluded that there was a material error of law  in  the
    decision by the failure of the First-tier Tribunal to deal with Article
    8 ECHR.

2.   For the background I refer to and rely on the Upper  Tribunal  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 29 September 2015.

3.   For this hearing Mr Gilbert  produced  a  skeleton  argument  dated  23
    November 2015.  The appellant and his witness I N  gave  evidence,  the
    details of which are set out in the record of proceedings. Reliance was
    placed on a  country  expert  report  of  Antonio  Giustozzi  dated  17
    November 2015, correspondence  from  the  British  Red  Cross,  medical
    evidence found in the appellant's  bundle  from  pages  50  to  71  and
    letters of support found in the appellant's bundle at pages 72  to  88.
    Further medical evidence was adduced at the hearing by way of a  report
    typed on 20 April 2015, report typed 23 December 2014, letter dated  26
    August 2014 and letter dated 5 December 2012.  The appellant relied  on
    a report entitled The 2015 Afghanistan Refugee and Returnee Overview.

4.   Mr Clarke for the Secretary of State relied on the  Country  of  Origin
    Information Response dated 17 September 2015,   Akhalu  (health  claim:
    ECHR Article  8)  [2013]  UKUT  00400  (IAC),  JL  (medical  reports  -
    credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) and R (on the application of
    Naziri and Others) v SSHD JR - scope - evidence) IJR [2015] UKUT  00437
    (IAC).

Statutory Framework

5.   The requirements to be met for  leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of
    private  life  paragraph  276ADE(1)  are  that  as  at  the   date   of
    application, the applicant:

    (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section  S-
         LRT1.2 to S-LRT2.3 and S-LRT3.1 in Appendix FM; and

    (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds of
         private life in the UK; and

    (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (ii), is aged  18  years  or  above,  has
         lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less   than   twenty   years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment) that there would  be  very
         significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into  the
         country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

6.   Article 8(1) the Right to Respect  for  Private  and  Family  Life  and
    Article 8(2) are relevant. The approach adopted  by  this  Tribunal  is
    first of all to consider whether or not the appellant meets the Article
    8 provisions under the Rules in paragraph 276ADE and if  not,  then  to
    consider whether  there  are  compelling  or  other  circumstances  not
    covered by the Immigration Rules  such  that  the  appellant  may  have
    established a claim under Article 8 outside of the  Rules  (R  (on  the
    application of Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720)).  In such cases it  must
    be shown that removal would be disproportionate having regard  to  non-
    standard and particular features of the case of a compelling nature  to
    show that removal would be unjustifiably harsh.

7.    Section  19  of  the  2014  Immigration  Act   introduced   into   the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  Part  5A  containing
    Sections 117A-117D.  In considering Article 8 outside of the Rules  and
    the question of proportionality the Tribunal must have  regard  to  the
    factors listed as public interest considerations in Section 117.

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
             cases.

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of the UK,  that  persons
             who seek to enter or remain  in  the  UK  are  able  to  speak
             English, because persons who can speak English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  UK  are
             financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the UK unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the UK.

Submissions

8.   Mr Clarke relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter  dated  9  September
    2014 and the COIR.  Mr Clarke conceded that the Article  8  Immigration
    Rule under 276ADE(vi) was the central issue  to  be  considered  and/or
    Article 8 outside of the Rules.  There was no challenge to the  medical
    evidence relied on.

9.   It was submitted that the appellant was now an adult,  had  lived  most
    of his life in Afghanistan and was effectively living independently  in
    the UK and would be able to  resettle  in  Afghanistan  given  that  he
    speaks the language.  Reliance was  placed  on  the  existence  of  the
    Assisted  Voluntary  Return  Scheme  as  referred  to  in  Naziri  with
    particular reference to the assistance provided for vulnerable persons.
      The  appellant  would  be  given  short-term   assistance   including
    accommodation. It was clear  from  the  objective  material  that  some
    mental health treatment was available  including  the  particular  drug
    prescribed to the appellant.

10.  In terms of the medical evidence it  was  submitted  that  the  reports
    were not capable of corroborating the credibility  of  the  appellant's
    claim simply the diagnosis as PTSD.  There was no evidence of  suicidal
    tendencies.  Reliance was placed on the  adverse  credibility  findings
    made by the First-tier Tribunal.  It was clear the  appellant  did  not
    wish to return to Afghanistan  and  his  depressed  mood  was  directly
    relevant to the possibility of removal.

11.  As  regards  the  tracing  issue,  it  was  submitted  that  there  was
    effectively a period of five years before the  appellant  provided  any
    information about the whereabouts of his family.  Reference was made to
    a maternal grandmother  and  extended  family  members  in  a  doctor's
    letter.  Article 3 medical grounds have not been established.   Article
    8 outside of the Rules was not engaged.  Reliance was placed on Akhalu.
     The current evidence showed that the  appellant's  mental  health  was
    improving and in terms of proportionality Section 117B  was  applicable
    to the extent that the appellant was not financially  independent,  the
    establishment of private life was not a route  to  settlement  and  the
    medical evidence was lacking.

Submissions by Mr Gilbert

12.  It was the duty of the Secretary of State to meet the  obligations  for
    tracing.  The appellant entered the UK as a child and his  role  needed
    to  be  considered  in  the  context  of  his  age  and  mental  health
    difficulties.  Reliance was placed on the evidence of the Red Cross  to
    demonstrate the efforts made to secure the tracing  of  family  members
    and this established that the appellant  fully  engaged  with  the  Red
    Cross and that process.  None of the evidence was consistent  with  any
    avoidance action on the part of the appellant as it was clear  that  he
    was positively engaging with the tracing process.

13.  The medical  evidence  was  strong.   Two  consultants  had  found  the
    appellant to be  suffering  from  symptoms  of  post  traumatic  stress
    disorder.  It was submitted that it was the symptoms presented  by  the
    appellant that were capable of corroborating the account given.   There
    were no concerns that the appellant was faking and it was clear he  was
    seriously unwell and in need of treatment.  There had been worsening of
    the  symptoms  over  the  last  three  months   arguably   because   of
    difficulties with the new doctor (the appellant now being moved to  the
    adult mental health team) and the appellant (as  a  vulnerable  person)
    struggled with moving home and interruption of his treatment.   It  was
    submitted that the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable  individual  who  had
    experienced suicidal ideation which was consistent  with  past  medical
    evidence in which  he  had  described  suicidal  feelings.  The  recent
    medical evidence showed a decrease in his mental state.   Reliance  was
    placed on suicidal ideation as an indicator of the  difficulties  faced
    by the appellant in dealing with stress and coping and were relevant to
    his ability to integrate.

14.  Reliance was placed on the evidence  establishing  the  high  level  of
    vulnerability of the appellant.  All  professionals  engaged  with  him
    described an exceptional level of care was required and provided  which
    was indicative of his inability to look after himself.

15.  Doctor Giustozzi had provided a detailed,  well  sourced  and  balanced
    report which could be relied on by the Tribunal. It was  of  assistance
    when considering  the  obstacles  to  be  faced  by  the  appellant  if
    returned.  The violence from the Taliban  had  increased  significantly
    and the appellant's home area was located in an area  where  there  had
    been an increase in violence.  In any event he had  lost  contact  with
    his family and therefore realistically Kabul would be  the  only  place
    for return and where the appellant would be  at  risk  of  destitution.
    There was huge unemployment and given the appellant's vulnerability and
    lack  of  connection  in  Kabul  together  with   his   mental   health
    difficulties he would not be able to compete to obtain  employment  and
    establish an independent life.

16.  In considering Article 8 outside of the Rules and Section  117  it  was
    submitted that the appellant was very integrated in the  UK;  he  spoke
    English and he was still "looked after" by Social Services and not  yet
    living  independently  in  the  UK.   The  evidence  produced  in   the
    testimonies demonstrated significant  integration  from  the  level  of
    friendships established and he was growing up  in  the  UK  during  his
    formative years.  Given the network in connections established  in  the
    UK by the appellant and his emotional and practical reliance  on  those
    connections his removal would amount to a  disproportionate  breach  of
    private life in the UK.

Discussion and Decision

17.  I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  established  a  significant
    private life in the UK by reason of his length of residence in the  UK,
    the strength of his connections in the UK, his high level of continuing
    vulnerability and his high level of integration in the  UK  personally,
    socially and emotionally.  Furthermore I am satisfied  that  there  are
    very significant obstacles to his integration  into  Afghanistan  which
    include his youth and vulnerability, absence from Afghanistan for  more
    than six years, lack of familiarity with Afghanistan as  an  adult  and
    lack of familiarity with Kabul, continuing mental health  problems,  no
    experience of employment and absence of  any  family.    These  are  of
    relevance in the context of the UNHCR Guidelines which  highlight  that
    the additional extended family and community  ties  in  Afghan  society
    constitute the main protection and coping  mechanisms  particularly  in
    rural areas where  infrastructure  has  not  developed.   I  have  also
    considered the situation existing in Kabul with reference  to  evidence
    cited  in  Naziri  of  factors  including  the   lack   of   employment
    opportunities in Kabul and inadequacy of financial settlement  packages
    and the essential nature of family connections.   In  Naziri  reference
    was made to the UNHCR 2013 Eligibility Guidelines  addressing  internal
    relocation from the perspective  of  safety  and  reasonableness.   The
    guidelines observe  that  personal  traits  and  circumstances  of  the
    individual must be evaluated  together  with  the  security  situation,
    respect for human rights and possibilities of economic survival in  the
    area concerned.  UNHCR suggest that internal relocation  is  reasonable
    only where the individual can expect to benefit from meaningful family,
    community or tribe support in the area of prospective residents.  It is
    acknowledged that in circumstances single able-bodied men  and  married
    couples of working age without identified specific vulnerabilities  may
    be able to subsist without family and community support  in  urban  and
    semi-urban areas.

18.  In reaching my decision I have taken into  account  the  evidence  from
    the appellant which in general terms I  found  to  be  credible  having
    regard to his personal, emotional and private life in the  UK  and  his
    lack of contact with family in Afghanistan.  I place significant weight
    on the impressive and convincing  evidence  given  by  the  appellant's
    witness I N.  I found this witness to be extremely knowledgeable and to
    have considerable experience of working  with  young  people  who  have
    claimed asylum in the UK.  I place weight in particular on her evidence
    as to the high level of vulnerability demonstrated by the appellant and
    the resultant high level of support provided to enable him to deal with
    daily life and practical issues.

19.  I am satisfied that the appellant does come within the  category  of  a
    person with identifiable vulnerabilities.  Not only did he enter the UK
    as an unaccompanied minor at the age of 12 years but he has  also  been
    in the care of the local authority and, of significance, he remains  in
    the care of the local authority as a looked after child and a  decision
    taken to continue the support provided to him notwithstanding  that  he
    is  now  over  18.   The   local   authority   has   clearly   accepted
    responsibility for the appellant and provides him with supported living
    accommodation, a social worker and in addition he has practical support
    from his mentor and this will continue until at least  the  age  of  21
    years.  In the Government report 2003 entitled  "Every  Child  Matters"
    looked after children are viewed as already significantly disadvantaged
    and  highly  vulnerable  members  of  society  requiring  support   and
    assistance often beyond the age of adulthood.   The  report  emphasises
    the need to work towards a permanence plan for young people by adopting
    a shared responsibility and multi  disciplinary  approach.   The  Local
    authority decision carries weight in my assessment.

20.  In addition I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  also  has  continuing
    vulnerability by reason of his mental ill health.   The  appellant  has
    been provided with  significant  support  from  the  children's  mental
    health services and as  established  in  the  various  reports  he  was
    diagnosed  with  post  traumatic  stress  disorder  by  two  consultant
    psychiatrists.  I acknowledge that since he has entered into the  adult
    mental health system he appears not to have engaged with those services
    in any useful way.  I find that he is taking prescribed medication  for
    depression and although there has been  some  overall  improvement,  he
    still remains  subject  to  the  diagnosis  of  post  traumatic  stress
    disorder and continues to require further  treatment  in  the  form  of
    counselling.  The most up-to-date report confirmed that he had now  re-
    engaged with the system and would be provided with further support.   I
    accept his explanation that he did not  make  a  meaningful  connection
    with his "new" psychiatrist with whom  he  felt  unable  to  develop  a
    helpful relationship.  I entirely accept  the  submission  made  by  Mr
    Gilbert that the appellant's high level  of  vulnerability  and  mental
    health difficulties are significant factors in terms of how he would be
    able to re-integrate if returned to Afghanistan.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant is an adult carries little weight  given  he  remains  to  be
    treated as a young person.

21.  I further place weight on the conclusions made  in  Naziri  as  regards
    the current situation in Afghanistan.  I further place  weight  on  the
    findings made by Dr Giustozzi in his expert  report.   I  am  satisfied
    that that the appellant is a person who  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles  to  re  integration  to  the  extent  that   he   would   be
    significantly  restricted  in  terms  of   employment,   accommodation,
    financial and other support given his high level of  vulnerability  and
    susceptibility  to  mental  health  difficulties.   In  addition  I  am
    satisfied that there is no family support available to the appellant in
    Afghanistan.  Having regard to all of those factors the appellant faces
    a real risk of destitution and homelessness if returned to Afghanistan.
     Whilst accepting that there is in existence some form  of  support  in
    terms of the Voluntary Return Scheme,  this  would  provide  short-term
    assistance only.  This would  not be at all adequate for a person  such
    as the appellant who was described by his mentor  as  being  "the  most
    vulnerable person she  had  met",  given  the  high  level  of  support
    required to enable him to deal with daily living and in navigating  the
    wider world.  It is of significance (and I take into account) that  the
    appellant has exceptionally been provided with a  long-term  care  plan
    including supported accommodation by the  local  authority  which  will
    potentially be available to him for another six years.

22.  In addition to  the  appellant's  vulnerability  he  has  also  adduced
    evidence of strong friendships in  the  UK  and  developed  educational
    skills including learning English.  The  evidence  in  the  appellant's
    bundle establishes a high level of commitment to  integration  into  UK
    society demonstrated by his  motivation  to  do  well  and  to  educate
    himself and his desire to obtain employment in future.

23.   In  dealing  with  tracing  issues  I  have  taken  into  account  the
    correspondence from the British Red Cross.  Whilst accepting that there
    was a lack of activity or input by the appellant for a number of  years
    after his arrival in the UK, I am satisfied  that  there  has  been  no
    attempt on his behalf to avoid any engagement with the tracing process.
     It  is  clear  that  once  that  engagement  was  established  he  has
    positively contributed to the provision of information and demonstrated
    a  keenness  to  locate  the  whereabouts  of  any  family  members  in
    Afghanistan.  I find no evidence to show that there are family  members
    living in Afghanistan with whom the appellant could obtain  support  be
    it emotional, financial or otherwise.

24.  I have decided therefore to allow the appeal under Article 8 under  the
    Immigration Rules paragraph 276ADE(vi).  In the  alternative,  I  allow
    the appeal under Article 8 outside of the Rules on the basis  that  the
    appellant has established a significant private life in  the  UK  which
    deserves respect.  I endorse the approach in Razgar  having  regard  to
    the questions posed which are answered in the affirmative.  The central
    issue is proportionality.  I conclude for the same reasons  as  I  have
    found that the  appellant  meets  the  Rules  that  there  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his right to private life.  In  that
    context I have had regard to the public interest factors under  Section
    117 of the 2002 Act as amended.  The appellant does speak  English  and
    can communicate well.  He has not been able to  obtain  employment  but
    has engaged with educational opportunities  and  I  am  satisfied  that
    given the level of support required and provided he  will  be  able  to
    take up opportunities for further qualification and employment  in  the
    near future.  The appellant has been  in  the  UK  lawfully  since  his
    arrival as an unaccompanied minor and was granted discretionary  leave.
    In general terms his circumstances are  precarious,  however  the  high
    level of integration and high  level  of  vulnerability  shown  by  the
    appellant enables me to place less significance on Section 117B(5).

Notice of Decision

25.  I allow the appeal on Article 8  grounds  under  paragraph  276ADE  and
    outside of the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 14.12.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 14.12.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
