
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07267/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 30th August 2016                 |On: 29 September 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     NA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S. Khan, Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born in 1985.

    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    The Appeal

 3. The Appellant claims to have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for
    reasons of his political opinion. He claims to have  stood  for  public
    office on an anti-Taliban ticket and to  have  come  to  their  adverse
    attention as a result. He relied on numerous documents as well  as  his
    own evidence.

 4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had
    discharged the burden of proof. It found that he had  given  discrepant
    evidence about a core part of his claim, namely whether his father  had
    been in a coma for two years following his  abduction  and  torture  by
    Taliban militants.   The Appellant's oral evidence that the Taliban had
    recently renewed their threats was rejected on the basis that  if  true
    he would have included it in his  witness  statement.  The  documentary
    evidence submitted, comprising 11 items, was given no  weight  at  all:
    the Tribunal found the contents of some to  be  inconsistent  with  the
    evidence overall, and the Appellant had failed to supply the originals.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Tribunal had erred in  its  approach  to  two  matters.  First  it  was
    submitted that it was irrational to place no weight  on  the  documents
    for  the  reason  given.  The  Appellant   had   confirmed   that   his
    representative had the originals and any failing on her part to forward
    them to the Tribunal could easily have been remedied had it been raised
    at hearing.  Second, the Appellant had said in  his  witness  statement
    that his father was in a coma and this had  been  consistent  with  his
    oral evidence.

 6. Permission was initially refused on all grounds by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fisher. Upon renewed application permission was granted by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Freeman in  respect  of  the  second  ground  only.  The
    Tribunal's conclusion that the Appellant had  only  latterly  mentioned
    his father's coma was arguably unfair given that he had mentioned it in
    a witness statement a year before the appeal was heard.

 7. The Respondent opposed the appeal on all grounds. It is submitted  that
    the determination  goes  into  some  detail  about  the  way  that  the
    inconsistencies emerged in relation to the father's coma and  that  the
    findings were open to the Tribunal on the evidence before  it.  As  for
    the documents, it was a matter for the Appellant as to how he wished to
    present his case.

    My Findings

 8. Permission was expressly refused  on  ground  1.  Given  the  extensive
    nature of the documents in question it is perhaps surprising that  that
    decision was not challenged by way of judicial review.  At the date  of
    the appeal before  me  no  such  challenge  had  been  brought.   I  am
    therefore precluded from determining whether the decision to place "no"
    weight on documents that included readily verifiable material  such  as
    the certificate issued by the  Independent  Election  Commission  or  a
    letter of thanks from the Halo Trust was rational or fair.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal clearly placed significant weight on the matter
    of the Appellant's father. Its detailed deliberations and  findings  on
    this evidence take up a full eleven paragraphs of the determination.

10. Permission was granted on the basis of what is said at paragraph 26:

         "I do not find the Appellant's evidence  about  his  father's  coma
         consistent or credible. I find that his failure to mention prior to
         the hearing that his father had fallen into a  coma  shortly  after
         his release by the Taliban damages his claim that  his  father  was
         kidnapped as claimed, or that he suffered any illness as  a  result
         of being kidnapped. The appellant failed to mention either  at  his
         asylum interview or in either of his two  witness  statements  that
         his father had fallen into a coma some two years ago"

11. These findings are contrasted in the grounds  with  the  words  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement [at para 4], drafted in April 2015,  over
    a year before the appeal was heard:

         "My father is now very ill and suffers from hear (sic) problems. My
         father had an operation on his stomach. For the past four months my
         father has been in a hospital in a coma".

12. Had it been established that the Tribunal had overlooked this  evidence
    I would have had no hesitation in finding paragraph 26  to  contain  an
    error of law, in the form of a material error of  fact.  The  Appellant
    plainly did mention, long before the hearing, that his father was in  a
    coma.   I am not however satisfied  that  it  can  be  shown  that  the
    Tribunal missed that evidence. It is expressly referred to at paragraph
    24, and there are further a number of qualifications to the words  used
    at paragraph 26, which read in the context of the determination overall
    indicate that the Tribunal has in fact given close and anxious scrutiny
    to this issue.

13. The Tribunal does not say that the Appellant never mentioned the  coma.
    What is said is that he had never previously claimed  that  his  father
    had been in a coma for the entire period since he was released  by  the
    Taliban in March 2014. This is an accurate summary of the evidence.

14. The Appellant's first opportunity to state his case was in  his  asylum
    interview, dated the 16th April 2015. He explains how the local Taliban
    put up posters bearing his photograph with a  warning  that  any  Talib
    commander had authority to kill him. The Appellant fled the  area  with
    his wife and children, but within the week they had come  and  abducted
    his father, on the  25th  March  2014.  The  Appellant  is  asked  what
    happened to his father and he said  that  local  elders  intervened  to
    negotiate with the Taliban. When they saw that this old  man  had  been
    very badly beaten they begged for his released. The Taliban  acquiesced
    and released him after 2 days.  He goes on to explain that  he  managed
    to speak with his father who warned him to take  care  of  himself  and
    said that he had been lucky to escape  with  his  life.   There  is  no
    mention of any further consequences for his father.

     On the 29th April 2015, approximately a week after the claim had  been
    rejected by the Respondent,  a  witness  statement  was  drafted.  That
    witness statement contains the paragraph cited above, and a reiteration
    of the evidence given at the asylum interview [paras 50-57].  There  is
    no statement to the effect that the Appellant's father fell into a coma
    upon, or soon after, his release.

15. A further statement was drafted for the purpose of the appeal. This  is
    dated 14th April 2016 and makes no reference at all what  has  happened
    to the Appellant's father, save that he was kidnapped in March 2014.

16. Having looked carefully at all of that material I am satisfied that the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal were open to it. It was entitled to
    find that the Appellant had not previously claimed that his father  had
    been in a coma since his release.  The  April  2015  witness  statement
    states that he had fallen into a coma four months earlier,  ie  at  the
    beginning of that year, and strongly suggests that the underlying cause
    was some kind of illness or problem with his stomach.  There were then,
    the discrepancies identified in the determination.

17.  The  question  then  arises  whether  the  Tribunal  acted  fairly  or
    rationally in drawing the adverse inference  that  it  did  from  those
    findings. Two matters weigh in the Appellant's favour. First of all, Mr
    Khan points out, much of the evidence about the father was hearsay. The
    Appellant had not been at home, having been in Kabul and  then  out  of
    Afghanistan. If the evidence about his father's condition was vague  or
    inconsistent that was because the  information  supplied  to  him  also
    suffered from those defects. Secondly, the interview dated  16th  April
    2015 and the witness statement of 29th April 2015 were both  undertaken
    whilst the appeal was in the 'fast track' asylum  process  subsequently
    deemed by the Court of Appeal to be "systematically unfair and unjust":
    Lord Chancellor v Detention  Action  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  840.    I  have
    considered carefully whether either or both  of  these  factors  should
    have weighed in the First-tier Tribunal's assessment.

18. In respect of the 'fast track' process it is right that the Appellant's
    asylum claim was processed very quickly. He claimed on the  24th  March
    2015, was interviewed on  the  16th  April  2015  and  gave  a  witness
    statement to his representative whilst in detention on the  29th  April
    2015. I appreciate Mr Khan's concern that  this  statement  would  have
    been prepared in considerable haste. The refusal came on the 21st April
    2015 and an appeal lodged.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chana on the 19th May 2015, but following  the  decision
    of Nichols J in  the  Detention  Action  case,  her  determination  was
    automatically set aside by order of the  President  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The Appellant was then released from  detention.  The  appeal
    before Judge Chamberlain was not listed until April  2016.   There  was
    therefore a period of one year in  which  the  Appellant  was  able  to
    consult freely with his representatives and to draft  coherent  witness
    statements setting out the basis of his case. He had the opportunity to
    rectify any mistakes or omissions in his asylum interview  or  original
    witness statement.   He, or rather his representatives,  did  not  take
    that opportunity.   It cannot therefore be said that this decision,  as
    Judge  Chana's  was,  was  infected  by  the  "systematic   unfairness"
    identified in the Detention Action case. That  too  is  the  difficulty
    with  Mr  Khan's  'hearsay  submission'.  If  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement, prepared for the appeal, had said "in truth I  do  not  know
    what has happened to my father or the extent to which his  current  ill
    health was caused by detention - I do not know because I am  not  there
    and I have not been able to speak with him  directly",  this  may  have
    been a fair point. He did not however do this. He instead gave  varying
    accounts which  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  reject  for  lack  of
    consistency.

19. I conclude that there was  no  error  in  the  approach  taken  to  the
    evidence about the Appellant's father.  With some reluctance I am bound
    therefore to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.  For my own  part  I  have
    considerable unease  at  the  decision  to  attach  no  weight  to  the
    extensive documents that had been produced in support, but  as  I  note
    above there is nothing that I  can  do  to  address  that  issue.   The
    Appellant may wish to consider why  the  original  documents  were  not
    before the First-tier Tribunal and to seek appropriate redress if  that
    failing was not his.

    Decisions

20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain the error
    identified in the ground of appeal and the  decision  is  upheld.   The
    appeal is dismissed.

21. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         22nd September 2016
