
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07099/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 9th February 2016                 |on 24th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [O S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Duheric, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine, born on 21st October  1981.   He
    has not asked for an anonymity order.  He came to the UK in 2002  on  a
    working visa which expired that year, but  did  not  return.   On  10th
    October 2014 he sought asylum, based on the risk that as a reservist he
    might be mobilised into the Ukrainian Army.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's claim by a decision  dated  10th
    April 2015, for these reasons.  The appellant  completed  his  national
    service with the prospect of being called upon to  serve  in  conflict,
    and has not asserted that he refused to do so due to religious  or  any
    other beliefs.  He is not a conscientious objector to military service.
     It is noted that in Ukraine conscientious objection  applies  only  to
    specific religious groups.  It is also noted that the appellant has not
    asserted that the conflict is such that he might be required to act  in
    breach of basic rules of human  conduct  generally  recognised  by  the
    international community, or that disapproval of such  military  methods
    is his reason for refusing to serve (paragraph  10).   He  is  a  draft
    evader, liable to prosecution not persecution.

 3. The decision letter goes on to analyse the appellant's account of  call
    up papers being received at his home, and  finds  it  vague  and  self-
    contradictory.  The claim that he has been called upon again to  report
    for military service is rejected.  There has been a high  incidence  of
    draft evasion in Ukraine,  and  the  evidence  does  not  suggest  that
    sentences of imprisonment are being imposed  (paragraph  43).   Country
    guidance  and  background  evidence  regarding  prison  conditions  are
    analysed, and the conclusion reached that even if the appellant were to
    be imprisoned current prison conditions are not  of  such  severity  to
    attract protection (paragraph 48).

 4. The appellant's claim is also rejected on various other  grounds  which
    are not now in dispute.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    determination dated 21st September 2015.  At  paragraph  23  the  judge
    found that the appellant had not been called up as claimed, and was not
    liable to prosecution.   He  also  found  that  mobilisation  into  the
    Ukrainian Army would not be an act of persecution (paragraph 26).

 6. In his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the appellant contends:

       . that he did claim asylum immediately upon learning from his parents
         that call up documents had been received, which  was  the  earliest
         opportunity, "as soon as he realised that he might  be  drawn  into
         the conflict and that his life would be in danger",  and  that  the
         judge's findings are perverse;

       . that the documentary evidence regarding his  call  up  was  in  the
         respondent's bundle and was "not disputed";

       . that evidence of the extent of the  call  up  relied  upon  by  the
         respondent and the judge was out  of  date,  the  appellant  having
         produced evidence of a presidential decree  on  16th January  2015
         extending mobilisation to reserve servicemen aged 25 to 60, leading
         to further perverse findings; and

       . that the judge confused service in peace time and during civil war,
         so that the appellant's lack of objection  during  his  service  in
         2002 was irrelevant to his objection later.

       . An unreferenced case citation is taken from the textbook  by  Symes
         and Jorro, Asylum Law and Practice:

       . "... simply forcing someone to take part in a war where  the  basic
         rules were not adhered to, or to punish him if he did not, would be
         sufficient to constitute persecution."

       . The judge's interpretation of conscientious objection is  therefore
         "far too simplistic" and his conclusions are  perverse,  irrational
         and unfair.

 7. On 19th October 2015 Designated Judge Manuell  refused  permission,  on
    the view that the judge was entitled to find  that  the  appellant  was
    positively dishonest in claiming to be a conscientious objector and  to
    have been called up, which was the end of  the  appellant's  case,  and
    that no arguable error of law had been shown.

 8. The appellant renewed his application, on  the  same  grounds,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  UT Judge Bruce granted  permission  on  12th  November
    2015, on the view that it was arguable that the FTT failed to take into
    account material showing that the class of persons being  enlisted  had
    considerably widened  since  the  asylum  claim  was  rejected  by  the
    respondent and that "in  apparently  equating  conscientious  objection
    with pacifism the FTT  failed  to  address  the  appellant's  principal
    argument that the Ukrainian Army was engaging in activity  contrary  to
    the basic rules of human conduct."

 9. (The second part of the UT's grant of  permission  unfortunately  falls
    into an error, brought about by misleading citation of case law in  the
    grounds.  The submission in the Upper Tribunal strayed  at  first  into
    the  same  misapprehension,  as  emerges  further  below.   It  is  not
    sufficient for the appellant to show that he may be  required  to  take
    part in a war where fatalities are being suffered on  both  sides.   It
    was conceded on his behalf in the UT that there had been no evidence of
    the Ukrainian Army failing to adhere to the basic rules of war,  or  of
    requiring servicemen to  engage  in  atrocities.   There  was  no  such
    "principal argument" for the FtT to address.)

10. Under cover of a letter of 6th December 2015 the appellant  sought  the
    consideration of additional evidence under Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   This  comprises  a  Ukrainian
    court judgment, which is attached with a  certified  copy  translation.
    The judgment (or purported judgment)  says  that  on  23rd  June  2015,
    following a public hearing which took  place  on  23rd  May  2015,  the
    appellant, "a native and resident of Khlibychyn ... responsible for the
    maintenance of two young children, no previous convictions, a Ukrainian
    national" was convicted of evasion of call  up  and  sentenced  to  two
    years' imprisonment.

11. At page 2 the judgment takes account of  the  mitigating  circumstances
    that this is a first conviction and that the  appellant  "has  positive
    references from his community and is responsible for the maintenance of
    two young children and an elderly mother".

12. Mr Duheric firstly applied to rely upon the new evidence.   I  enquired
    whether it was intended to show error of law, or to be relevant only in
    the event of remaking the decision.  Mr Duheric said that  he  accepted
    that the evidence could not show that the judge made any error in  law,
    because it was not before the FtT.

13. I noted that the proceedings date from well prior to the  FtT  hearing,
    which took place on 13th July 2015, and asked if it could be  explained
    why the information had not been before the FtT.

14. Mr Duheric said that his understanding was  that  the  appellant  first
    became aware of the sentence when the document was  sent  to  him  from
    Ukraine by his parents.  Mr Duheric had no evidence of when  that  took
    place.  There was no statement from the appellant  about  what  he  had
    known of the Ukrainian proceedings, and when.

15. I observed that it  seemed  from  the  document  that  there  had  been
    information provided by or on behalf of the appellant to the  Ukrainian
    Court, which was rather inconsistent with the present assertion that he
    had no contemporaneous knowledge of the proceedings.

16. Mr Duheric acknowledged that no information was offered as to  how  the
    mitigating circumstances came to be before the Ukrainian Court.

17. Mr Duheric next referred me to the materials to show that call  up  was
    being extended to reservists, which might include  the  appellant.   He
    said that was the essence of the case for the appellant, and  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's findings were all based on him not  being  liable
    to mobilisation, when such was not the up-to-date information.

18. I observed that in principle it appeared to  be  insufficient  for  the
    appellant merely to show that he was  liable  to  be  mobilised.   Some
    consideration would have to be given to his  reasons  for  refusing  to
    serve, or alternatively to the nature of the conflict.

19. Mr Duheric referred to the appellant's witness statement, where he says
    "conflict does not resolve anything", and said that implied that he  is
    a pacifist.   As  to  what  the  law  requires  to  show  conscientious
    objection, Mr Duheric referred me to the citation  above.   I  enquired
    whether there was any evidence of the Ukrainian Government not adhering
    to the basic rules.  Mr Duheric suggested that the  Ukrainian  conflict
    is a "dirty war", but he accepted that there was no  evidence  to  that
    effect in the bundle or to show that the Ukrainian Government has  been
    guilty of such conduct.  He submitted that Ukrainian law  is  defective
    in international terms in that it extends conscientious objection  only
    to fixed religious groups.   There  was  evidence  that  various  human
    rights groups have pointed out that Ukrainian law in this respect is in
    need of amendment.  He also said that country guidance states that  any
    prison sentence in the Ukraine may result in  Article  3  ill-treatment
    and require protection to be granted.

20.  Mr  Duheric  submitted  finally  that  there  was  a  legal  error  of
    overlooking the  appellant's  liability  to  be  called  up;  that  the
    determination should be set  aside;  and  that  a  decision  should  be
    substituted, allowing the appeal, based on the Article 3  risk  arising
    from prison conditions.

21. Mrs O'Brien submitted thus.  The appellant had accepted  that  the  new
    documentary evidence could not be relied upon to show error of  law  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In any event there was no basis for admitting
    it, because there was nothing to show why it had not  been  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  No error was shown in the  judge's  finding  that
    the appellant had not in fact been called up.  Even if he had  achieved
    a favourable finding on that point, his statements fell well  short  of
    showing him to be a genuine  conscientious  objector.   The  judge  was
    correct also to find against him on that respect.  The appellant seemed
    to think that it was sufficient simply to say that he did not  wish  to
    engage in a lethal conflict, but that does not by  itself  attract  any
    protection.  There was no information before the Tribunal by  which  it
    could conceivably have been  held  that  the  Ukrainian  Army  was  not
    observing the basic rules of warfare.  There was no case for protection
    based simply on the nature of the conflict.  The  judge  had  correctly
    taken a section 8 credibility point against the appellant,  who  had  a
    very poor immigration history and who made his asylum claim only  after
    overstaying for a  lengthy  period,  after  unsuccessfully  seeking  to
    remain based on human rights, and long after he appeared to have  known
    that he might be called up.  All of this undermined the genuineness  of
    any claimed principled objection.  The  background  evidence,  even  as
    updated, did not clearly classify who might be liable to  recall  as  a
    reserved serviceman.  The determination was entirely  sound,  based  on
    the evidence which was before the judge.  The  new  evidence  presented
    its own difficulties for the appellant, but if he sought to  rely  upon
    it he could do so only by way of a  fresh  claim.   The  submission  on
    Article 3 and prison conditions was  based  on  country  guidance,  but
    there was a substantial analysis in the refusal letter to show that the
    guidance was outdated.  There was  no  reason  to  find  that  such  an
    Article 3 risk would apply, even if he had succeeded in showing that he
    was likely to be imprisoned.

22. Mr Duheric in response accepted that the question of who is  classified
    as a reservist was not specifically dealt with at the  hearing  in  the
    FtT, but he said that it was most likely to apply to all those who  had
    served previously.

23. I reserved my determination.

24. The information about reservists  liable  to  call-up  is  not  crystal
    clear, but I accept for present purposes  that  call-up  is  likely  to
    apply to all who have completed military service and  who  fall  within
    the age group.  That would include the appellant.

25. That is as far as any findings favourable to his case may properly  go.
    The judge was entitled to find that he had not in fact been called  up,
    for the various reasons he gave, in  which  no  legal  error  has  been
    shown.

26. Even if the appellant had persuaded the judge that he received call  up
    documents, his case faced a formidable series of further difficulties.

27. There was not even a scanty basis for accepting that the appellant  has
    any principled objection to serving in the military.

28. There was nothing to show that the nature of  the  conflict  was  of  a
    nature such as by itself to make out his case.

29. Nothing was produced to refute the respondent's careful analysis, based
    on background evidence, that even if the appellant had  shown  that  he
    was liable to imprisonment that by itself  would  not  entitle  him  to
    protection.

30. The appellant's fundamental misconception was that if he proved he  had
    been called up, and said that he did not wish to  serve,  that  without
    more entitled him to protection.

31. The appellant did not prove his call-up, but if he had, his case  would
    still have failed to clear the  further  series  of  hurdles  mentioned
    above.

32. The decision of the FtT shall stand.




                           [pic]
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                           16 February 2016
