
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07011/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 September 2016                          |On 05 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     TR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Proudman, Counsel, instructed by Messrs A P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 12 January 1989,  appeals
    with permission against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Graham dated 13 July 2016 in which she dismissed the appellant's appeal
    against a decision of the respondent made on 22 March 2015 to refuse to
    grant asylum and to issue directions for his removal.

2.   The appellant entered Britain in October in 2011 with  entry  clearance
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  He travelled to Sri Lanka on  3  August
    2013 returning to Britain on 8 August 2012 when he  claimed  asylum  at
    the airport.  He was interviewed on that date  and  again  in  February
    2015.  A witness statement dated 3 August 2015 was also produced.

3.   The appellant did not claim to be a supporter of the LTTE  although  he
    said that his brother had helped them in 2002/2003.  He stated that  in
    February 2005 he had collected aid in his school in Colombo for victims
    of the tsunami which he had taken to an LTTE controlled  area.  He  had
    stayed at a camp for two days due to problems distributing the aid  and
    there got to know a man called Thirakumaran who borrowed his ID card so
    that he could pass through checkpoints to  visit  his  sick  mother  in
    Vavuniya.

4.   In 2008 the appellant stated that he had worked  for  an  online  radio
    station, Thalem, where he had played request songs and wrote news  part
    time in the news department.  The following year  between  January  and
    April he had worked for Sudaroli, a newspaper and had also worked for a
    Sinhalese televisions station, Derana, part-time while he  was  working
    for a newspaper, Sudaroli, until August 2011.  He  had  analysed  daily
    newspapers.  There  was  some  confusion  in  the  appellant's  various
    interviews and in his statement regarding the exact dates when  he  had
    worked at the newspaper and for the televisions station.

5.   He stated that some time between August and November  2010  or  at  the
    beginning of 2011 he had been queuing at a prison to visit his  cousin.
    The appellant was unclear  about  the  name  of  his  cousin.   He  had
    translated for a lady standing in front of him in the queue, an officer
    had asked him why he was doing that and took  his  details  and  stated
    that the appellant had helped her.  He found out that  that  woman  was
    the wife of an LTTE suspect.  Two weeks later he said the CID had  come
    searching for him at his home and had questioned him as to why  he  had
    helped the woman.  They had taken his mobile phone and noted numbers on
    it. Because he was working  as  a  journalist  he  had  all  ministers'
    numbers.  One number was listed under the name which the  minister  had
    used when he was in the LTTE.  The appellant was asked why he  had  had
    that man's name listed in his phone in his "movement name".

6.   In May 2011 he had posted some news on the  internet  about  a  Douglas
    Devananda saying incorrect things about a Member of  Parliament  called
    Savanabavan. Mr Devanda had objected to this false information and that
    part of the news was erased.  Someone had on Mr Davananda's behalf rung
    the radio station and informed the head of the station that their  post
    was wrong.  The appellant's home number had been phoned and his  mother
    had been told that he was doing unnecessary work and she must  ask  him
    to be careful.  The appellant presumed that the telphone call had  been
    from a member of the EPDF.

7.   On 4 August 2012 after the appellant had returned to Sri Lanka  he  was
    passing through a checkpoint at Omanthai when he saw the person to whom
    he had lent his identity document.  He was  then  detained,  questioned
    about his involvement in helping the LTTE and held  for  two  days  and
    asked about lending his identity card in 2005.  He was also asked about
    smuggling weapons and how long he had been a journalist.

8.   His mother contacted an agent who bribed someone and the appellant  was
    released. The agent was given his passport and booked his  ticket  back
    to Britain.  He travelled through the airport on his return and was not
    stopped.

9.   The judge considered the evidence  before  her  which  included  a  DVD
    which showed the appellant reading the news at Derana  TV  on  29  July
    2010. She also noted his evidence that in Octobers 2013 he had recorded
    a voice over in Britain which had been used to  make  announcements  at
    the Heroes Day celebrations.

10.  She set out her findings  of  credibility  in  fact  in  paragraphs  35
    onwards. She wrote:-

         "My Findings of Credibility and Fact


         35.  At the start of the hearing  the  appellant's  representatives
             produced a DVD which he said showed the appellant reading  the
             news at Derana TV on 29 July 2010 and interviewing a person, a
             screen shot of the same appears at page 6 of  the  appellant's
             supplementary bundle. I stood the hearing down to  enable  the
             Home Office Presenting Officer  to  view  the  DVD.  When  the
             hearing resumed the PO indicated that  she  decided  not  take
             issue with either video clip.


         36.  The appellant adopted his witness statements  dated  3  August
             2015 and 13 June 2016.


         37.  I am satisfied that the appellant's credibility is central  to
             this appeal.  I have considered the appellants credibility  by
             looking at the matter in the round. In doing so I  have  found
             the following factors to be relevant.


         38.  The appellant claims he lent his ID card to an LTTE  supporter
             in  2005,  this  incident  relates  to  the  appellant   being
             appointed a school steward. In cross-examination  he  accepted
             he had finished his studies in 2004, although he said  he  was
             still at school awaiting his exam results at the time  he  was
             appointed school steward but was forced to  accept  that  this
             incident must have  occurred  in  2004  rather  than  2005  as
             previously stated.


         39.  In his witness statement (paragraph 42) the appellant says  ID
             cards are issued when a person reaches 16 years  old.  It  was
             put to the appellant that he would  have  been  15  years  old
             therefore would not be in possession of an  ID  card  when  he
             went to distribute aid to the LTTE area.  The  appellant  then
             said that his ID card would have been  issued  to  him  at  15
             because he would be 16 on his next birthday. I have not  found
             the appellant to be credible in respect of this  part  of  his
             claim; he has changed the date the incident  occurred  to  fit
             with the date he finished his schooling but this  date  change
             means that he was too young to have been issued  with  his  ID
             card which is central to this incident


         40.  In any event, I have not found the  appellant's  claim  to  be
             plausible or at all  likely  for  the  following  reason,  the
             appellan says the checkpoint in question is always manned  and
             everyone is checked.  If so, then  I  consider  it  is  highly
             unlikely that Thirkumaran would be able to  pass  through  the
             checkpoint  using  the  appellant's  ID  which  contained  his
             personal details and photograph.  In addition,  I  have  found
             the appellant's claim that Thirkumaran happened to be  working
             with the army at  the  checkpoint  seven  years  later  to  be
             fanciful.


         41.  The appellant says he has come to the adverse attention of the
             authorities because he assisted the wife  of  an  LTTE  member
             whilst queuing to make a prison visit.  I have not found  this
             incident to be plausible or likely for the following  reasons.
             Firstly, the incident, if it occurred, was witnessed by prison
             guards and it would have been obvious that the  appellant  was
             not connected to  the  woman  in  the  queue  but  was  merely
             assisting her  with  translation.  In  addition,  despite  the
             appellant's explanation I have not  found  credible  that  the
             appellant would choose to visit his cousin in  prison  without
             first finding out his full name and details. It must have been
             obvious to the appellant that he would be  asked  to  identify
             the prison he was intending to visit.  I find the fact that he
             did not know his cousin's  full  name,  for  whatever  reason,
             undermines his claim to be visiting him in prison.


         42.  Even if I had accepted this incident and accepted that it  led
             to the authorities checking the telephone number on his mobile
             phone, I note that  the  appellant  was  not  the  subject  of
             further scrutiny or investigation. He says he was advised that
             a summons would be issued  yet  it  appears  that  no  further
             action has been taken against the appellant.


         43.  In relation to the appellant's  claim  to  have  posted  false
             information relating  to  a  prominent  political  figure,  Mr
             Devananda in 2011 whilst employed by Deranda TV,  I  found  it
             relevant that the TV station did not broadcast the information
             once it became clear  it  was  untrue  and  apologised  to  Mr
             Devananda.   The  TV  company  took  no  action  against   the
             appellant  who  remained  in  his  job,  suggesting  that  the
             appellant  was  not  held  responsible  for  the  error.   The
             appellant remained in Sri Lanka  for  a  further  five  months
             after this incident and apart from a single telephone call  to
             his home by unknown persons, the appellant does not appear  to
             have been contacted further in relation to this incident. I am
             satisfied that the fact that the  appellant  returned  to  Sri
             Lanka in 2012 suggests that the appellant does  not  fear  any
             further repercussions from Mr Devananda.


         44.  It is accepted that the appellant is involved  with  media  in
             Sri Lanka and worked as a news presenter  with  Derana  TV,  a
             Singhalese TV  station.  However,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             appellant was of no adverse interest to the authorities in Sri
             Lanka at the time he left the country in  October  2011.   The
             appellant obtained a student visa to the UK and  was  able  to
             exit Sri Lanka through an international airport using his  own
             documents without incident, which undermines his claim to have
             come to the adverse attention of the authorities in Sri Lanka.
              Similarly, I do not accept  that  the  appellant  would  have
             retuned to Sri Lanka in 2016 if he felt at risk.


         45.  I have dismissed the appellant's claim to have lent his ID  to
             Thirkumaran in 2005 for the reasons stated.  It follows that I
             have not accepted his account that  he  was  arrested  at  the
             Omanthai checkpoint in 2012 or that he needed the services  of
             an agent to bribe officials to secure his release from  prison
             and to assist him to leave the country. In any event,  I  have
             found the appellant's account that he was  able  to  exit  Sri
             Lanka through Colombo  international  airport  using  his  own
             documents by using a particular channel  as  improbable.   The
             appellant states that the authorities have visited  his  house
             looking for him.  Given my findings above I have not  accepted
             this and have found it relevant that there is no  evidence  of
             an arrest warrant for the appellant  or  summonses  suggesting
             Court proceedings


         46.  I have considered whether, bearing in mind my findings  above,
             the appellant faces a risk upon return to Sri Lanka by  reason
             of his sur place activities in the UK.  The  country  guidance
             case of GJ and Others (Post-civil war; returnees) [2013]  UKUT
             00319 (IAC) sets out the current categories of persons at risk
             of persecution or serious harm upon return to Sri Lanka; these
             categories included (7)(b): Journalists (whether in  print  or
             other media) or human rights activists who,  in  either  case,
             have criticised the Sri Lankan government, in  particular  its
             human rights record, or who are associated  with  publications
             critical of the Sri Lankan government.


         47.  Whilst it is accepted that  the  appellant  has  worked  as  a
             journalist I am not satisfied that he has been critical of the
             government and note he  is  associated  with  a  Sinhalese  TV
             station. In the UK the  appellant  said  that  he  had  worked
             unpaid for ILC  Tamil  since  13  March  2015.   Although  the
             appellant refers to photographs  (at  28  of  the  appellant's
             bundle)  taken  with  Mr  Tarcissius,  and   Mr   Esvaravhasan
             described  as  a  senior  journalist  with  ILC,  he  says  Mr
             Tarcissius had previously worked for Tiger's  Voice,  a  radio
             station run by the LTTE. The appellant said that ILC Radio was
             viewed by the authorities in Sri Lanka as supporting the  LTTE
             because  it  reported  news  against  the  government  and  Mr
             Tarcissiuis broadcast Tamil Tigers' songs. In  addition  every
             Hero's day the station focused on a hero who  lost  his  life,
             listeners contact the station  and  praise  and  remember  the
             person.


         48.   The  appellant's  involvement  with  ILC  was  presenting   a
             programme every Saturday between 6 am -  8  am;  presenting  a
             programme between 6 am -  7  am  called  'Tamil-this  is  your
             stage' when he plays part of a  song  and  listeners  try  and
             identify the songs.  A second programme between 7 am  -  8  am
             which was a comic take on current affairs, political or social
             issues. The appellant said he used a comical name, not is  own
             name, and pretended to be an elderly man.  As a result,  I  am
             satisfied that his only involvement is as a presenter with ILC
             Radio is with a music show or a debating show where he uses  a
             false name and pretended to be an old man, therefore he is not
             identifiable.


         49.  As regards the appellant's field activities,  I  am  satisfied
             that there is no evidence which would place the  appellant  at
             risk on return.  He states he is associated with  the  Chamber
             of Commerce which is a non-political  organisation.  His  role
             with ILC is on a voluntary  basis,  he  holds  a  junior  role
             appearing once a week and is  involved  in  a  music  show  or
             otherwise uses a false identity. In these circumstances  I  am
             satisfied that his sur place activities in  the  UK  have  not
             placed him in any of the risk categories listed  in  GJ.   The
             appeal is therefore dismissed."


11.  The appellant appealed. The grounds of appeal stated that  it  was  not
    the case that the appellant  had  changed  the  date  of  the  incident
    regarding the identity card in 2005 and arguing that the judge had  not
    explained why she considered that the appellant had been too  young  to
    be issued with an ID card and why she had not accepted his  explanation
    for having been issued with an identity card poor  to  taking  his  'O'
    levels.

12.  It was argued that she had no right to consider  that  his  claim  that
    Thirukumaran happened to be working for the army checkpoint seven years
    later be fanciful and that she was wrong to place weight  on  the  fact
    that the appellant  had  not  claimed  asylum  when  he  first  entered
    Britain.

13.  The judge, it was argued, had been wrong to find  that  his  departure,
    using a particular channel, was "improbable" referring  to  the  expert
    who had said that leaving through the airport either on an  appellant's
    own passport or with a false identity did not  necessarily  indicate  a
    lack of interest on the part of the authorities.  It was argued that it
    was wrong for the judge to have placed weight on the  fact  that  there
    was no evidence of an arrest warrant in relation to  the  appellant  as
    the appellant was not seeking to suggest an  arrest  warrant  had  been
    issued or that any court  proceedings  had  been  instigated.   It  was
    stated that he was a perceived critic of the government  of  Sri  Lanka
    because  he  was  "someone  associated  with  publications  which  were
    critical the Sri Lankan government or was someone who was perceived  to
    be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state.

14.  It was argued that the judge had been wrong  to  state  that  appellant
    had not been critical of the government and it was stated that Sudaroli
    was a sister paper of Uthayan which were leading Tamil  newspapers  and
    there was evidence before her that employees of both media agencies had
    been threatened, attacked and detained.  It was stated that  the  judge
    had erred in her assessment of the appellant's employment with Sudaroli
    which would mean that the appellant  would  have  had  the  profile  of
    somebody associated with the Sinhalese TV station.  It was argued  that
    the judge had failed to engage with that evidence.

15.  Moreover the appellant had been involved with ILC Tamil as a  presenter
    of a radio station and that even if he was not directly criticising the
    Sri Lankan government it was unreasonable and  irrational  to  consider
    that he would not be at risk on return.  It was stated that  the  judge
    had been wrong to state that the appellant was  not  identifiable  from
    his role as a presenter for the ILC Tamil and he had  represented  that
    group at a number of public events and that the Sri Lankan intelligence
    would be aware of that involvement.  There  was  evidence  showing  him
    working as a reporter at the Mullivaikal remembrance day in Britain and
    that as he had interviewed people about that event he would  have  been
    identified.  The judge had not placed weight  on  that  clip.   It  was
    stated that the judge had been wrong to state  that  he  would  not  be
    identifiable by the Sri Lankan government.  It was argued that the  Sri
    Lankan government would be aware of the  appellant's  involvement  with
    ILC Tamil on return.

16.  Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Easterman  granted  permission.   In
    paragraph 3 he stated

         "In light of the grounds I have read the entire decision with care.
         Whilst on the face of it,  it  appears  that  the  judge  had  made
         perfectly rational findings with clear reasons, it is arguable that
         there is little or no reference to the background  evidence,  which
         has been referred to heavily in the applicant's skeleton  argument.
         This is particularly important in relation to risk on return, where
         it is suggested that the appellant's associations as  a  journalist
         are not simply with the Sinhalese television station, but are  with
         various Tamil associated organisations,  which  as  the  background
         evidence is said to suggest the Sri Lankan  authorities  regard  as
         threatening.  To that extent it is arguable that the judge has made
         an error of law."


17.  In her submissions  before  me  Miss  Proudman  dealt  first  with  the
    evidence regarding the identity card and stated that it  was  incorrect
    that the judge had stated that the appellant had changed the  dates  of
    when he had lent the card and was also wrong to state that he had  been
    too young for the  identity  card  and  that  there  was  no  objective
    evidence to suggest that the card would not be issued before the age of
    16.  It was also wrong to state that it  was  implausible  that  having
    lent the identity card to someone in 2005 that that man would appear at
    a checkpoint seven years later.

18.  She argued moreover that the judge was wrong to  place  adverse  weight
    on the fact that the appellant had left on his own passport through the
    airport.  She noted that  that  was  not  in  accordance  with  country
    guidance. Moreover she argued that the judge had been  wrong  to  place
    little weight on the work done by the appellant for ILC Tamil  -  as  a
    presenter with ILC Tamil he would have been considered to  be  critical
    of the Sri Lankan government. The judge had watched a video clip  which
    would show his role as a presenter.

19.  She argued that the judge had given insufficient  reasons  for  finding
    that the evidence of the appellant  regarding  journalistic  activities
    was  not  such  as  to  bring  to  the  attention  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

20.  Moreover she stated that the judge was wrong to place  such  weight  on
    the issue of credibility in this case when there was material which had
    not been relied on by the appellant such as an arrest warrant but other
    material in the bundle showing his activities  as  a  journalist.   She
    referred to the country guidance case of  GJ  and  to  the  appellant's
    witness statement.  She argued that in general the judge had not  given
    reasons for her decision.

21.  She emphasised that when considering the danger  to  the  appellant  on
    return the judge had not remarked on his work for Sudaroli and that  he
    had worked for a  Tamil  newspaper.   Moreover  she  had  not  properly
    engaged with his work for ILC.

22.  In reply Mr Melvin referred to a Rule 24  statement  in  which  he  had
    submitted that the judge had properly considered  the  evidence  before
    her and that she had given detailed reasons for her  conclusions.  With
    regard to the appellant's work with ICL the  judge  had  set  down  the
    evidence at paragraphs 47 to 49 in  which  it  was  recorded  that  the
    appellant had worked for ICL voluntarily and that he  had  presented  a
    programme early on Saturday mornings where listeners tried to  identify
    part of a song and as  a  comic  take  on  current  affairs  where  the
    appellant had used a name that was not  his own and stated that it  was
    simply implausible that the Sri Lankan would have any interest in  this
    appellant.  He pointed out that there was no evidence of the  appellant
    attending demonstrations belonging to organisations that were active in
    the promotion of a resurgent LTTE and that he had not  aligned  himself
    with any proscribed organisation.

23.  In his oral submissions he again stated  that  the  judge  had  reached
    conclusions which were fully open to her on  the  evidence  and  stated
    that her conclusions that the appellant would not be at risk were again
    open to her.

Discussion

24.  The judge did very carefully deal with the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    identity card and his claim that he lent it to a Tamil  man  to  enable
    him to visit Vavuniya and she gave very detailed reasons for  rejecting
    that claim.  She was right to find that it was  implausible  that  that
    card could have been used by a Tamil man to go through  checkpoints  as
    it would have the appellant's details thereon.  She was  also  entitled
    to indicate that he had been muddled about the dates at which the  card
    would have been issued and when it could have been used.

25.  In any event, the fact that the appellant  lent  his  card  to  someone
    whom the appellant later  claimed  was  working  with  the  army  at  a
    checkpoint in 2012 would hardly be  a  matter  that  would  be  of  any
    importance to the Sri Lankan authorities now.

26.  Similarly his assertion that  he  had  been  detained  because  he  had
    assisted with translation for a woman standing with him in a queue when
    he went to visit a cousin in prison is also implausible as it would  be
    obvious to the prison officers that that was all he was doing and  that
    he was not with the woman.

27.  She was also entitled to place weight on the fact  that  the  appellant
    had returned to Sri Lanka in 2012 and that clearly showed that  he  had
    no fears of returning then.

28.  While  it  is  the  case  that  many  people  who  are  sought  by  the
    authorities are able to leave through the airport  the  fact  that  the
    appellant did so and used his own passport again is an indication  that
    he was not of interest to the authorities.

29.  The judge's comment that  there  was  no  arrest  warrant  against  the
    appellant was an observation which was again  open  to  her.   She  was
    entitled to consider that the fact that there  was  no  arrest  warrant
    indicated that the appellant would not  be  at  risk.  The  appellant's
    mother's statement does not carry weight but  was  clearly  taken  into
    account by the judge who confirmed that she had read the  documents  in
    the appellant's bundles in paragraph 8 of the determination.

30.  Turning to the  appellant's  journalistic  activities,  the  judge  did
    properly comment on those.  While  it  is  correct  that  she  did  not
    specifically refer to his work with Sudaroli, that work did not lead to
    the appellant being detained or questioned before he left Sri Lanka and
    of course it is  worth  recording  that  that  work  was  really  on  a
    voluntary basis.

31.  The fact that the appellant worked  for  a  Sinhalese  newspaper  again
    does not indicate that he would be in difficulties - it is of note that
    no articles written by the appellant which  are  critical  of  the  Sri
    Lankan regime have been produced.  With regard to his work for the  ILC
    the judge did correctly point out that the appellant did  not  use  his
    own name, that the item he was responsible for was humorous and that he
    was pretending to be an old man.  Again, there is  nothing  to  suggest
    that would lead to him being in any difficulties on return.

32.  It was said that he gave the voice over at certain  Tamil  celebrations
    but the reality is that he would not be able to be traced by his voice.
    While it is asserted that he had interviewed people at the  remembrance
    day event that would not, of itself, lead to his being of  interest  to
    the Sri Lankan authorities particularly given his more regular  roe  at
    the radio station.

33.  On return to Sri Lanka the appellant would be  able  to  refer  to  the
    evidence of his studies here and the qualification received.  He  would
    be entitled to correctly state that he had come to  Britain  to  study,
    had done so and was returning with the appropriate qualification.

34.   The  appellant  has  not  produced  evidence  that  he  is  a  serious
    journalist who has been taking a position critical of  the  Sri  Lankan
    government and there is no evidence to  indicate  that  that  would  be
    considered to be the case.  While he states that he had made  incorrect
    statements  about  Mr  Devarandan  there  is  no  indication  that   Mr
    Devarandan had taken the matter further. I consider that what the judge
    wrote in paragraph 49 of her determination is correct.

35.  In all I consider that the judge was entitled to find that this was  an
    appellant who would be able to return to  Sri  Lanka  without  fear  of
    persecution and I note, of course, that the country guidance  does  not
    indicate that merely by being a journalist  an  individual  would  face
    persecution on return.

36.  Taking all these factors into consideration I consider that  the  judge
    was entitled to dismiss this appeal, that she properly  considered  the
    evidence before her and that there is no material error of law  in  her
    determination.

Notice of Decision

37.  I therefore dismiss this appeal.


Signed                                  Date 05 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
