
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/07663/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 8 August 2016                       |On 11 August 2016         |
|Prepared on 10 August 2016             |                          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tetty, Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally  and  claimed
           asylum on 24 November 2014. That application was refused  on  21
           April  2015,  and  a  decision  to  remove  him  was   made   in
           consequence.
        2. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal against those immigration
           decisions was first heard and dismissed on 22  June  2015.  That
           decision was however set  aside  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  5
           January 2016, and the appeal was  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
           Tribunal to be heard afresh. It was then heard, and dismissed by
           decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Fisher  promulgated  on  4
           April 2016.
        3. The Appellant's application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal was refused by Designated Judge  Murray  on
           28  April  2016,  but  undaunted  the  Appellant   renewed   the
           application to the Upper Tribunal when it was granted  by  Upper
           Tribunal Judge Reeds on 7 June 2016. Despite the length  of  the
           grounds to the application the sole ground upon which permission
           was granted was as follows;
                 The only issue related to that of internal  relocation,  it
                 being accepted that the  Appellant  was  from  one  of  the
                 contested areas. Whilst  the  Judge  set  out  the  country
                 guidance decision of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT
                 544 it is arguable that the  Judge  failed  to  apply  that
                 guidance and make a clear finding as to whether, or in what
                 circumstances the Appellant would be able to obtain a  CSID
                 to enable his relocation to be reasonable  and  not  unduly
                 harsh.
        4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice  dated  24  June  2016  in
           which she argued that the Judge's decision correctly applied the
           guidance to be found in AA because the Appellant had a  national
           ID document, and thus gave adequate  reasons  for  why  internal
           relocation was feasible. That finding was open  to  him  on  the
           Appellant's own evidence and the guidance to be found in AA.
        5. The Appellant made a Rule 15(2A) application on 1 August 2016 in
           relation to a report dated 29 July 2016 from  Dr  Rebwar  Fatah.
           The Respondent offered no objection to  the  admission  of  that
           evidence, which was prepared to deal with the issue  upon  which
           permission to appeal  had  been  granted,  Dr  Fatah's  original
           report of 11 December 2015  having  failed  to  deal  with  that
           issue.
        6. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Error of Law?
        7. Before the Judge the Respondent conceded that the Appellant  was
           from the town of Jawala, in the province of Diwala,  as  he  had
           claimed. Both  that  town,  and  the  province  of  Diwala  were
           conceded by the Respondent in AA to  be  the  subject  of  armed
           conflict, and areas where serious harm was occurring to civilian
           members of the population to the Article 15(c) threshold.  There
           was no suggestion that the situation had improved materially  by
           the date of the hearing before the Judge, and the Respondent did
           not  seek  to  go  behind,  or  to  amend  the  breadth  of  the
           concessions made in AA.
        8. It follows in my judgement  that  the  only  possible  inference
           available to the Judge was that it was not reasonable to  expect
           either the Appellant himself, or a Baghdad  lawyer  retained  by
           him as his proxy, to travel from Baghdad  to  attend  any  civil
           administration offices  in  Jalawa  to  seek  to  establish  the
           Appellant's identity, and/or to obtain the reissue of  documents
           that were now lost to him. It is  not  at  all  clear  that  the
           Appellant's case was presented in such a way as to identify  the
           significance of this  point,  but  I  accept  that  the  Judge's
           decision does not engage directly with it.
        9.  Whilst  the  Judge's  decision  does  record  that  the   Iraqi
           authorities have opened in Baghdad an alternative CSA office for
           the provinces of Mosul, Anbar, and Saluhaddin [AA #187], it does
           not appear to recognise, or to engage with, the failure to  open
           a similar office in relation to the province of  Diwala.  Again,
           it is not at all clear that this formed any part of the  way  in
           which the Appellant's appeal was presented.
       10. That begs the question of why that stance might have been  taken
           by the Iraqi authorities in distinguishing between the different
           provinces subject to fighting. It is entirely possible,  because
           the evidence  placed  before  both  the  Judge  (and  the  Upper
           Tribunal) does not deal with this either way, that  it  was  not
           perceived that there was any need to  do  so,  because  the  CSA
           offices for the province in the provincial capital  of  Baqubah,
           have  remained  open  for  business  and  are  functioning,  and
           accessible to citizens in Baghdad, even  if  they  have  to  use
           local agents based in Baqubah to do so as  their  proxy,  rather
           than to travel there directly in person. In so saying I do  note
           that Baqubah lies some 50km north east of  Baghdad,  and  within
           the area referred to in AA as "The Baghdad Belts", and  an  area
           where an Article 15(c) risk exists [146]. I make no  finding  to
           this  effect,  and  nor  did  the  Judge,  I  merely  note   the
           possibility since the evidence did not deal with the matter.
       11. In paragraph 16  of  the  decision  the  Judge  found  that  the
           Appellant's return was feasible, and that he would  be  able  to
           obtain the identity documentation that he would require to  make
           his relocation to Baghdad reasonable, upon return. The  question
           of reasonableness arose, because  as  set  out  in  AA,  if  the
           Appellant were unable to  obtain  a  CSID  within  a  reasonable
           period of time, and had no family member capable  of  supporting
           him, he faced a real risk of destitution.
       12.  The Judge did not fall into  the  error  of  relying  upon  the
           "Central Archive" in Baghdad as being able to  provide  identity
           documents, because as he noted, in AA it had been concluded that
           the evidence did not establish that it was able to do so  [187].
           Instead he relied upon the  existence  of  the  National  Status
           Court in Baghdad, which was recognised in AA as being  available
           for individuals to apply  for  recognition  of  their  identity.
           Although the  precise  nature  of  that  court's  operation  was
           therein described  as  unclear,  that  is  not  the  same  as  a
           conclusion that the court did not function, and  that  it  would
           therefore be unable to  provide  identity  documentation  to  an
           applicant. Thus the Judge  was  correct  to  reject  Mr  Tetty's
           argument to the contrary as without evidential foundation, and I
           note that even now Dr Fatah's recent report offers no suggestion
           that the court does not function. Indeed that  report  makes  no
           reference to the existence, or the function, of  that  court  at
           all.
       13. The  Appellant's  evidence  to  the  Judge  about  the  identity
           documentation that he had been  issued  with  was  not  entirely
           clear. At his screening interview he had denied having ever been
           issued with an Iraqi passport  [2.2],  or  a  military  ID  card
           [2.6], but he had admitted to having been issued with a  driving
           licence and a national ID card, both of which were then said  to
           be in Iraq [2.6]. The matter was not taken further at  his  full
           interview, and his brief witness statement of 11 June 2015  [ApB
           p4] made no reference  at  all  to  either  the  nature  of  the
           identity documents he had originally been issued  with,  or  his
           ability to obtain the re-issue of those  he  had  lost,  or  the
           issue of those he had never had.
       14.  Mr  Tetty  confirmed  to  me  however  that   the   Appellant's
           instructions were that his birth had been properly registered by
           way of an entry into the "Family Book", and that he had  in  due
           course been issued by the Iraqi authorities with three forms  of
           legitimate identity document. One was an  Iraqi  Citizenship  ID
           (also known as  an  Iraqi  National  Certificate)  ["INC"],  the
           second was a Civil Status ID (also known as  a  CSID)  ["CSID"],
           and the third was his driving licence. Of  these  the  Appellant
           admitted to retaining in his possession only the  INC,  although
           he had never produced a copy of it in evidence. His evidence was
           that he had left the CSID card at his family home when he  fled.
           His evidence was that he had lost contact with his family  as  a
           result of that flight, and the fighting in the  area,  and  thus
           his CSID card was in practice lost to him, even  if  it  did  in
           fact continue to  exist,  and  remained  in  the  possession  of
           members of his family.
       15. Those instructions are consistent  with  the  instructions  that
           were given recently to Dr Fatah, and which were recorded by  him
           in his report of 29 July  2016  [36].  Dr  Fatah  goes  slightly
           further however, and he records  in  addition  that  whilst  the
           Appellant knows his own citizenship number (00441051),  he  does
           not know the citizenship number of any member of his family.
       16. There was no finding to the effect that the Appellant had either
           a current, or an expired passport, and the Appellant denied  it.
           Unless  the  Respondent  is  able  to  obtain  from  the   Iraqi
           authorities, through the Iraqi Embassy in London, the issue of a
           laissez passer then she will not be able to effect  his  removal
           to Iraq. A laissez passer may however be issued upon  production
           of an INC, and since the Appellant has such a  document  in  his
           possession, there is in my judgement no  basis  upon  which  the
           Tribunal could properly have inferred that his  return  was  not
           feasible.
       17. Upon return to Baghdad the Appellant would  need  a  replacement
           CSID in order to access public services,  financial  assistance,
           employment and housing. Without it, he would be  destitute,  and
           the expectation of his internal relocation to Baghdad would  not
           be a reasonable one. With a CSID, there is no criticism  of  the
           Judge's conclusion  that  it  would  be  reasonable.  That  begs
           therefore the question of whether the Appellant could  obtain  a
           replacement CSID, either now from within the UK,  or,  upon  his
           arrival in Baghdad.
       18. It is plain, both from the guidance in AA, and from  Dr  Fatah's
           recent report (paragraphs 53-60), that since  the  Appellant  is
           able to produce his original genuine INC, it is possible for him
           to obtain from the Iraqi Ministry of the Interior the details of
           the CSID that was originally issued to him,  and  which  is  now
           said to be lost. The CSID details include all  of  the  relevant
           details of the Family Book  (volume  and  page  number  allowing
           tracing of his family,  and  cross-checking  of  his  identity).
           Armed with those, he would in my judgement be able to obtain the
           issue of a replacement CSID either from the UK, or within  Iraq.
           That is because the INC could only ever have been issued to  him
           upon his production of a valid CSID,  and  because  the  details
           contained  upon  the  CSID  will  have  been  recorded  by   the
           citizenship department of the nationality directorate  when  the
           INC was issued to him. It is therefore possible according to  Dr
           Fatah to obtain from the Nationality Directorate  of  the  Iraqi
           Ministry of the Interior upon production of the INC all  of  the
           details that would be required to be produced  in  a  successful
           application to obtain a replacement CSID.
       19. Whilst Dr Fatah is plainly concerned that  there  are  practical
           difficulties inherent in this process, they are in my  judgement
           very far from insuperable. Dr Fatah is concerned that the  Iraqi
           authorities may not believe  the  Appellant;  but  there  is  no
           reason offered as to why that should be  the  case,  and  I  can
           identify no reason why the Tribunal should infer that this would
           occur. The Appellant has been believed by the Respondent and the
           Tribunal, and he holds his original genuine INC, and he will  be
           able to obtain a laissez passer from the Embassy as a result. Dr
           Fatah is also concerned that the Appellant would need to  be  in
           Baghdad himself to search the INC record; but again there is  no
           reason offered as to why that should be the  case,  or  why  the
           Appellant should not be  expected  to  take  such  a  step  upon
           arrival in Baghdad. I note that Dr Fatah, and the Upper Tribunal
           in AA  recognised  the  practice  and  procedure  of  appointing
           someone within Baghdad a power of attorney. I accept that  since
           the Appellant denies contact with anyone in Baghdad, he will  be
           required to use a lawyer for that  purpose,  but  no  reason  is
           offered as to why he should not do so. To do so is said to be  a
           recognised process, that Dr Fatah accepted in his evidence in AA
           he had used himself, and was "commonplace" in Iraq [AA 174].
       20. In the circumstances the Judge did not make any  material  error
           of law in his decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  4
      April 2016 contains an error of law  in  the  decision  to  allow  the
      Appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and human rights
      grounds which require that decision to be set aside and remade so that
      the appeal on those grounds is dismissed. There is no error of law  in
      the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds  and
      that decision is confirmed.


      I remake the decision so as to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 24 March 2016


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 24 March 2016
