
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07400/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 17th April 2015                  |On 13th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MZ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smyth, Kesar & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The Appellant is  a  national  of  Afghanistan  date  of  birth  1st
        September 1996.  He appeals with permission[1] the decision  of  the
        First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  S  Taylor)  to  dismiss   his   asylum
        appeal[2].

     2. It is accepted that the Appellant was 16 years old when  he  arrived
        in the UK as an unaccompanied asylum seeking child on the  4th  July
        2013. He claimed asylum  and  in  accordance  with  her  policy  the
        Respondent granted him discretionary leave until he  was  17�  years
        old.  The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim to international
        protection, having found his account of forced  recruitment  to  the
        Taliban not to be credible.

     3. The Appellant brought an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a
        decision  dated  18th  November  2014  Judge  Taylor  accepted   the
        Appellant's account of events before he left Afghanistan to be true.
         That factual background is as follows:

         i) he is from a village in Chardara district, Kunduz, an  area  of
            "high Taliban activity";

        ii) his father had formerly worked for the Taliban but had left the
            organisation;

       iii) this had resulted in his abduction, along with the  Appellant's
            brother, in (approximately) late 2012;

        iv) his father and brother's whereabouts remain unknown;

         v) his mother died shortly after the abduction;

        vi) his paternal uncle who remains in his home  area  is  a  senior
            Taliban commander;

       vii) a tenant farmer helped him leave the country  in  exchange  for
            the Appellant giving him his father's land;

      viii) the Appellant was 16 when he arrived in the UK,  and  had  just
            turned 18 at the date of the appeal hearing

        ix) he has no family in, nor any known connection with, Kabul.

     4. Having made those findings the determination implicitly accepts that
        the Appellant would be at risk in his home area. I say this  because
        the next paragraph dismisses the appeal on the  grounds  that  there
        was  a  reasonable  internal  flight  alternative.  The   First-tier
        Tribunal finds that the Appellant would be returned  to  Afghanistan
        as an 18 year old and could therefore safely relocate to  Kabul  [at
        17]:

            "His expert report referred to the large numbers of people  who
            had returned to Kabul and the difficulty of finding  work.  The
            expert report  refers  to  the  poor  earnings  and  restricted
            employment opportunities in  Kabul,  such  that  the  appellant
            would probably be  unemployed.  The  expert  report  refers  to
            various charity organisations which help people in Kabul  which
            the  appellant  may  have  recourse  to.  The   expert   report
            acknowledges that the  UK  government  provides  assistance  to
            returnees from  the  UK  but  some  returnees  had  a  lack  of
            confidence  in  the  system.  The  expert  report   refers   to
            difficulties in Kabul but does not suggest that  the  appellant
            would be in danger of being hunted  down  or  targeted  by  the
            Taliban in Kabul. Neither  is  there  any  expert  or  external
            evidence to suggest that the appellant would be  at  risk  from
            the government on return, as the son of an  ex-Taliban  member.
            By the time that the appellant would return to Kabul  he  would
            be at least 18 and a half, he has no medical issues, and he has
            had the advantage of some education in the UK. While there  may
            be difficulties on return to Kabul,  which  may  be  considered
            harsh, the test in  the  case  of  Januzi  [2006]  UKHL  5  was
            relocation being unduly harsh, which  is  a  higher  test  than
            being harsh. I find no aspects of undue  harshness  on  return.
            Many of the returnees to Kabul would have no family support but
            there are  several  support  agencies  such  as  charities  and
            government assistance schemes".

   Submissions on Error of Law

     5. This appeal is brought on the grounds that in making his findings on
        internal flight the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider, or
        give appropriate weight to, the particular characteristics  of  this
        appellant, those being his young age, and the background  facts  set
        out above: he would be returned to Kabul as a very young  man  whose
        entire family have died/been kidnapped by the Taliban.  The  grounds
        submit:

         a) That the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
            findings in AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT
            16 (IAC):

            "92. But the background evidence demonstrates  that  unattached
            children returned to  Afghanistan  may,  depending  upon  their
            individual circumstances and the location  to  which  they  are
            returned, be exposed to a risk of serious harm, inter alia from
            indiscriminate violence, forced recruitment,  sexual  violence,
            trafficking and a  lack  of  adequate  arrangements  for  child
            protection.  Such risks will have to be taken into account when
            addressing the question of whether a return is in  the  child's
            best interests, a  primary  consideration  when  determining  a
            claim to humanitarian protection".

            Had the First-tier Tribunal expressly directed itself to  these
            findings it may not have concluded that internal  flight  would
            not be unduly harsh.

         b) That the Tribunal further failed to have regard  to  the  point
            made by Maurice Kay  LJ in KA (Afghanistan) & Ors v SSHD [2012]
            EWCA Civ 1014:

            "18. At this point, it is appropriate to refer to  what  I  may
            call "the eighteenth birthday  point".  Although  the  duty  to
            endeavour to trace does not endure  beyond  the  date  when  an
            applicant reaches that age, it cannot  be  the  case  that  the
            assessment of risk on return is subject to such a  bright  line
            rule. The relevance of this relates  to  the  definition  of  a
            "particular social group" for asylum purposes. In DS, Lloyd  LJ
            considered  LQ  (Age:  immutable  characteristic)   Afghanistan
            [2008] UKAIT 00005 in  which  the  AIT  held  that  "for  these
            purposes age is immutable", in the sense that,  although  one's
            age is constantly changing,  one  is  powerless  to  change  it
            oneself. Lloyd LJ said (at paragraph 54):

                "...  that  leaves  a  degree  of  uncertainty  as  to   the
                definition of a particular  social  group.  Does  membership
                cease on the day of the person's eighteenth birthday? It  is
                not easy to see that risks of the relevant kind to who as  a
                child would continue until the eve  of  that  birthday,  and
                cease at once the next day."

            Given that the kinds  of  risk  in  issue  include  the  forced
            recruitment or the  sexual  exploitation  of  vulnerable  young
            males, persecution is not respectful of birthdays - apparent or
            assumed age is more important than chronological  age.  Indeed,
            as submissions developed there seemed to be a degree of  common
            ground derived from the observation of Lloyd LJ."

            It is submitted that this determination  fails  to  assess  the
            risk/circumstances in Kabul for young man leaving care, who has
            only just reached majority. Further reliance is  placed  on  JS
            (former unaccompanied child - durable  solution)  (Afghanistan)
            [2013] UKUT 568 (IAC).

         c) That the established facts place the Appellant at the  top  end
            of Maurice Kay LJ's hypothetical spectrum in KA: he is a  young
            person who has provided a credible account of having no  family
            to whom he can turn. Had the Secretary of State discharged  her
            duty to trace his family members when  he  claimed  asylum  his
            account would have been corroborated and  he  would  have  been
            granted asylum then. This raises the principle  of  'corrective
            relief'.

     6. For the Respondent Mr Avery agreed that there is  no  "bright  line"
        between minority and majority, but the fact was that  the  Appellant
        was now an adult for whom no  particular  vulnerabilities  had  been
        identified. He pointed out that the  skeleton  argument  before  the
        First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  argued  that  the  Appellant  was  a
        membership of a particular social group by reason of his age. As for
        the tracing point Mr Avery protested that the burden of  proof  does
        not lie on the Respondent; it is for the Appellant to prove his case
        and  the  obligation  to  trace  does  not  extend  to  proving  the
        Appellant's case for him.

   My Findings

     7. The legal framework to be applied when considering  internal  flight
        is set out at Article 8 of the Qualification Directive:

        1.  As part of the assessment of the application  for  international
            protection, Member States may determine that  an  applicant  is
            not in need of international protection if in  a  part  of  the
            country of origin  there  is  no  well-founded  fear  of  being
            persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious  harm  and  the
            applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in  that  part  of
            the country.

        2.  In examining whether a part of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
            accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall at the time of
            taking the decision on  the  application  have  regard  to  the
            general circumstances prevailing in that part  of  the  country
            and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.

        3.  Paragraph 1 may apply  notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
            return to the country of origin.

     8. In AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 the House of Lords make clear that  the
        question of whether internal flight is "reasonable"  is  not  to  be
        equated with the test under Article 3 ECHR. Lord Bingham refers  [at
        5] to his own guidance in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5:

            "In paragraph 21 of my  opinion  in  Januzi  I  summarised  the
            correct approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms
            with which all my noble and learned friends agreed:

                'The  decision-maker,  taking  account   of   all   relevant
                circumstances pertaining to the claimant and his country  of
                origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to  expect  the
                claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh  to
                expect him to do so....There is, as  Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
                observed in  Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of cases.
                 The decision-maker must do his  best  to  decide,  on  such
                material  as  is  available,  where  on  the  spectrum   the
                particular  case  falls...  All  must  depend  on   a   fair
                assessment of the relevant facts'.

            Although specifically directed to  a  secondary  issue  in  the
            case, these observations are plainly  of  general  application.
            It is not easy to see how the rule  could  be  more  simply  or
            clearly expressed.  It is, or  should  be,  evidence  that  the
            enquiry must be directed to the  situation  of  the  particular
            applicant, whose age, gender, experience,  health,  skills  and
            family ties may all be very relevant..."

     9. At 20 Baroness Hale cites with approval the UNHCR view that the test
        is whether the individual will be able to live a "relatively  normal
        life without undue hardship", itself a formulation approved by their
        Lordships in Januzi[3]:

            "As the UNHCR put it in their very helpful intervention in this
            case:

                '...the correct approach when considering the reasonableness
                of IRA [internal relocation alternative] is  to  assess  all
                the circumstances of the individual's case holistically  and
                with  specific  reference  to  the   individual's   personal
                circumstances (including past persecution or  fear  thereof,
                psychological  and  health  condition,  family  and   social
                situation, and survival capacities).  This assessment is  to
                be made in the context of the conditions  in  the  place  of
                relocation   (including   basic   human   rights,   security
                conditions, socio-economic conditions, accommodation, access
                to health care facilities), in order to determine the impact
                on that individual of settling  in  the  proposed  place  of
                relocation  and  whether  the  individual   could   live   a
                relatively normal life without undue hardship'.

            I do not understand there to be  any  difference  between  this
            approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph  5  of
            his opinion.  Very little, apart from  the  conditions  in  the
            country to which the claimant has fled, is ruled out."

    10. The cases that the Appellant cites in his grounds  of  appeal  apply
        this guidance with specific reference to the position of the  young.
        I am satisfied that in his  consideration  of  internal  flight  the
        First-tier Tribunal Judge did not have any regard to the  particular
        dangers identified for unaccompanied young males  in  AA  and  other
        cases, for instance "indiscriminate  violence,  forced  recruitment,
        sexual violence, trafficking".  Whilst it is no doubt correct to say
        that  being  unemployed  does  not  itself  render  internal  flight
        "unduly"  harsh  there  must  be  some  consideration  of  what  the
        consequences of  that  would  be  for  this  18  year  old  with  no
        connections in the city, a troubled past  and  a  objectively  well-
        founded fear of the Taliban that would prevent him from returning to
        his home area.  The findings in paragraph 17 of the determination do
        not address any of these issues.  There was  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal a detailed expert report by Claudio Franco which does:

            "The option  of  MZ  making  his  own  way  in  Kabul  must  be
            considered. MZ is a young man whose  life  experience  consists
            firstly of life in a remote rural  village,  and  secondly,  of
            some time in the UK which has been directed and  structured  by
            social services, school etc. Neither has prepared him for  life
            in a chaotic, teeming, predatory large city full  of  desperate
            people, such as Kabul.  Lacking  a  home,  employment  and  any
            friends or family members - indeed any contacts at  all  -  his
            situation would be extremely precarious. It must be  remembered
            that in Afghan culture and society the importance of family and
            kinship networks and the support they  provide  are  absolutely
            central, and constitute defining trait of a person to an extent
            which is difficult to understand when accustomed to the  highly
            individualistic perspective of British culture...."

        Mr Franco  then  sets  out  the  statistical  data  on  the  rampant
        unemployment rate and concludes:

            "Were  he  forced  to  relocate  to  Kabul  on  his  own,   the
            probability of his ending up on  the  street  without  home  or
            employment therefore is very high, in a city already awash with
            desperate  people,  having  an  infrastructure   stretched   to
            breaking point, and lacking any form  of  social  services.  He
            might have recourse to various options  such  as  ASCHIANA  who
            provide free meals, or the  Revolutionary  Association  of  the
            Women of Afghanistan (RAWA) who run an orphanage in Kabul. Even
            at best, these options would provide a subsistence or  survival
            level existence. Added to this must then  be  the  considerable
            risks of becoming a victim of  crime  on  the  streets,  or  of
            sexual predation of street children,  which  is  a  significant
            problem".

    11. I find that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  fails  to
        consider  internal  flight  in  the  context   of   the   particular
        circumstances of this Appellant. He is not simply an  "adult  male".
        He is a young man who has only just attained majority, who has  lost
        his mother, father, brother, whose only living relatives are members
        of the Taliban and to whom he cannot  therefore  turn,  who  has  no
        connection at all to Kabul. The risks to someone  in  his  situation
        are plainly spelled  out  by  Mr  Franco,  a  recognised  expert  on
        Afghanistan who has produced a pertinent and balanced  report.   The
        Appellant's case was not simply the high likelihood  of  him  facing
        unemployment in Kabul. It was the  risk  which  stemmed  from  that:
        homelessness, destitution, vulnerability to crime, sexual  predation
        and trafficking. These are not matters which can be considered  part
        of "normal life". Whilst much of the population in Kabul are  living
        in very challenging circumstances,   they do so with connections and
        family support. The Appellant has neither of these things.    I  set
        the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside. The errors identified
        are a failure to apply the legal tests on  internal  flight  to  the
        individual circumstances of the Appellant, and further a failure  to
        consider the material evidence of Mr Franco (it should be noted that
        the evidence of risk in Kabul was not confined to his report, but is
        most conveniently summarised therein).

    12. The parties agreed that if the grounds in respect of internal flight
        were made out this was a case where the final  outcome  was  'rolled
        up' with the finding on error of law. Having found the determination
        contains the errors set out above it follows that  I  would  re-make
        the decision in the appeal by allowing it on the grounds that  there
        is a risk to the Appellant in his home area and  that  there  is  no
        reasonable internal flight alternative.

    13.  I  need  not  therefore  address  the  'tracing/corrective  relief'
        grounds.

Decisions

    14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains  an  error  of
        law and it is set aside.

    15. I re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it  on  asylum
        grounds.

    16. The First-tier Tribunal made a direction for anonymity and I do  the
        same in the following terms:

        "Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              17th June 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 9th January 2015 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Levin
[2] Appeal brought under s83(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002.

[3] See for instance Lord Hope of Craighead at 47.

