
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07431/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Oral Decision & Reasons       |
|On 7 January 2016                             |Promulgated On 13 April 2016  |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     NA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Secretary of State:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:        Mr P. Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
Peirce & Partners


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge S.L. Farmer who allowed  the
    appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    refusing his asylum claim.  For the sake of continuity I shall refer to
    NA as the appellant as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.   I  find
    that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of
    law and set it aside.  My reasons for doing so are as follows.

 2. The Secretary of State made a decision refusing the  appellant's  claim
    in a letter dated 5  August  2014.   In  it,  the  Secretary  of  State
    challenged the credibility of the account provided  by  the  appellant.
    The appellant had said that he had been held  at  Chettikulam  Camp  in
    April 2009 and he remained there until 2012 when he was released.  Upon
    release he went to the house  of  a  cousin.  He  then  says  that  CID
    officers attended at the house and checked  his  details.  He  was  not
    taken in for questioning immediately but was arrested  later.   He  was
    released.

 3. On the basis of this account, the Secretary of State concluded that  he
    was of no interest to the authorities.

 4. Importantly, however, the principal matter relied upon by the Secretary
    of State in reaching the conclusion that he was of no interest  to  the
    authorities was that information had come to the  Secretary  of  State,
    (which the appellant himself had not revealed), that he  had  travelled
    to Oman in 2011 on his own lawfully issued passport with a stolen blank
    UK visit visa. This had been detected by the police in Oman and he  had
    been returned to  Colombo.   It  is  now  no  longer  disputed  by  the
    appellant that in December 2011 when he claimed he was in detention  in
    Sri Lanka, he was in fact travelling to Oman on  false  United  Kingdom
    papers, although he later claimed  that  he  had  been  apprehended  on
    arrival, detained for  questioning  but  then  released;  circumstances
    which may not in themselves establish he is at risk of persecution.  It
    gave the lie to his claim that he was in detention until 2012.

 5. The question is whether the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  paid  adequate
    regard to the significance of these events.  First of all, the logic of
    what occurred is that instead of being in  a  place  of  detention  and
    therefore of continuing interest until 2012,  he  was  arguably  of  no
    further interest on the part  of  the  authorities  by  December  2011,
    depending on what view one takes of the circumstances of his travel  to
    Oman.  We do not know how long it took to arrange his travel  to  Oman.
    It may have been that it was  a  considerable  period  before  December
    2011.

 6. The appellant was confronted with the  information  from  Oman  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter of 5 August 2014.   Inevitably,  he  had  to
    address that issue and he did so in a statement dated 10 February  2015
    in anticipation of the hearing in July 2015.  He offered an explanation
    including being told by an agent not to mention his detention in  Oman.
    More surprisingly perhaps is his claim that his former solicitors  also
    told him to lie: '[My previous caseworker] told me that if  I  did  not
    mention this before there was no need to mention this at the interview.
     That's why I could not mention this detention and return from Oman  in
    my asylum interview.'  I would have thought, at the very least, one has
    to look critically at a claim that a person  should  be  absolved  from
    blame for lying in his formal interview because he has been told to  do
    so by his solicitors.  In particular, the appellant does not appear  to
    accept that he might have some personal responsibility for providing an
    account which was untrue and which he knew to be untrue.  Doubtless, he
    relied on the prospect that the United Kingdom  authorities  would  not
    know about it.  On the appellant's own account, there was a  period  of
    time when he was in his cousin's house and no apparent action was taken
    against him.  There is also the fact that he had been released  without
    charge and appeared therefore to have been of littlie interest  to  the
    authorities. He claims that he was released on payment of a  bribe  but
    that does not significantly strengthen his case.

 7. The point made by  the  Secretary  of  State  does  not  simply  go  to
    credibility.  It goes to the whole issue as to whether this  particular
    individual has a profile or (perhaps better expressed) a  past  history
    which is likely to put him at risk were he to be returned  in  2015  at
    the time when the Immigration Judge considered the matter.

 8. The case that appellant  now  puts  forward  had  to  be  substantially
    remodelled as a result of what happened in Oman in 2011. It is said  by
    Mr Lewis on behalf of the appellant that  actually  all  that  happened
    during this period was really of  no  moment  because  the  significant
    event is his latest arrest and the fact that he was  mistreated  during
    the course of that arrest; it is therefore the effect  of  that  latest
    arrest that is the matter that puts him at risk.

 9. According to Mr Lewis, one can  effectively  treat  all  that  happened
    prior to that latest arrest as being of very marginal  importance.   Of
    course  he  accepted  that  the  appellant's  immigration  history  now
    establishes his journey to Oman with  a  stolen  blank  United  Kingdom
    visit visa.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge acknowledged that the appellant had lied.
     He was entitled to accept that the fact that he had lied  was  not  in
    itself a matter upon which he could properly find that every other part
    of his evidence was therefore incredible.  However his handling of this
    crucial strand in the evidence was dealt with principally in  paragraph
    17 of the determination.  The appellant did not himself give  evidence.
    The Judge said:

     'I am unable to assess the appellant as a witness ... He  has  remained
         consistent throughout his evidence in interview and  his  statement
         save for one detail which relates to  the  fact  that  he  did  not
         previously mention (prior to his statement) the fact  that  he  was
         returned from Oman.

11. The Judge's reference to the discovery  that  the  appellant  had  lied
    about his travel to Oman as a 'detail' was unfortunate.   It  does  not
    seem to me that it was a detail.  The Judge went on to find  that  this
    'omission' (as the Judge describes it) did not damage his  credibility.
    The word 'omission'  is  also  unfortunate  since  even  the  appellant
    himself accepts that it was a lie.  Whilst an omission may not damage a
    person's credibility, an outright lie must surely  affect  credibility,
    albeit not necessarily fatally  or  even  perhaps  significantly.   The
    Judge gives three reasons for concluding credibility was not  affected.
    First, the appellant's account was very detailed  and  apart  from  the
    'omission' has remained internally consistent.   Secondly,  the  expert
    evidence from Dr Smith supported the appellant's account.  Thirdly, the
    appellant has a recognised psychiatric condition which would affect his
    ability  to  recall  with  complete  accuracy  all  the   events   when
    interviewed in what would have been a distressing situation.

12. In my judgement those reasons do not do justice to  the  material  that
    was before the judge. There is no  suggestion  that  a  person  with  a
    recognised psychiatric condition  would  have  forgotten  that  he  had
    travelled to Oman, and indeed that is not the  appellant's  case.   His
    case is that he was told not  to  mention  it.   Nor  does  Dr  Smith's
    evidence support the appellant's account, at  least  in  terms  of  the
    issues which arise from the fact that he did  not tell the truth  about
    his trip to Oman.  Dr Smith could talk with  expert  knowledge  of  the
    place but he could not make good a  shortcoming  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant's evidence in the claim that he had made that he remained  in
    detention for a period which ended in 2012.  The fact that his  account
    is very detailed and apart from this 'omission' had remained internally
    consistent is also a reason which  is  irrational.   This  was  not  an
    omission on the part of the appellant.  It cannot properly be said that
    it was a mere oversight on his part.  It was a  deliberate  attempt  to
    lie and that inevitably meant that his case has to be remodelled, as it
    was in his later statement.

13. It may well be that the appellant would wish to jettison  any  reliance
    upon events which preceded 2012 and rely  simply  on  the  last  event.
    That seems to me to be an attempt at cherry-picking.  Clearly there are
    matters which the appellant would wish to overlook  or  to  marginalise
    but I do not think that it can be done on the strength of  the  reasons
    advanced by the judge in paragraph 17 of the determination.  Nor by his
    classification of this  substantial  change  in  his  account  as  'one
    detail'.  In saying this, I entirely accept that  the  judge  was  well
    aware that the appellant had travelled to Oman.  It is not  a  question
    of the judge overlooking it or not paying attention to it.

14. The second point that is made by the Secretary of State in the  grounds
    of appeal relates to whether this all plays into the decision of GJ and
    Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319  (IAC).
    The Judge found that the guidance provided in GJ and Others resulted in
    the appellant establishing that  his  involvement  in  affairs  in  the
    United Kingdom had substantial political  ramifications,  such  as  his
    giving evidence to what is said to  be  the  International  Centre  for
    Prevention and Persecution of Genocide.  There is a  letter  from  that
    organisation whose head office is at 227 Basement Office, Preston Road,
    Wembley.  It refers to this organisation and speaks  of  the  appellant
    who has provided written evidence under oath to  be  submitted  to  the
    UNHCR's Commission and would be one of the potential witnesses who  may
    be asked in person to give evidence.  It is said that the appellant had
    also consented  to  attend  and  give  evidence  in  any  international
    protection investigation against Sri Lanka  and  may  be  viewed  as  a
    potential witness in establishing justice.

15. All of these things speak of events in the future as far as  the  UNHCR
    is concerned or in relation to any international investigation  against
    Sri Lanka.  So far the only evidence  of  separatist  activities  which
    would put him at risk is the fact that he had provided a statement to a
    basement office in Preston Road, Wembley that happens to  be  the  same
    address as the soi-disant transnational government of Tamil Eelam. [  ]
    There is a statement from Mr Yogalingam who claims to be  a  member  of
    parliament of the trans-national government of Tamil  Eelam.  [  ]  The
    address of this organisation is 227 Preston Road and, as I  have  said,
    this is the same  as  the  grandly-sounding  International  Centre  for
    Prevention and Persecution of Genocide.  Mr Yogalingam  says  that  the
    appellant contributes to the best of his ability  to  campaign  against
    the ongoing genocide in Sri Lanka, requiring independent investigations
    about the war crimes committed by the Sri Lankan president: 'He  is  an
    ardent supporter of our mission and he desires the independence of  the
    Tamils in Sri Lanka. He continues to express his political  aspirations
    publicly.'

16. I caution against attaching too much weight to the activities of  these
    organisations without evaluating their effectiveness  as  an  organ  of
    political opposition in the United Kingdom.  This the Judge did not do.
     It required much more greater detail than that adopted  by  the  Judge
    who said:

     'I find  that  the  appellant's  involvement  goes  much  further  than
         [attending demonstrations] and has participated in a way  that  has
         real  political  ramifications  such  as  giving  evidence  to  the
         [International Centre for Prevention and Persecution of Genocide].'



17. The appellant  himself  did  not  give  evidence.   There  was  medical
    evidence to the effect that he was not in a position  to  do  so.   The
    Judge's findings that the appellant is at  risk  at  a  result  of  his
    involvement and participation in matters in the United Kingdom  is  not
    supported by the material that has been drawn to my attention.   If  it
    is also the case that he has attended demonstrations in the  UK,  these
    would not of itself (as the Judge himself acknowledged in paragraph  25
    of the determination), place a person at risk on return.   The  Judge's
    finding  that  the   appellant's   activities   had   'real   political
    ramifications' is not, without more, adequately supported  by  the  two
    documents to which I have been referred.

18. In these circumstances I consider that there was an error on  the  part
    of the Judge and it was a material  one.   The  decision  requires  re-
    making.  No findings of fact  are  preserved.   The  re-making  of  the
    decision will take  place  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  will  be
    conducted at Taylor House.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

