
[pic]




                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL


                       IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Field House                              Decision Promulgated:
On: 27 March 2014
On: 02 April 2014


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                                     ANM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Cohen, instructed by Hammersmith and Fulham Law
                                 Centre
For the Respondent: Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


      DETERMINATION AND DIRECTIONS FOR REMITTAL TO FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL



This is an  appeal  by  the  appellant  against  a  determination  dated  19
December 2013 of First-tier Tribunal Judge C H  Bennett  which  refused  her
asylum and human rights appeal.

Under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  I
continue the anonymity order made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  precluding
publication of any information regarding  the  proceedings  which  would  be
likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  appellant  or  her
child. I do so in order to avoid the  likelihood  of  serious  harm  to  the
child arising from her identification and to the appellant on the  basis  of
the matters forming the substance of her asylum claim.

The appellant is a citizen of the Congo and was born on  14  December  1976.
She claims asylum on the basis of her family's involvement  in  politics  in
the Congo, in particular the UDAPS party of President Lissouba and  also  on
the basis of her husband's involvement with the regime of  President  Kabila
in the Democratic Republic of  Congo  and  her  subsequent  mistreatment  by
Moroccan police and DRC nationals whilst she  was  in  Morocco  in  November
2011.

The challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was that it:

     1. approached the medical evidence incorrectly

     2. took into account irrelevant evidence and was unduly speculative

     3. was based on procedural irregularity where  weight  was  placed  on
        evidence from a hearing abandoned because the appellant was not fit
        to give evidence

     4. misapplied country guidance

Preliminary Issue

The grant of permission to  appeal  dated  30  January  2014  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Levin stated in paragraph 3 that grounds 1 and  3  were  "not
arguable". Ground 1 was stated not to be arguable because  of  "the  Judge's
careful analysis  of  the  medical  evidence  and  his  detailed  assessment
thereof". Ground 4 was stated not to be arguable as  "the  Judge  took  into
account  the  country  guidance".  The  final  paragraph  of  the  grant  of
permission states "Grounds 2 and 3 disclose arguable  errors  of  law  which
were material to the Judge's dismissal of the appeal."

Mr Melvin maintained that the grant of permission was limited to  grounds  2
and 3. Ms Cohen argued to the contrary, relying  on  the  reported  case  of
Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC).

Because, for the reasons set out below, I find that ground 2 has merit  such
that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains an error on  a  point
of law such that the matter had to be set aside and  decided  de  novo,  the
question  of  whether  the  grounds  before   me   were   limited   is   not
determinative. I therefore address it only briefly.

The second paragraph of the head note of Ferrer states:

"Where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  nevertheless  intends   to   grant
permission only in respect of certain of the applicant's grounds, the  judge
should make this abundantly plain, both in his or her  decision  under  rule
25(5) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  by
ensuring that the  Tribunal's  administrative  staff  send  out  the  proper
notice, informing the applicant of the right to apply to the Upper  Tribunal
for permission to appeal  on   grounds  on  which  the  applicant  has  been
unsuccessful in the application to the First-tier Tribunal."

Even if the comments made by Judge Levin  in  paragraphs  3  and  4  of  his
decision were intended to limit definitively the grant of permission,  there
was no dispute before me that proper notice of this,  enclosing  Form  IA68,
was not sent to the appellant. For that reason it appeared to  me  that  any
limitation on the  grounds  argued  before  me  would  not  be  the  correct
procedure.

That was additionally so where the reasons given  for  purporting  to  limit
grounds 1 and 4  did  not  address  what  were  detailed  and  multi-faceted
grounds. The purported refusal  of  permission  to  appeal  ground  1  omits
consideration of the challenge to Judge Bennett's  legal  analysis  of  case
law on the correct  approach  to  medical  evidence.  Ground  4  was  not  a
challenge  that  the  country  guidance  was  not  taken  into  account,  as
suggested by Judge Levin in his paragraph 3, but that country  guidance  was
not correctly applied, page 21 of the grounds  containing  the  full  ground
apparently missing from the copy placed before Judge Levin.

Error of Law

Prior to the hearing before Judge Bennett, on 12  July  2013  the  appellant
had an hearing before  First-tier  Tribunal  J  Simpson.  That  hearing  was
adjourned due to her ill-health and the concern raised that she was not  fit
to give evidence. I was assisted as to what occurred during that hearing  by
the transcript provided by Ms Cohen which Mr  Melvin  did  not  suggest  was
other than an accurate record.


The respondent's Presenting Officer on 12 July  2013,  Mr  Briant,  accepted
that the appellant had "been in some distress" such that the hearing  should
be adjourned for an assessment of whether she  was  fit  to  give  evidence.
Judge Simpson recused himself from any future hearing where it was  possible
that the evidence he had heard was "tainted" because the appellant  had  not
been fit to give evidence.

When the matter came before Judge Bennett on 1 November 2103,  [10]  of  his
determination shows that he proposed to take  into  account  the  Presenting
Officer's note of evidence from 12 July 2013. The same paragraph shows  that
this course of action was opposed by counsel for the appellant.

Judge Bennett  decided  at  [10]  that  the  Presenting  Officer's  note  of
evidence was admissible "unless excluded by a statutory provision or  common
law rule" neither of which, in his view, applied. He concluded  [10] thus:

"The crucial questions to be determined, in relation  to  Mr  Briant's  note
were,

    a) whether Mr Briant's note was accurate


    b) what weight I should place on the content of the  note,  taking  into
       account such medical evidence as there might be relating to  Mrs  M's
       condition and fitness to give evidence.

 I therefore concluded that Mr Briant's note was admissible in evidence and
 that I should consider its content."


Judge Bennett made adverse credibility  findings  based  on  the  Presenting
Officer's note at [32(b)], relying  on  that  section  of  it  covering  the
appellant's evidence on the constitution of Parliament in  the  Republic  of
Congo.

I had a number of difficulties concerning the admission of the note  of  the
Presenting Officer. Firstly, Judge Bennett admits it and places reliance  on
it without deciding on the accuracy of  the  note,  the  question  he  posed
himself at the end of [10]. There is nothing to show that  he  assessed  its
accuracy. Indeed, the section set out at [32(b)] suggests that it was not  a
clear record, the first question and response being:

"Q How Parliament organised?

A. Represent [illegible]"

It also remains unclear and troubling to me why, if Judge  Bennett  proposed
to take into account the oral evidence from 12 July 2013, he relied  on  the
Presenting Officer's note without, apparently,  even  comparing  it  to  the
Judge's  record  of  proceedings  or  any  note  taken  by  the  appellant's
representative on 12 July 2013.
Secondly, Judge Bennett also failed to answer his second  question  at  [10]
as to whether the appellant had been  fit  to  give  evidence  before  Judge
Simpson.  He makes no finding on  that  specific  issue  so  was  not  in  a
position to decide what weight to place on the Presenting Officer's note  of
evidence.

As indicated by Mr Melvin, the adverse credibility finding  at  [32(b)]  was
clearly not the only matter that  Judge  Bennett  found  went  against  this
appellant. The findings on credibility are set out at some  length  in  [31]
to [37].

However, to my mind, it was clearly procedurally  incorrect  to  rely  on  a
record of evidence from the hearing of 12 July 2103  in  the  light  of  the
matters set out above. It was also not possible to say how  Judge  Bennett's
view that the oral evidence the appellant did give, even if he did not  hear
any, undermined her credibility, impacted on his approach to other parts  of
her evidence and her credibility overall, the assessment of credibility  not
being a technical or mathematical exercise but a holistic one.

It was therefore my conclusion that as the  remaining  credibility  findings
were potentially tainted by the  procedural  unfairness  that  the  decision
could not stand.

I therefore find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  discloses  an
error on a point of law such that it should be  set  aside  and  re-made  de
novo. As the appellant was deprived of a fair hearing before the  First-tier
Tribunal, the appeal is remitted to be re-decided  following  paragraph  7.2
of Part 3 of the Senior President's Practice Statement  dated  25  September
2012.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law such that it is set aside to be re-made.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made de novo.










DIRECTIONS

The appeal will be heard at the Taylor House hearing centre on  3 July  2014
before a panel other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  J  Simpson  and  First-
tier Tribunal Judge C H Bennett.

By 26 June 2014, the parties are to file with the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
serve on the other  party  ALL  evidence  relied  upon  in  a  consolidated,
indexed and paginated bundle.






Signed: [pic]                                Date:  31 March 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
