
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07620/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On  25 February 2016                     |On 5 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                         MRS DENISE KABANGU MUKENDI
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms P Ma, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of the Congo  born
   on 4 May 1975. She appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the decision  of
   First-tier Judge Obhi dated 2 September 2015 refusing her appeal  against
   the decision of the respondent dated 21 April 2014  refusing  her  asylum
   and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom and to remove her  from
   the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   1999.

2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pooler  on
   24 September 2015 stating that it was arguable that the First-tier  Judge
   failed to assess the risk to the appellant on return to the DRC in  light
   of her claim to be at risk from my husband's family and  that  she  would
   have no family support.

3. Therefore, the only issue  in  this  appeal  is  whether  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge adequately considered the risk to  the  appellant  on  her
   return to the DRC, in light of the evidence.

   The first-tier Tribunal's findings

4. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  find  the  appellant  credible
   stating that the appellant's account that her husband has had no  contact
   with her and therefore the baby is not his is undermined by the fact that
   she herself has provided. It is highly unlikely said the Judge  that  her
   husband would have attended any hospital appointments with the appellant,
   or that he  would  then  go  and  put  his  name  on  the  child's  birth
   certificate to state the child is his, unless the child  was  either  his
   child, or even of the child was not his child,  unless  he  accepted  the
   child as his own. During her evidence the appellant referred  to  husband
   is the child's father on more than one occasion.

5. The Judge further noted that the account of the appellant of her rape  is
   further undermined by the fact  that  she  has  been  inconsistent  about
   whether the rape was perpetrated by the  police  by  soldiers,  and  even
   whether she actually saw who they  were.  The  Judge  found  that  having
   considered the account by the appellant and  her  evidence,  he  was  not
   inclined to find that the appellant was a victim of rape  as  she  claims
   that the child is a product of that rape. He stated that there is a  high
   probability that the child is the child of her husband and the child  was
   conceived when the couple met in the DRC or elsewhere. The  judge  stated
   that the absence of the husband is convenient for the  appellant  as  she
   cannot be asked to confirm through DNA testing that the  husband  is  not
   the father of the child.

6. The  judge  noted  that  what  appears  to  have  happened  is  that  the
   relationship between the appellant and the husband  broke  down  and  the
   appellant is unable to apply for leave to remain  under  the  Immigration
   Rules, and so has applied for asylum. The appellant is in an  unfortunate
   situation. She does have serious medical problems, and her heart  failure
   as is documented by her records. She has the care of a  young  child  who
   appears to have abandoned by her husband, who she came to join.

7. The Judge stated that while he has a great  deal  of  sympathy  with  the
   appellant in what is an impossible situation for her to be in, not  least
   because of  her  poor  health,  she  cannot  succeed  under  the  Refugee
   Convention. The country guidance case does not apply in this case because
   it is not a political case.

8. The appellant has a young child with her who she claims  that  the  child
   is not her husband. However, he is registered as the father of the  child
   and therefore there is a presumption of legitimacy  in  relation  to  the
   child, which can only be rebutted through evidence that  he  is  not  the
   father. He would have to agree to a DNA test if he does not  accept  that
   the child is his. Presumably the appellant will  be  able  to  seek  some
   child support from him in relation to the child on  that  basis.  If  the
   child is not his, then the appellant will be returned to the DRC with the
   child, and it is in the child's interest, at this stage of life  for  her
   to be with her mother. She is so young that she has yet to establish  any
   real roots in the United Kingdom.

9. The Judge stated that he is more concerned  about  the  appellant's  ill-
   health. She has a number of different ailments, including heart  failure,
   and sickle-cell anaemia. As the respondent notes in  her  refusal  letter
   there are medical facilities available in the DRC and the  appellant  has
   not claimed that they are not. Her condition is being managed  and  there
   is no reason to assume that it will not be managed if he returns  to  the
   DRC with the drugs that she requires are available. Her illness  has  not
   reached the stage where Article 3 is engaged and  therefore  her  removal
   would not result in the United Kingdom being in breach of its obligations
   to her.

10. The Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  in  respect  of  asylum,
   humanitarian protection in human rights grounds.

   The grounds of appeal

11. The appellant in his grounds of appeal  states  the  following  which  I
   summarise. The Tribunal notes at paragraph 16 of the  determination  that
   the respondent accepts that "the appellant being a member of a particular
   social group, in that she is a victim of sexual violence, who  claims  to
   have become pregnant as a result.  It  is  accepted  that  she  would  be
   socially ostracised as a result" the Tribunal found at paragraph  27  and
   28 of  the  determination  that  the  appellant's  account  of  rape  was
   undermined by the fact that she had been inconsistent about  whether  the
   soldiers or police had raped. The  Tribunal  gave  weight  to  immaterial
   matters which led to the negative finding that the appellant  was  not  a
   victim of rape and therefore erred in law. It is immaterial  whether  the
   appellant was raped by police or soldiers, both are  categorised  as  the
   authorities and belonging to the government security forces. The Tribunal
   had regard to the respondent's refusal decision  and  objective  evidence
   relating to widespread sexual and gender-based violence committed by  the
   security forces of DRC.


12. The Tribunal was referred to the skeleton argument put  forward  by  the
   appellant's representative and appeal bundle  which  contained  objective
   evidence relating to the particular risk to a lone woman and child in the
   DRC. It is submitted that the Tribunal has misdirected himself  and  only
   considered the appellant's appeal in the  context  of  domestic  violence
   instead of the risk for the appellant on return to  the  DRC  as  a  lone
   woman with a young child. The respondent accepted that the appellant  was
   a victim of sexual violence  and  it  is  therefore  submitted  that  the
   Tribunal has erred in failing to give reasons and also  consideration  of
   the child's best interests whether there exists a  reasonable  likelihood
   that the appellant's child would be at risk of sexual  violence  if  they
   were returned to the DRC. The Tribunal has further erred  in  failing  to
   make findings whether the appellant and a child could internally relocate
   within the DRC as a lone woman with a young child and whether  she  could
   seek protection from the authorities.




      The Rule 24 Response

13. The respondent in  her  Rule  24  response  stated  the  following.  The
   appellant entered the United Kingdom on the basis of family  reunion  and
   that marriage subsequently failed in the United Kingdom. It is clear from
   the evidence that the Judge rejects the claim that the child is  not  her
   husbands at paragraph 28 and 29 of the determination. Given the above  it
   is unclear why the Judge should make a finding on the claim that the  ex-
   husband's family would  seek  to  do  harm  to  the  appellant  or  their
   grandchild on return to the DRC. It is clear from paragraph 33  that  the
   Judge has considered the refusal letter and the medical evidence that  it
   would be available to the appellant in her home country.

           Decision as to whether there is an error of law.

14. I have given anxious scrutiny to the determination of Immigration  Judge
   Obhi  and  have  taken  into  account  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
   submissions made at the hearing by both parties.


15. The main complaint about the determination is that  the  Judge  did  not
   adequately consider the appellant would be returning  to  the  Democratic
   Republic of the Congo as a  lone  woman  with  a  child  with  no  family
   support.


16. I find that the Judge was entitled and required to reach his  conclusion
   based on his consideration and evaluation of the evidence as a whole. The
   Judge made a finding based on the evidence that the appellant's child  is
   from her husband and therefore the appellant would not be  at  risk  from
   her  husband's  family  in  the  DRC  as  they  would  be   the   child's
   grandparents.


17. The Judge made many detailed adverse credibility  findings  against  the
   appellant in respect of which there cannot be  any  possible  error.  The
   Judge found that the appellant finds  herself  in  a  difficult  position
   because she is in no position to meet the requirements of the Immigration
   Rules for further leave to remain and has claimed asylum in order to live
   in this country. On the evidence it is clear that the appellant has woven
   a story for her asylum claim which  the  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
   entitled not believe. In the circumstances, the  Judge  was  entitled  to
   find that the appellant can return to the DRC with her child who  is  the
   child of her husband.


18. Even at the hearing there was no evidence provided to me  that  a  woman
   in the appellant's position would be at risk in the DRC. There  was  also
   no case law submitted which the Judge had not considered which  suggested
   that a woman returning to the  DRC  would  be  at  risk  because  of  the
   widespread sexual violence in that country or that the authorities cannot
   provide protection.


19. On the evidence in this appeal, I find that the differently  constituted
   Tribunal would not come to  a  different  conclusion.  I  find  that  the
   grounds of appeal are no more than a quarrel with the Judge's findings. I
   find that the Judge's reasoning is understandable, and  not  perverse.  I
   find that the grounds of appeal and no more than a disagreement with  the
   Judges findings of fact and  the  conclusions  that  he  drew  from  such
   findings.

20. For each of these reasons given by the Judge  in  his  determination  he
   was not satisfied, even to the lowest standard, that the events of  which
   the appellant speaks are credible.

21. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
   Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:
       15. It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls used  the  words
       "vital" and "critical" as synonyms of the word "material"  which  we
       have used above. The  whole  of  his  judgment  warrants  attention,
       because it reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not to overturn
       a judgment at first instance unless it really cannot understand  the
       original Judge's thought processes when he/she was  making  material
       findings.
22. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning  in  the
   Judge's determination for why he reached his conclusions. I find that  no
   error of law has been established in Judge's determination. I  find  that
   he was entitled to conclude that the appellant  is  not  entitled  to  be
   recognised as a refugee or to be granted humanitarian protection in  this
   country. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



DECISION

Appeal dismissed


     Dated this 28th day of March 2016

Signed by,

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Mrs S Chana











