
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07543/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 29 April 2014                              |                             |
|Extempore                                     |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                                     R M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Claimant: Ms C Bayati, Counsel, instructed by S. Satha & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Appeal of R M whom I refer to as the claimant against the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State which was taken on 26 July 2013  to  refuse  her
    asylum and to give directions for her removal from the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The claimant's claim is set out in detail in the refusal letter, in her
    witness statement and is referred to in detail in the determination  of
    Judge Clayton.  In summary the claimant is a  Sri  Lankan  national  of
    Tamil ethnicity. In 2008 she began a relationship  with  a  man  called
    Umesh and on 15 October 2010 she was arrested, detained for nine  days,
    tortured and questioned on suspicion of being involved with  the  LTTE.
    She was specifically questioned about Umesh who she was told was a LTTE
    member who had also been arrested.  It appears that  she  was  sexually
    assaulted during this detention.  She was released on 24  October  2010
    upon payment of a bribe and was taken to hospital  where  she  received
    treatment.  The CID searched for her at her home and arrangements  were
    then made for her to travel to the United Kingdom for which  a  student
    visa was obtained for her and she left Sri  Lanka  using  her  passport
    with the assistance of an agent.

 3. The claimant did not claim asylum until June 2013 when she  attended  a
    screening interview and was given a substantive asylum interview on  25
    July 2013.  The respondent refused the application for the reasons  set
    out in the refusal letter of 26 July 2013.  In summary  the  respondent
    accepted that the claimant was of Tamil ethnicity but  did  not  accept
    that she had been arrested, detained or ill-treated as claimed, did not
    accept the reliability of the documents she had adduced in  support  of
    her claim and having had regard to the country guidance set out  in  GJ
    and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319
    considered that she would not be of adverse interest to the authorities
    on return even if what she said were true.

 4. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal but did not give  oral
    evidence before Judge Clayton there being by that point a report from a
    consultant psychiatrist, Dr Raj Persaud, which indicates that  she  was
    unable to attend court and was unfit to  give  evidence  or  be  cross-
    examined.  In a follow-up letter to that report Dr Persaud states  that
    he doubted whether she was in fact capable of instructing Counsel.

 5. Judge Clayton heard submissions from Ms  Physsas  of  Counsel  for  the
    claimant and from Mr Panayi, a Home Office Presenting Officer.  In  the
    absence of oral testimony from the claimant the judge accepted that the
    psychiatric report was pivotal and having had  regard  to  it  and  the
    other evidence from the  claimant's  general  practitioner  records,  a
    letter from a Nugegoda Private Nursing Home in  Sri  Lanka  and  having
    examined the interview record Judge Clayton found that  the  claimant's
    account was truthful and that she had been  detained  and  tortured  as
    claimed.  She accepted that she had been released through  a  bribe  as
    has been her smooth passage through the airport and that following  the
    notice of decision in GJ that she would be perceived to be of  interest
    in the in post-conflict Sri Lanka as an individual perceived  to  be  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka.  She then allowed the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds and on the basis that  the  claimant's  removal  to  Sri
    Lanka would be in breach of Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

 6. The Secretary of State  then  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  three
    principal grounds which have been characterised by Ms Isherwood as:

         (1) failing to take into account the  delay  on  the  part  of  the
         claimant in seeking asylum despite the fact that  that  was  raised
         explicitly in the refusal letter,

         (2) failing to resolve a conflict in evidence between  the  records
         of the GP and what is said in Dr Persaud's report as to whether  or
         not the claimant had been raped or not and in so  doing,  attaching
         too much weight to the report of Dr Persaud  in  reaching  findings
         with respect to credibility; and

         (3) failing to apply properly the country guidance in  GJ  given  a
         failure to provide reasons as to why the claimant  would  fit  into
         the risk categories identified in GJ or what  risk  categories  she
         would fit into.

 7. The grounds are further subdivided in the application but I  considered
    it was fair to proceed on the three main heading.

 8. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sommerville on 26 March 2013.   Subsequent  to  that  a  Rule  24
    letter has been produced by the claimant's solicitors and  was  drafted
    by Ms Bayati who appeared before me.

 9. I turn first to the issue of delay in making a claim for asylum.  As Ms
    Bayati candidly accepted the judge makes no  express  reference  either
    Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004 or to the specific allegation made in paragraphs 11 and 12  of
    the refusal letter.  I accept also that the delay  in  this  claim  was
    somewhat over two years.  It is not, however, incumbent on a  judge  to
    address Section 8 of the 2004 Act first in reaching a determination nor
    is section 8 determinative.  It is a factor to be  taken  into  account
    and I note that that  is  the  view  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JT
    (Cameroon).

10. The assessment of credibility is to be taken as an  overall  basis  and
    given the other findings in respect of credibility to which I will turn
    later I consider that whilst there was  no  express  reference  in  the
    determination to the delay, it is nonetheless evident from the  judge's
    approach to the evidence that she was aware of the issue of  delay  and
    she refers to that in dealing with the seeking  of  medical  treatment,
    and thus, it cannot be argued that she did not take  it  into  account;
    the weight to be attached to it was a matter for the judge and  it  was
    open to her, viewing the evidence as a whole, not to attach significant
    weight to it.

11. Judge Clayton also said that she had considered all the  evidence  with
    greatest care and  it  is  also  a  case  where  the  judge  had  noted
    inconsistencies in the claimant's evidence and had resolved them in the
    claimant's favour, in particular at paragraph 43 and to an extent  also
    at paragraph 42.  On that basis I am satisfied that this did not amount
    to a  material  error  which  is  capable,  given  the  other  positive
    findings, of affecting materially the outcome of the appeal.

12. Turning to the apparent conflict of evidence which  is  said  to  exist
    between what is said in the GP records  and  what  is  recorded  by  Dr
    Persaud in his report.  I start first with the GP records which consist
    of brief notes  extracted  from  the  claimant's  GP's  database.   The
    relevant passage appears in an entry of 20 July 2013 when the  claimant
    saw a practice nurse who records when she was undertaking a smear  test
    that the claimant was, and I quote, "not  sexually  active,  never  has
    been, still a virgin, explained risk is low  and  parental  choice  was
    that the patient was happy to leave."  She also goes on to record that:
    "says things happened in the past?  Sexually not sure but she says told
    by GP back home still a virgin."  What Dr Persaud records after setting
    out the claimant's account of the claimant being assaulted  and  waking
    up to find her clothes ripped is:

         "She repeats several instances like this but it  is  possible  that
         because of the cultural taboo over sex and rape she  has  not  been
         clear that she was raped but she gives every  sense  that  this  is
         indeed what happened, without  explicitly  saying  so.   She  keeps
         complaining during the consultation that she does  not  talk  about
         the past, and this almost  aggressive  response  to  any  inquiries
         about what happened to her, while understandable will also  explain
         why she has not improved at all.  She needs specialist  counselling
         from rape trauma specialists and PTSD specialists to help her  -  I
         note she has not benefited from such a referral as yet."

13. I do not consider that the notes made by the practice  nurse  could  be
    treated as a verbatim note of what was said.  It is  evident  from  the
    notes that the practice nurse had some concerns about what she had been
    told or rather believed that  the  claimant  had  said  raised  certain
    concerns as to whether she had suffered sexually in  the  past.  It  is
    remarkable that the nurse writes "says told by the GP back home still a
    virgin".  This is not the same thing that she had told the GP that  she
    was still a virgin.  I consider that this particular phrasing  and  the
    apparent concern by the GP to explain that the  claimant  was  still  a
    virgin is in itself indicative of some concern that  the  claimant  had
    been sexually assaulted.  There would have been little need,  if  there
    had been no concern about that on the part of the GP, for  him  to  use
    such a phrase.

14. Whilst I accept there is no mention of possible sexual assault  in  the
    letter of referral from the  North  East  London  Foundation  Trust  in
    respect of the  claimant  this  letter  concerned  most  with  how  the
    claimant herself presents and what she had  suffered  and  the  current
    threats and concerns which in this case appears  to  be  a  significant
    amount of suicidal ideation.  The  letter  from  the  Nugegoda  Private
    Nursing Home does refer to sexual  abuse  and  that  the  claimant  was
    subjected to sexual abuse and that is of course a  letter  which  Judge
    Clayton found to be document on which she could rely  and  it  is  also
    evidence from the grounds of appeal that that finding is  not  directly
    challenged.  Accordingly I am not satisfied that there is when properly
    viewed an evidential conflict between what  is  recorded  in  the  GP's
    notes and what is said in Dr Persaud's report.

15. Ms Isherwood developed the challenge to Dr Persaud's report identifying
    a number of  issues  which  are  raised  in  submissions  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer to Judge Clayton that were not factored into account
    when assessing Dr Persaud's report.  Whilst it is correct that at  [15]
    the submission was made that a credibility issue arose from the  timing
    of mental health coming to be raised with the GP and that  is  was  not
    credible that the claimant had not sought treatment upon arrival in the
    United Kingdom that issue is dealt with by Judge Clayton albeit briefly
    at [42] and that she accepts it was somewhat tardy. Although I consider
    that in reality the judge was here  using  understatement,  it  is  not
    arguable that the judge did not have regard to the issue.

16. A further submission was made to Judge Clayton [18] that  Dr  Persaud's
    report was flawed in that it was said [75] that the claimant  continued
    to have suicidal thoughts and. on top of that,  command  hallucinations
    of a serious nature and intent, inconsistent  with  paragraph  4  which
    said if she is experiencing auditory hallucinations  then  she  becomes
    unreliable in terms of giving an account of herself.  I find that there
    is in reality no inconsistency here.  When  reading  the  report  as  a
    whole and in particular paragraph 4 it is clear  that  Dr  Persaud  did
    accept that the claimant  is  suffering  or  is  experiencing  auditory
    hallucinations and it is important to note the  whole  paragraph  which
    says:

         "I  am  very  concerned  that  if  she  is  experiencing   auditory
         hallucinations then she becomes unreliable in terms  of  giving  an
         account  of  herself.   She  did  appear  to  be  hearing  'command
         hallucinations' where voices command the patient not to respond  to
         questions or to give certain answers.   In  the  grip  of  'command
         hallucinations' then a patient may not be giving  truthful  answers
         or responding as they would  like  to  really.   Instead  they  are
         responding through fear of the voices."

    It could not possibly be said that this is an indication that  she  was
    not having hallucinations.

17. Ms Isherwood submitted also that Judge Clayton had  attached  too  much
    weight to the report of Dr Persaud bearing in mind that  in  this  case
    there had been no oral evidence from the claimant nor indeed a  witness
    statement.  While  it  is  correct  that  the  claimant  did  not  give
    evidence, as I have noted earlier, it is evident from paragraphs 42 and
    43 of her  determination  that  Judge  Clayton  based  her  credibility
    findings on matters other than those raised by Dr Persaud and  for  the
    reasons I have given above there appears to be no  evidential  conflict
    between what was told him and what was said to the GP.   It  could  not
    properly be said that the judge in this case had relied solely on  what
    was said by Dr Persaud in reaching her conclusions.

18. Finally I turn to the judge's findings  with  respect  to  GJ.   It  is
    important to bear in  mind  that  this  is  a  case  in  which  if  the
    claimant's account is correct  she  had  been  ill-treated  and  indeed
    tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities on suspicion of involvement with
    the LTTE post-conflict.  The purpose of the guidance GJ is to  identify
    those who have not come to adverse attention in Sri Lanka post-conflict
    but who may nonetheless be at risk on return.  That  is  not  the  case
    here.

19. On the basis of the findings which were reached by  Judge  Clayton  and
    which I consider are sustainable the claimant had been ill-treated  and
    tortured because it appeared she was believed to be involved  with  the
    LTTE.  Whether that is a rational belief on the part of the Sri  Lankan
    authorities is not the point; the point is that that is  what  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities believed.  It is not clear why they think  that  she
    is a threat but she appears to have been treated as  though  she  is  a
    threat given the manner in which she was investigated and  abused.   As
    Judge  Clayton  noted  at  44  the  claimant  was  arrested,  detained,
    questioned and fingerprinted.  It is unlikely that those  records  will
    have been expunged given that she was ill-treated in such a manner post-
    conflict.   As  Ms  Bayati  submitted,  given  the  provisions  of  the
    Qualification Directive and paragraph 339K of Immigration Rules it  was
    open to the judge to conclude that, as there  had  been  no  indication
    that there had been any change in circumstances since the claimant left
    Sri Lanka or indeed that the situation has changed since GJ was  handed
    down, that the claimant is at risk on return of the same  treatment  to
    which she has already been subjected.

20. Accordingly, for these reasons I consider  that  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Clayton did not involve the making of an  error  of
    law capable of affecting the outcome and I uphold it.


Signed                                  Date approved 2 June 2014
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
