
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07393/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 21 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                allama iqbal
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Waterstone
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision promulgated on 12 June 2015 of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Meah who allowed the appeal of Allama Iqbal.  However,  for  ease
    of reference I refer to the parties as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Background

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  5th  February  1973.
    The Appellant applied for asylum on 10th  September  1999.   The  final
    decision on his asylum and ECHR claim was served on 8th September  2014
    with the reasons for that refusal set out in a letter of the same date.



3.   The Appellant appealed on the basis that he is  a  refugee  as  defined
    within The Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter referred to as "The  2006
    Regulations") or alternatively he claimed  humanitarian  protection  as
    defined within paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.  The  Appellant
    also claimed that  his  removal  would  be  contrary  to  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

4.   The Appellant's appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 28  April
    2015.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Meah found that the  Respondent
    had erred in her consideration of the Appellant's Article 8 claim.  The
    Respondent had considered Article 8 under Appendix FM and Rule  276ADE.
     This was set out in the reasons for refusal letter at pages 8  and  9.
    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found this  decision  unlawful  as
    not in accordance with the decision in Edgehill & Anor v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402 (02 April 2014).

5.   The judge found that therefore the Appellant was entitled to  have  his
    human rights claim considered in line with the provisions in  force  at
    the time he made his application, long before HC 194  and  Appendix  FM
    came into force. The judge allowed the Appellant's appeal to the extent
    therefore that it was remitted back to the respondent to consider under
    the previous provisions.  The judge also made findings in  relation  to
    the Respondent's substantial delay of over fifteen years in reaching  a
    decision in this case.

6.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department applied  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis  that  the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal had made a material error  of  law  in  relying  on
    Edgehill (above).  It was submitted that  in  light  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74, it was argued  that  the
    judge had erred.

7.   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne granted permission  to  appeal
    on 30th June 2015 on the basis that there was an arguable error of  law
    following the case of Singh (above).  In particular reference was  made
    to paragraphs 56 and 57 thereof, including what was said  at  paragraph
    56(2):

         "... but that position was altered by HC 565 -  specifically by the
         introduction of the new paragraph A277C  -  with  effect  from  6th
         September 2012.  As from that  date  the  Secretary  of  State  was
         entitled to take into account the provisions  of  Appendix  FM  and
         paragraphs 276ADE -  276DH  in  deciding  private  or  family  life
         applications even if they were made prior to 9th  July  2012.   The
         result is that the law as it  was  held  to  be  in  Edgehill  only
         obtained as regards decisions taken in the two month window between
         9th July and 6th September 2012."

8.   The appeal then  came  before  me.   Miss  Jones  indicated,  a  little
    reluctantly, that in light of Singh there was clearly an error of  law,
    although she submitted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was
    prior to the decision in Singh.

9.   Both Miss Jones and Miss Fijiwala  made  submissions  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Both  parties  were  in
    agreement that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not engaged  with  the
    substantive issues either in relation to the Appellant's asylum appeal,
    and specifically his risk on return as a Bihari (which was accepted  by
    the Respondent), nor with the Article 8 cliam.   Miss  Jones  indicated
    that the appellant and a friend would give evidence.

My Findings

10.  I find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  materially
    in law as it is now clear from Singh that the Respondent  was  entitled
    to consider Article 8 rights under the provisions which came into force
    on 9 July 2012, as the decision in this Appellant's case was made on  8
    September 2014 and therefore not within the two month  window  in  2012
    outlined in Singh.

Notice of Decision

11.  The appeal is allowed.  The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is set aside.  No findings are to stand,  Under section 12(2)(b)(i)  of
    the 2007 Act and Practice Statement  7.2,  the  nature  and  extent  of
    judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such
    that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the  case
    are not to include Judge Meah.

No anonymity direction was sought or made.


Signed   Date: 19th August 2015

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As this is the respondent's appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 19th August 2015

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
