
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07370/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th February 2015                |On 25th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M Anderson of the Immigration Legal Advice
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Shimmin
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 12th November 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  9th  May  1994.   He
    came to the UK on 23rd February 2009 and applied for  asylum.   He  was
    refused on 1st October 2009 but granted discretionary leave  until  9th
    November 2011 as he was an unaccompanied  minor.   He  did  not  appeal
    against that decision.

 3. He made an in time application for further leave to remain on the basis
    of asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights and, after a  three
    year delay, was refused on 2nd September 2014.

 4. The judge recorded the Appellant's claim.  The  Appellant's  father,  a
    doctor, had been put under pressure by the  Taliban  in  2008  to  join
    them.  Three or four months later the  Taliban  came  and  dragged  his
    father out of the house.  His maternal uncle followed him  out  and  he
    was beaten and shot in the leg.  The Appellant's father tried  to  help
    and the Taliban killed him.

 5. A few days later they sent two threatening letters to the house  saying
    that they were going to kill the Appellant's  maternal  uncle  together
    with the Appellant and the rest of the family.  A month later they  all
    moved to Pakistan for safety and lived in the Hajizai Refugee  Camp  in
    Peshawar, but had to travel onwards because the Taliban had  found  out
    that they were there.  They sent two letters to the  Appellant's  house
    in the camp which threatened that the Appellant and his family would be
    killed.  There was insufficient money for all of the family  to  travel
    and so only the Appellant was able to leave for the UK.

 6. The judge did not accept  that  the  Appellant's  story  was  credible.
    Whilst he had given clear and largely consistent evidence  it  was  not
    credible that the Taliban would come to the Appellant's house  to  take
    his father but then kill him and leaving the Appellant's uncle free and
    alive. Neither was it credible that the Taliban would send two  letters
    saying that they wanted to kill the family and the uncle  because,  had
    they wanted to do so, they could have done killed him on the  night  of
    the father's murder.  Furthermore the Appellant  had  remained  in  the
    house for a month before leaving Afghanistan and the  Taliban  had  the
    opportunity  of  attacking  him  then.   He  rejected  the  Appellant's
    explanation that the Taliban could not approach the  house  because  of
    mourners, which was inconsistent  with  his  other  evidence  that  the
    Taliban had not come for him because the family was not at home much of
    the time.  Finally the judge did not find it credible that the  Taliban
    would expend resources and effort in tracing the Appellant,  his  uncle
    and family in Pakistan because they were of no  continued  interest  or
    threat to  them.   Moreover  he  had  travelled  through  several  safe
    countries in Europe and had failed to claim asylum.

 7. The judge recorded that the Secretary of  State  has  a  duty  to  help
    unaccompanied minors find their families and the Secretary of State had
    not done so  in  this  case.  The  judge  said  that  he  accepted  the
    Respondent's submission that the  Appellant  had  failed  to  give  the
    fullest details about  his  family  and  had  hampered  them  in  their
    efforts; he rejected  the  argument  that  he  had  been  disadvantaged
    because he had been deprived of the opportunity to  bring  forward  the
    best evidence to support his claim.

 8. The Appellant's evidence was that he had a general  fear  arising  from
    the security situation in Kabul. The judge relied on AK (Article 15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 and held that he would not  be  at  real
    risk of indiscriminate violence there.  He is a  healthy  and  educated
    man of 20 years, speaking good English and teaching English  to  Pushtu
    speakers in the UK,  currently  studying  civil  engineering  at  Leeds
    University and could not properly be described  as  being  particularly
    vulnerable.  On the contrary, the judge said that  he  was  intelligent
    and very resourceful.   It  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to
    internally relocate to Kabul.

 9. The judge considered the Appellant's Article 8 rights and accepted that
    he had lived in the UK for five years during an important and formative
    period of his life, namely his late teenage years.  He was impressed by
    his educational qualifications.  He accepted that the Appellant had  no
    experience of living independently in Afghanistan.

10. The judge had regard to the considerations listed in Section  17(b)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  noting  that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  was  in  the  public
    interest.  The Appellant  had  a  good  command  of  English  and  this
    consideration did not weigh against him but, on the other hand, he  was
    in the middle of a four year civil engineering  degree  course  and  it
    would be some time before he is financially independent.  Little weight
    should be given to the Appellant's private life because his immigration
    status has always been precarious.  On  that  basis  he  dismissed  the
    appeal.

The grounds of application

11. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the following grounds.

12. First, the fact that he did not appeal  against  the  initial  decision
    should not have any bearing on the case because he  was  following  the
    advice of his then legal representative.

13. Secondly, the judge had failed to take into account that the  Appellant
    was very young when the incidents at his home took place and there  was
    nothing inherently implausible in his account.  So far as the Section 8
    point was concerned he could not be expected, as a child  of  14  years
    old, to break away from the agent who had been paid to take  him  to  a
    place of safety.

14.  The  judge  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  duty  to   help
    unaccompanied minors find their family  but  failed  to  recognise  the
    consequences of the Secretary of State's failure to trace and  gave  no
    reasons for concluding that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  give  the
    fullest details about his family which had hampered the Red Cross.  Had
    a tracing enquiry taken place it would have established whether he  had
    family members in Afghanistan to return to. If he  had  not,  he  would
    have been entitled to refugee status on the basis of his age (LQ  (age:
    immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005).

15.  Finally  the  judge  did  not   consider   whether   the   Appellant's
    vulnerability as a young person would give rise to  undue  hardship  if
    returned to Afghanistan.  The  Court  of  Appeal  in  KA  (Afghanistan)
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 recognised that there was no bright line and  that
    apparent or assumed age was more important than  chronological  age  in
    assessing what risks a young person might face.  The mere fact that  he
    had reached majority did not mean that he would not face  some  of  the
    hardships recognised by the Tribunal in AA (unattended children) [2012]
    UKUT 00016.

16. The Appellant argued that removal was disproportionate.  The judge  had
    not taken relevant factors into account, namely the Appellant's  length
    of residence during an important developmental  period,  his  level  of
    integration into UK society, the Respondent's failure to  endeavour  to
    trace, the fact that his private life had been established while he had
    valid leave to remain in the UK and  the  delay  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision on his extension application.

17. The fact that the Appellant is studying means that  in  the  future  he
    will be less of a burden  on  the  taxpayer  and  will  make  a  larger
    contribution via income tax than if he choose not to study and to  take
    a minimum wage job.  The Appellant has always been in the UK  lawfully.
    His status has not been precarious and four  out  of  the  five  public
    interest considerations in Section 117B of the 2002 Act  weigh  in  his
    favour.

18. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge White on 11th  December  2014
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

19. On 18th December 2014 the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

20. Miss Anderson relied on her  grounds.   She  accepted  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to establish that the Appellant was  in  need  of
    protection in the UK on asylum  grounds  and  said  that  she  was  not
    pursuing that aspect of the grounds.  However she did  argue  that  the
    judge's proportionality assessment was flawed. In particular there  was
    no justification for the Immigration Judge's view  that  the  Appellant
    had not properly co-operated with the Red Cross, which was relevant  to
    the proportionality decision.

21. Mr McVeety accepted that it was difficult to understand the  foundation
    for the original Presenting Officer's submission that the Appellant had
    not properly co-operated, but said that it was immaterial in any event.
     He relied on the Court of Appeal decision in EU & Others  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 32 and said  that  the  failure  to  trace  added  nothing  to  the
    Appellant's case.  The judge had given proper reasons for  finding  him
    not to be vulnerable as a well-educated  resourceful  young  man.   His
    status in the UK was precarious because he had only ever had  temporary
    leave here.  He did not enjoy family life in the  UK  and  overall  the
    judge's conclusions in respect of private life were balanced and  well-
    reasoned.

Findings and Conclusions

22. Miss Anderson was right not to  pursue  the  asylum  challenge  in  her
    submissions.  The Appellant's story was,  as  the  judge  acknowledged,
    basically consistent, but it is a  simple  one  and  not  difficult  to
    memorise.  The Appellant was of course very young when the events  were
    said to have taken place but the judge did not disbelieve him  because,
    for example, there were internal discrepancies or because  the  account
    was vague.  There  is  nothing  in  the  judge's  considerations  which
    demonstrates that he was not aware of the fact that the Appellant was a
    child when the events were said to have taken place.

23. The judge did not believe him because the story  was  nonsensical.   He
    was fully entitled to conclude that there was no point in  the  Taliban
    putting pressure on the Appellant's father to join them, because he was
    a doctor, and then killing him and then  pursuing  the  uncle  and  the
    Appellant.   On  the  Appellant's  own  account  neither  were  of  any
    continued interest to or threat to the Taliban and there was absolutely
    no reason for them to try to find them  in  Pakistan.   The  Section  8
    point was not  relied  upon  by  the  judge  save  as  an  aside  after
    considering the credibility of the account.

24. Miss Anderson made it clear that she was only relying on the failure to
    trace point in the context of Article 8.  I accept that it is difficult
    to see where the Respondent's submission that the Appellant had  failed
    to co-operate with the Red Cross  is  founded.   However  it  does  not
    really assist him.  In EU the Court of Appeal said that  the  rationale
    of  the  inhumanity  of  returning  an  unaccompanied  young  child  to
    Afghanistan where there would be no family to take care of him  applies
    with less and less force with increasing  age.   Moreover,  given  that
    they had spent considerable resources in sending the children to the UK
    they would be unlikely to co-operate with an agent of the Secretary  of
    State for the return of their child to Afghanistan.

25. I do not consider that in reality there has been any disbenefit to  the
    Appellant as a consequence of the Secretary of State's breach  of  duty
    and accordingly, even if the judge had considered  that  the  Appellant
    had not been actively complicit in the failure to trace, it would  have
    made no difference to his decision.  In this case the Appellant had the
    opportunity to challenge the original asylum refusal when he was  still
    a minor and, on legal advice, chose not to do so.  He cannot now  argue
    that he has been deprived of any opportunity to establish his claim.

26. The assessment of proportionality was a matter for the judge  and  will
    not be interfered with by an appellate Tribunal absent an error of law.
     There is no error here.

27. The judge was clearly impressed with the Appellant, who has worked hard
    and made the best of his time in the UK.   He  is  clearly  a  talented
    young man.  He has achieved well and worked hard.  However, he  has  no
    basis of stay in the UK.

28. The fact that the Appellant has not remained in the  UK  unlawfully  is
    irrelevant since he does not enjoy family life here.

29. The judge was unarguably correct to say that Section 117B(3) weighs  in
    the Respondent's favour because the Appellant is financially  supported
    by social services in his education, maintenance and accommodation.  He
    could have looked at the Appellant's studies through another prism  but
    was not obliged to do so.

30. So far as his leave is concerned, the Appellant has never had  anything
    other  than  discretionary  leave  in  the  UK.   Whether  or  not  the
    Respondent is right to argue that all  forms  of  temporary  leave  are
    precarious is beside the point.  Some forms of temporary leave may well
    be  more  precarious  than  others.   But  on  any  view  a  period  of
    discretionary leave which is time limited following the refusal  of  an
    asylum claim is precarious.

31. Finally, although the judge did not make any reference to the delay  it
    is immaterial because the 2014 Act, which postdates  the  case  law  on
    delay states that private life developed  when  immigration  status  is
    precarious is to be given little weight.

32.  Miss  Anderson's  argument  that  it  was  unreasonable  for  a  young
    vulnerable adult with no support to return to Afghanistan is  simply  a
    repetition of the submission made to the judge and rejected by him  for
    the reasons which he gave.  The judge was entitled to  reach  the  view
    that the Appellant was not to be  considered  as  such  and  there  was
    therefore  no  obligation  on  him  to  consider  the  risks  such   as
    trafficking which appertain to those who are.

Notice of Decision

33. The original judge did not err in law and  his  decision  stands.   The
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed
         Date 19th February 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
