
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07328/2012
                                                               AA/07329/2012
                                                               AA/07332/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|on 26th July 2013                               |On 5th August 2013         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER


                                   Between

                               Mubashir Ahmad
                               Sajida Mubashir
                                Samreen Ahmad
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr A Khan, counsel, instructed by Thompson & Co.
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan and of the Ahmadi  faith.   The
    first and second named appellants are husband and wife respectively and
    the third appellant is their daughter.  The first appellant was born on
    23rd May 1955, the second named appellant was born on 24th  April  1963
    and the third named appellant was born on 3rd  September  1993.   Their
    appeals against the respective decisions of  the  respondent,  made  on
    23rd July 2012, to remove them from the  United  Kingdom  to  Pakistan,
    following the refusal of their asylum and  human  rights  claims,  were
    dismissed after a hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Haynes, in a
    determination promulgated on 26th September 2012.

 2. The dismissal of the appeals has to be  set  against  a  background  in
    which the respondent accepted that the appellants were Ahmadis and also
    accepted that the first named appellant had been in an Ahmadi mosque on
    Friday 28th May 2010 when it was attacked by a terrorist group, in  the
    course of which a number of people  were  killed  and  others  injured,
    including the first named appellant.

 3. The appellants' applications for permission to appeal were  refused  in
    the First-tier Tribunal but on 2nd January 2003  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Peter Lane granted permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "1.  Whilst it would be wrong retrospectively to apply the  country
             guidance in MN and others  (Ahmadis  -  country  conditions  -
             risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC) in order to  disturb
             a determination that was in its  own  terms  free  from  legal
             error, the apparent significance given by the  panel  in  that
             case to evidence emanating  from  the  United  Kingdom  Ahmadi
             Association lends weight to the criticism at  paragraph  5  of
             the  present  grounds  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   judge's
             approach to that strand of  evidence.   It  is  also  arguable
             that, as paragraph 8 contends (the judge failed to give weight
             to the fact that the respondent apparently accepted the  first
             appellant had been involved in a mosque attack.

         2.   Although I grant permission on the entirety of the appellants'
             grounds, the appellants would probably do well to  concentrate
             on the above.  Conversely, in her response under  Rule  24  of
             the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008;  the
             respondent should address whether in the light of the  country
             guidance case she accepts  that  the  appellants  fall  to  be
             treated as refugees."

 4. In the course of the hearing Mr Saunders indicated that in view of  the
    adverse credibility findings made by the First-tier Tribunal judge, the
    respondent did not propose to accept that the appellants were  entitled
    to refugee status.

 5. Paragraph 5 of the grounds of appeal, to  which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Peter Lane referred, asserted that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  made
    an error of law in relation to  his  treatment  of  a  letter  from  Dr
    Munawar Ahmad Chaudhry, the Secretary of the General Affairs Department
    of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK, dated 15th  January  2012.   In
    paragraph 3 of that letter Dr Chaudhry  said  that  any  applicant  for
    membership of the association in the United Kingdom must be verified as
    being an Ahmadi before he or she was given membership.   The  applicant
    was furnished with a 'Particulars of the Ahmadi Applicant'  form  which
    was completed and returned to them for processing.  On receipt  of  the
    form they processed the information.  A  lot  of  the  information  was
    needed for their  headquarters,  situated  in  Rabwah,  to  verify  the
    details given by the applicant.  That was then  carefully  verified  by
    the local official  Ahmadi  community  leadership  under  a  prescribed
    procedure.  The information was  then  relayed  back  to  them  by  the
    Executive Director  of  the  Foreign  Missions  in  their  headquarters
    through the Executive In-charge of the UK Chapter of  the  Director  of
    Foreign Missions.  Dr Chaudhry went on to deal with what was  described
    as the current situation of Ahmadi Muslims in Pakistan.  He then  dealt
    with a number of matters relating to the first named appellant. He said
    that their headquarters had confirmed that the  first  named  appellant
    was an Ahmadi Muslim by birth, that his participation in congregational
    prayers, contact and cooperation with the Ahmadi and  Muslim  community
    were excellent, that he used to pay his financial contributions to  the
    Ahmadiyya Muslim Committee and that his moral  character,  his  general
    reputation in the society and his character in financial  matters  were
    good and that he was seriously injured during an attack on their  Darul
    Ziker mosque in Lahore on 28th May 2010.  He said that the first  named
    appellant served in  their  Mustafabad  branch  in  Lahore  in  various
    capacities including

      a) the president of the branch of August 2009 to 2011,

      b) the organiser for the elderly 2006 - 2009, and

      c) the secretary for Tehrike Jadeed (a scheme for supporting  missions
         outside  Pakistan)  and  Waqfe  Jadeed  (a  scheme  for  supporting
         education and self reformation programmes) from 2000  to  2008  and
         was the auditor for financial contributions  by  the  members  from
         1996 to 2000.

    The letter contained a passage which said that as a  matter  of  policy
    and procedure they did not attend courts in support of  applicants  and
    their  absence  should  not  be  taken  adversely  to   undermine   the
    confirmation issued on the authority of the report provided to them  by
    their headquarters.  The position therefore was that Dr Chaudhry  could
    not be cross-examined on his evidence.   The report itself provided  to
    the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association from the headquarters  in  Rabwah,  to
    which Dr Chaudhry referred, was not adduced in evidence.

 6. In paragraph 34 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal judge said
    that there were some difficulties with the reliability of  the  letter.
    The association had not produced the documents that it claimed to  have
    received from Pakistan from which all  of  this  information  had  been
    gleaned.  According to the  COIS  report,  the  number  of  Ahmadis  in
    Pakistan was estimated  in  a  Pakistan  Government  census  at  around
    291,000, at nearly 600,000 according to Jamaat-e-Ahmadiyya and up to  3
    - 4 million according to a USCIRF Report 2012.  He said  that  even  if
    the figure given by Jamaat-e-Ahmadiyya was the most accurate, it  would
    require a recording system of considerable complexity to have  recorded
    the first named appellant's position in a group of 300 -  400  Ahmadis,
    let  alone  the  regularity  of  his  participation  in  congregational
    prayers.

 7. In paragraph 5 of the grounds of appeal it was said, on behalf  of  the
    appellants, that the  letter  from  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association
    showed that the first  named  appellant  had  a  high  profile  in  his
    community.  Whilst the report had not provided evidence as to  how  the
    association was able to know of the appellants' roles,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge had not considered the fact that Ahmadis were registered
    at the headquarters in Pakistan and that was how  the  information  was
    obtained  and  was  contained  in  the  letter.    The   reference   to
    'appellants' may have been a reference to a similar letter relating  to
    the second named appellant, dated 24th March 2012, which confirmed that
    "our headquarters in Pakistan" had stated that she  was  an  Ahmadi  by
    birth and a bona fide member of the Ahmadi community who  was  of  good
    character and who "used to take part in its activities".  In  paragraph
    35 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal  judge  said  that  the
    same concerns applied to that letter but more so,  because  the  second
    named appellant did not hold a position in the local  Ahmadi  community
    and so it was all the more astonishing that a  record  of  her,  albeit
    unspecified, activities was to be found at headquarters.  In  paragraph
    36 he said for these reasons he viewed both letters with caution.

 8. So far as the point made by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane relating  to  the
    apparent significance given by the Tribunal in MN and Others (Ahmadis -
    country conditions - risk) Pakistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00389  (IAC)  to
    evidence emanating from the United  Kingdom  Ahmadiyya  Association  is
    concerned, as Upper Tribunal Judge Lane himself acknowledged, it  would
    be wrong retrospectively to apply what was said in  that  determination
    to an  appeal  which  had  been  determined  before  its  promulgation.
    Moreover the Tribunal in that appeal had the advantage of oral evidence
    from Dr Iftikhar Ayaz, who was described as an eminent  member  of  the
    Ahmadiyya Muslim Association, about  the  system  of  registration  and
    checking of membership.  It is of interest that even he was not able to
    say why an accurate number of Ahmadis in Pakistan could not  be  given,
    having regard to the system of registration of members.

 9. In paragraph 22 of its determination the Tribunal said that  the  first
    question the decision-maker must ask was whether the claimant genuinely
    was an Ahmadi. As with all judicial fact-finding the judge  would  need
    to reach conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving such  weight
    to aspects of that evidence  as  appropriate.  Evidence  likely  to  be
    relevant  included  confirmation  from  the  UK   Ahmadi   headquarters
    regarding the activities relied on in Pakistan  and  confirmation  from
    the local community in the UK where the claimant was worshipping.

10. Therefore in any event in my view the Tribunal was saying no more  than
    that evidence from the UK Ahmadiyya  Association  would  likely  to  be
    relevant.  The fact  that  evidence  was  likely  to  be  relevant  did
    inevitably mean that it was likely to be reliable.

11. In his oral submissions Mr Khan submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal
    judge  did  not  have  any  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  Ahmadiyya
    headquarters  did  not  have  a  recording   system   of   considerable
    complexity.  He suggested that the  letter  came  from  an  association
    which  had  been  mentioned   with   approval   in   country   guidance
    determinations and in the  background  material.   He  referred  me  to
    paragraph 19.86 of the COIR on Pakistan, dated  7  June  2012.   It  is
    apparent from reading the entry that  it  referred  to  Al  Islam,  the
    official website of the Ahmadiyya Muslim community,  accessed  on  10th
    August 2011, which stated that the Ahmadiyya  Muslim  community  was  a
    dynamic fast growing international revival movement within Islam  whose
    current headquarters were in the United Kingdom.  There was a  complete
    absence of evidence about the recording system  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge, however, and there was nothing in the passage quoted in
    the COIR which suggested that any information coming from the Ahmadiyya
    Muslim Association UK should be accepted without question.

12. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the first named appellant  had
    acted dishonestly in securing a visit visa to the United  Kingdom.   In
    paragraph 37 of his determination he said that he made  an  application
    for a visit visa on 14th June 2011.  His own evidence was that  he  did
    so in the knowledge that he did not intend to return to  Pakistan.   It
    was, again by his own admission, a deliberate ploy that  his  wife  and
    the third named appellant would make  later  applications  though  they
    would all travel together.  He  led  the  entry  clearance  officer  to
    believe that he would be travelling alone and had a wife  and  daughter
    to return to.  In my view, having regard to this finding of  dishonesty
    and given that the appellants' son in the United Kingdom worked for the
    Ahmadiyya Muslim  Association  UK,  as  revealed  by  the  first  named
    appellant in the course of his interview, referred to in paragraph 7(c)
    of the letter of refusal dated 20th July 2012, the First-tier  Tribunal
    judge was entitled to reach the conclusion, expressed in  paragraph  46
    of his determination, that the first  named  appellant  had  failed  to
    prove that he was anything other than a low level member of the  Ahmadi
    faith with a profile that had enabled him  to  have  a  career  with  a
    government organisation.  In paragraph 49 he said  he  found  that  the
    first and  second  named  appellants  were  unreliable  and  untruthful
    witnesses.  He was unable logically to find that a person who purported
    to have religious faith but had not told the  truth  was  motivated  by
    faith.  It was not shown that on return the  practice  of  their  faith
    would be limited by a fear of persecution as opposed to the  limits  of
    their commitment to it.

13. Mr Khan also argued that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for his finding that the FIR adduced in evidence could
    not be relied upon.  He pointed to paragraph 27 of  the  determination,
    in which the First-tier Tribunal judge said that even  if  he  were  to
    take the FIR at face value, it was  nothing  more  than  an  allegation
    presented to the police which, if the account of the appellants was  to
    be believed, led them to do no more than come to the family house.   Mr
    Khan submitted that in paragraph 44 of his determination, in which  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge said that he  found  that  the  FIR  and  the
    report of Mr Hashmi were unreliable, he had failed to give a reason for
    rejecting the authenticity of the FIR.

14. It is the case, however, that the First-tier Tribunal judge dealt  more
    fully with the FIR in the section of his determination dealing with the
    report  of  Mr  Mohammed  Awais  Hashmi.   In  paragraph  17   of   his
    determination he said that according to the certified translation,  the
    FIR was dated  25th  November  2011  and  it  contained  a  generalised
    complaint that the first named appellant had been preaching the  Ahmadi
    faith.  In paragraph 18 he said the ease with which documents could  be
    obtained in Pakistan and the  unreliability  of  FIRs  and  other  such
    documents produced in asylum appeals was so well  documented  that  the
    background evidence on the subject did not  need  to  be  recited.   In
    paragraph 19 he said in order  to  respond  to  this,  the  appellants'
    representatives commissioned a report into the FIR from a law  firm  in
    Lahore.  The report from Awais Hasmi, dated 23rd  August  2012,  stated
    that the relevant  police  station  was  contacted  and  that  the  FIR
    submitted by the first named appellant corresponded with the  one  held
    on the police file.  The report also asserted that the "pattern of  the
    F.I.R. is also a true one and resembles the normal lay out/structure of
    a standard F.I.R.".  He said the report  went  on  to  claim  that  the
    police "has not  submitted  the  challans  and  is  in  search  of  the
    accused".  The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  said  that  Mr  Shoeb,  the
    appellants' representative at the hearing, referred to this  letter  in
    his submissions and described it as a verification of the FIR  obtained
    by Thompson & Co.  The First-tier Tribunal judge thereafter went on  to
    deal with the representation by Mr Hashmi that he was an  associate  of
    Thompson & Co. whereas in a letter, dated 6th September  2012,  written
    as a result of a direction given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,
    Thompsons confirmed that there was  no  commercial  connection  between
    themselves and Mr Hashmi and that he was not an associate of Thompson &
    Co.  Mr Hashmi apparently spent some time  during  his  legal  practice
    course shadowing one of the  partners  of  the  firm.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge drew the conclusion  that  as  a  result  of  Mr  Hashmi
    promoting a non-existent connection with Thompson & Co. it could not be
    said that his report was objective and reliable and therefore he placed
    no weight upon it.

15. In my view it is perfectly apparent that the First-tier Tribunal  judge
    refused to accept the reliability of the FIR because of the  ease  with
    which such documents could be fabricated and dismissed the  reliability
    of the evidence which the appellants sought to  rely  upon  to  bolster
    their claim that the FIR was genuine.

16. The third point relied upon in his oral submissions by Mr  Khan,  which
    related to paragraph 8 of the grounds of appeal, was that  because  the
    first named appellant had been injured in an attack upon a  mosque,  it
    meant that he would be at a real  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Pakistan.  The First-tier Tribunal judge accepted that the first  named
    appellant had been injured in the attack on  the  mosque  on  28th  May
    2010.  In paragraph 28 of his determination, however, he said there  no
    evidence that the first named appellant was specifically targeted.   If
    he had been to the extent that a person was dispatched to tell him that
    he would be killed, which is what the first named appellant claimed had
    happened subsequently, it was a reasonable supposition  that  he  would
    have been so.  Even the first named appellant's own evidence  was  that
    nothing adverse happened to  him  for  twelve  months  thereafter.   In
    submitting that the first named appellant would be at risk  because  he
    had been injured in the attack on the mosque on 28th May 2010  Mr  Khan
    was mirroring the approach set out in the  letter  from  the  Ahmadiyya
    Muslim Association UK.  In paragraph 11 of that letter Mr Chaudhry said
    that the blanket attack and massacre clearly showed that  every  Ahmadi
    was prominent in the eyes of the  enemy  once  he  or  she  had  become
    visible or had been identified following some incident  as  an  Ahmadi.
    It was suggested that simply being identified as an  Ahmadi  created  a
    real risk of harm.  In my view such an approach  is  inconsistent  with
    the country guidance determination  in  MJ  and  ZM  (Ahmadis  -  risk)
    Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033  which  obtained  at  the  date  of  the
    decision in question and for that matter with the post-decision country
    guidance determination of the Tribunal in MN and others.

17. The remaining grounds of appeal, which were not referred to by Mr  Khan
    in oral submissions,  criticised  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  for
    failing to deal with the issue of internal relocation,  suggested  that
    the First-tier Tribunal judge had not  adequately  considered  how  the
    appellants' religious beliefs and freedom as experienced in the  United
    Kingdom would be affected once they had returned to Pakistan, failed to
    recognise that the determination of the Tribunal in MJ and ZM  was  out
    of date and suggested that the First-tier Tribunal judge had not  given
    adequate reasons for disbelieving the first named appellant's claim  to
    have converted two Muslims.

18. In my view the First-tier Tribunal judge  gave  adequate  reasons  from
    paragraph 27 to paragraph 39 of his determination for not  finding  the
    account of the first named appellant to be credible, which included his
    claim to have converted two Muslims.  In the light  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge's findings of fact which, as already indicated, included
    a finding that the first and second named appellants had not shown that
    upon return the practice of their faith would be  limited  by  fear  of
    persecution as opposed to the limits of their  commitment  to  it,  the
    question of internal relocation did not arise and  none  of  the  other
    assertions that the First-tier Tribunal judge made an error of  law  in
    determination are justified.

19. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not make an error on a point  of  law
    in his determination of the appeals.  The appeals to the Upper Tribunal
    are dismissed so that the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge shall stand.




Signed                              Dated


P A Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
