
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07551/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice,     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Belfast                                   |                                 |
|On 14 February 2020                       |On 23 April 2020                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     PP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H. Wilson, BL, instructed by MSM Law
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 11 August 1998.  He  appeals
    against a decision of the respondent dated 25 April 2015 to refuse  his
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection made on 23  October  2014.
    The respondent's decision, and the reasons for it, are  set  out  in  a
    reasons for refusal letter ("the RFRL").



The appellant's case and reasons for refusal letter

 2. The appellant arrived in Belfast from Dublin on 16 July 2014, following
    a journey through the European Union and Turkey from Iran.  His  asylum
    claim now has two strands.

 3. The first strand is that he is sought by the authorities  in  Iran  for
    insulting Islam.  He claimed to have consumed a large amount of alcohol
    which led to him urinating on a mosque in his  intoxicated  state.   He
    was filmed doing so and now faces the  death  penalty.   The  appellant
    claims that a warrant for his arrest has been issued in order to impose
    the death  penalty.   The  appellant's  case  is  that  the  background
    materials demonstrate that the Iranian  authorities  regularly  enforce
    perceived breaches of the offence of insulting the  Prophet  of  Islam,
    often  using  capital  punishment.   The  authorities  continue  to  be
    interested in him, he maintains. He receives regular updates concerning
    the authorities' attempts to locate him from his parents in  Iran.  His
    foster parents confirm that he has  received  regular  calls  from  his
    family with  evident  bad  news,  after  which  his  demeanour  changed
    significantly.  He reports that he was being given very bad news  about
    the treatment he faces, in the event he returns,  during  those  calls.
    The approach of the Iranian authorities to those who  insult  Islam  is
    well established, he contends, meaning that he  is  at  risk  of  being
    persecuted upon his return.  The Refugee Convention nexus is that he is
    a member of the particular social group  of  those  perceived  to  have
    insulted Islam, and that the persecution will arise on account  of  the
    political opinion that will be imputed to him accordingly.

 4. The second strand is that the appellant claims  to  have  converted  to
    Christianity since his arrival in the United Kingdom.  As part  of  his
    journey of faith, he has attended a number of churches, and  has  since
    settled on the Windsor Presbyterian Church. He is an active participant
    in church life and has been baptised.  He will be  persecuted  in  Iran
    for manifesting and sharing his faith, he claims.

 5. While the respondent accepts the appellant to be a citizen of Iran,  in
    the refusal letter she did not consider his account of urinating on the
    mosque to be credible. The appellant's case was that he had attended  a
    party at a friend's home Tehran. He would have been 15 at the time.  He
    consumed a large amount of alcohol and felt sick, making his way  home.
    He ascended the stairs at the apartment block where  his  family  lived
    and went to check on his pigeons on the roof, as he was aware  that  he
    needed to "sober up" before going to see  his  family.  However,  while
    doing so, he was unable to control his need  to  relieve  himself,  and
    urinated off the top of the  building,  across  the  road  or  alleyway
    below, and onto the adjacent mosque.  This  incident,  he  claims,  was
    filmed from the vantage point of the mosque, and the footage - which he
    has not seen - later led to formal complaints being made  against  him,
    resulting in a criminal investigation leading to capital charges  being
    brought.

 6. The respondent searched maps of the area in Tehran where the  appellant
    claimed the incident took place but  was  unable  to  find  an  address
    corresponding to that which the appellant provided. He had  been  vague
    concerning the date when this took place, being able  only  to  say  he
    thought it was while the World Cup in Brazil  was  underway,  but  that
    only narrowed down the dates  to  a  range  of  one  month.  Given  the
    appellant claimed he had been aware of the  need  to  sober  up  before
    returning to the family flat, it was not credible that he was unable to
    control himself such that he could not find a toilet or even a discreet
    place to urinate. If he was so inebriated, it is not clear why he  made
    the effort to make his way to the edge of the  building,  stand  there,
    and urinate in  the  direction  of  the  mosque,  considers  the  RFRL.
    Furthermore, the appellant had  failed  to  explain  how  he  would  be
    visible from the mosque, given the events  he  claimed  to  have  taken
    place occurred in the middle of the night,  when  it  would  have  been
    dark. The appellant's account  that  the  authorities  had  raided  and
    ransacked his  home  three  days  later  was  not  credible;  the  RFRL
    considers that, where it the case that the authorities had the interest
    in the appellant that he claims, they would  not  have  given  him  the
    opportunity to evade capture by waiting for three days.  The  remainder
    of the account provided by the appellant concerning his departure  from
    Iran lacked detail in the appellant had provided  inconsistent  answers
    in his interview, considers the RFRL.

 7. Finally, the appellant is still in contact with his parents. They  were
    the recipients of the death warrant issued against him,  on  his  case.
    Yet he had not provided a copy to the respondent during  the  interview
    process.

 8. A screening interview took place on 23  October  2014.   A  substantive
    interview took place on 2 April 2015.

 9. The appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity is  a  "new  matter"
    and was not considered in the RFRL.  Although  the  presenting  officer
    confirmed to me that the respondent  consented  to  that  matter  being
    considered, it is now clear  in  light  of  Birch  (Precariousness  and
    mistake; new matters) [2020] UKUT 00086 (IAC) at [22] that the  ability
    of the Secretary of State to constrain the matters for consideration by
    the First-tier Tribunal does not apply to the Upper Tribunal, which  is
    a superior court of record.

Procedural matters

10. This matter has a lengthy procedural history.  The  appellant's  appeal
    was originally dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  S.T.  Fox  in  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 4 May 2016.  On 18  November  2016,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul set that decision aside. Judge Fox decided
    the case without the benefit of the appellant's bundle, even though  at
    least two copies had been provided to  the  tribunal,  one  before  the
    hearing, and another after the hearing. As such, the failure  to  place
    the bundle before the judge amounted to a procedural irregularity.

11. The matter was reheard by Judge Farrelly on 2 November 2017,  following
    a delay during which the case was erroneously  re-listed  before  Judge
    Fox.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  21  March  2018,  Judge
    Farrelly dismissed the appeal. A second error of law hearing took place
    in  the  Upper  Tribunal  before  Judge  Rintoul  who,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 December 2018, set Judge Farrelly's  decision  aside,
    and directed that the matter be reheard in the Upper Tribunal,  on  the
    basis that a further remittal to the First-tier Tribunal would  not  be
    appropriate.

12.  Judge  Rintoul  began  to  rehear  the  appeal  on  4  December  2019.
    Unfortunately,  the   interpreter   booked   on   that   occasion   was
    unsatisfactory, and the hearing had to  be  aborted.   The  matter  was
    relisted before me for the appeal to commence afresh.

13. Before aborting the hearing on 4 December 2019, Judge Rintoul was  able
    to hear the evidence of  Rev.  Ivan  Steen,  the  Minister  of  Windsor
    Presbyterian Church, and  Professor  Norma  Dawson,  an  elder  of  the
    Windsor Presbyterian Church, and the former Clerk  of  Session  to  the
    congregation.  The appellant currently attends the Windsor Presbyterian
    Church. Judge Rintoul took detailed notes of their  evidence,  and  his
    notes were  provided  to  the  representatives  of  the  appellant  and
    respondent in advance of the hearing before  me.   Shortly  before  the
    hearing, I arranged for Judge Rintoul's record  of  proceedings  to  be
    circulated to the parties, and they agreed that it was an accurate  and
    sufficiently detailed record of the evidence they gave for me  to  rely
    on for my  own  analysis  of  the  appellant's  claimed  conversion  to
    Christianity. As set out below, both Rev Steen and Prof  Dawson  kindly
    additionally attended  the  hearing  before  me,  in  order  to  enable
    clarificatory questions to be put to them.

14. I am grateful to the parties, the representatives, and the witnesses in
    this  case  for  their  flexibility  and  patience  in  light  of   the
    difficulties they have experienced on  account  of  the  unsatisfactory
    administration of this case by the tribunal.

15. At the hearing, it was common knowledge that  a  new  country  guidance
    case on Christians in Iraq  would  be  promulgated  shortly  after  the
    hearing.   With the agreement of the parties at the hearing,  I  sought
    post-hearing written submissions on the impact of  PS  (Christianity  -
    risk) Iran CG [2020] UKUT 00046 (IAC),  which  was  issued  as  Country
    Guidance on 24 February 2020, after the substantive hearing before  me,
    but  before  the  promulgation  of  this  decision.     The   following
    directions were issued to the parties on 4 March 2020:

         "Within seven days of being sent these directions, both parties are
         invited to make written submissions as to  the  application  of  PS
         (Christianity - risk) Iran  CG  [2020]  UKUT  00046  (IAC)  to  the
         evidence heard by the Upper Tribunal.

         Electronic written submissions are welcome."

16. Ms Wilson drafted a response dated 13 March 2020, which was sent to the
    Tribunal by those instructing her on 30 March 2020.  I  will  not  hold
    that breach of the directions by MSM Law against the appellant.

17. Regrettably, there was no response from the respondent.

Legal framework

18. The burden is on the appellant to establish that,  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof, he meets the requirements of the Refugee  or  Person
    in Need of International Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006
    ("the Qualification Regulations").  Specifically,  the  appellant  must
    establish to the above standard that he falls within the definition  of
    "refugee" contained in  Article  1(A)  of  the  Geneva  Convention,  as
    incorporated into domestic law by regulation 2(1) of the  Qualification
    Regulations.  Alternatively, he must  demonstrate  that  he  meets  the
    criteria in paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules to secure  a  grant
    of humanitarian protection, and/or that returning  him  to  Iran  would
    breach the United Kingdom's obligations under Articles 2 and 3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

Documents

19. The appellant relied on  a  Consolidated  Bundle  and  a  Supplementary
    Bundle.  I also relied on Judge Rintoul's Record of Proceedings from  4
    December 2019 which, as outlined above, had been agreed by the  parties
    to be an accurate record of the evidence he heard.

20. Ms Wilson provided a helpful  skeleton  argument  and  a  "schedule  of
    essential  paragraphs",  setting  out  which  parts  of  the  extensive
    background materials submitted on behalf of the  appellant  she  relied
    upon.

The hearing

21. The appellant participated in the  proceedings  in  Farsi,  through  an
    interpreter. At the  outset,  I  established  that  the  appellant  and
    interpreter could accurately understand  one  another  and  communicate
    through each other. Fortunately, in contrast  to  the  position  before
    Judge Rintoul, the interpreter provided on this occasion was  excellent
    and plainly had no difficulty in communicating with  the  appellant  in
    Farsi, and the tribunal, in English.

22. I treated the appellant as a vulnerable witness within the  meaning  of
    the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010.  I was  mindful  of
    the need to ensure that any questioning of the appellant had to be fair
    and non-combative.  I took steps to explain the proceedings to him in a
    way intended to put him at ease.

23. The  appellant  gave  evidence  and  adopted  his  statements  dated  2
    September 2015, 14 August 2017, 22 January 2019, and 27 November  2019.
    He was cross examined. Rev. Steen adopted his letters of support  dated
    22 January and 3 December 2019 respectively as his evidence, and  Prof.
    Dawson adopted her letter dated 24 November 2019 as her  evidence,  and
    both answered supplementary questions  I  put  to  them.  Finally,  the
    appellant's foster parents, Brian  Beattie  and  Ann  Beattie,  adopted
    their statements, each of which were dated 7 March 2016 and  14  August
    2017. They were cross examined.

24. The proceedings were recorded, and a full note of the evidence  may  be
    found in my Record of  Proceedings  on  the  tribunal's  file.  I  will
    outline the salient aspects of the oral and documentary evidence to the
    extent necessary to give reasons for my findings.



Findings

25. I reached these findings having considered the entirety of the evidence
    in the case,  in  the  round,  to  the  lower  standard  applicable  to
    protection proceedings.  I did not reach my decision before considering
    all issues  and  evidence  in  the  case,  including  the  post-hearing
    submissions, in the round.

Events in Iran

26. At the outset of my analysis,  I  recall  that  the  events  which  the
    appellant claims to have taken place in Iran occurred when  he  was  15
    years old. On any assessment, the journey that he will have endured  in
    order to get to this country will have been highly stressful, and he is
    likely to be vulnerable on that account. Although not material  to  the
    issues I need  to  decide,  the  appellant  has  given  an  account  of
    travelling through Turkey to Spain on a  false  Israeli  passport,  and
    later  on  a  false  Austrian  passport  with  accompanying  fraudulent
    boarding pass, all of which was arranged by  the  agent  the  appellant
    relied upon for his travel to this country. At the relevant  times,  he
    was a child. It is necessary, therefore, to calibrate my assessment  of
    the appellant's evidence by reference  to  the  age  he  was  when  the
    claimed events took place, and to allow a margin for  error  consistent
    with the difficulties that many genuine asylum seekers experience  when
    seeking to give an account of persecutory events from  which  they  are
    fleeing.

27. It is also necessary to recall that judges should be  slow  to  analyse
    the evidence in a case such as the present by reference to  their  own,
    subjective views as to what is likely to be credible or reasonable.  My
    experience is very far removed from that  of  a  15  year  old  Iranian
    schoolboy, and I should not purport to assume detailed knowledge of the
    inherent likelihood - or otherwise - of events which only the appellant
    could reasonably be expected to know about.

28. The appellant provided copies of the complaints that were said to  have
    been made by the mosque staff against him and issued to his father.   I
    will assess their reliability in the round, in accordance with  Tanveer
    Ahmed (Documents unreliable and forged) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT  00439.
    At this stage, I make the following preliminary observations about  the
    documents.  The English translation of one of the complaints at page 19
    of the bundle states that the target of the complaint  had  "repeatedly
    and publicly acted despicably towards the sanctity of  the  mosque  and
    has repeatedly consumed alcoholic drinks and has acted in a  despicable
    manner and thrown rubbish and... [sic] at the mosque." The  appellant's
    case is that on a single occasion he urinated at the mosque. He did not
    say he had thrown rubbish at the mosque. His case was that he  consumed
    alcohol in private, on a single occasion, at a friend's  house.   Taken
    at its highest, this document  is  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's
    case.

29. The appellant has not provided copies of the execution order he  claims
    was sent to his parents' address.  He said in his asylum interview that
    he had not seen it (Q63).

30. Under cross-examination, the appellant was unable to recall how long it
    took him to walk to his apartment block from the party.  He  said  that
    someone feeling ill would not check their watch; they just want to  get
    back home. He said that he urinated from the roof  because,  all  of  a
    sudden, he had the urge to do so. The reason he did not simply  urinate
    on the ground, but did so from the roof, was  due  to  the  effects  of
    alcohol, he added. He could not remember how long he was urinating for,
    saying "you never measure how long it takes you to  urinate".   I  have
    some credibility concerns about the lack of detail in these answers. In
    relation to the length of the journey  home,  and  the  length  of  the
    claimed urination, the answers provided by the appellant seemed  to  be
    defective, that is to say they refuse to engage with the  substance  of
    the question, but rather challenged the question itself.

31. In response to questions from me, the appellant said that he could  not
    recall how close the mosque was to his parents' building. He said  that
    it was over the alleyway, then adding that it was around three to  four
    meters away.  While reminding myself of the need  to  be  careful  when
    assessing the inherent likelihood of events that  happened  in  a  very
    different culture in a  land  a  considerable  distance  away,  I  have
    significant credibility concerns with the appellant's case that he,  as
    a 15 year old boy, could urinate across an street of some three to four
    meters, on to one of the entrances to the  mosque.  Ms  Wilson  submits
    that  there  is  no  expert  evidence  concerning  the  likely   flight
    trajectory of the appellant's urination.  That is true.   But  this  is
    the appellant's case to prove, albeit to the  lower  standard,  and  he
    would have been able to adduce expert evidence to support his otherwise
    incredible account.

32. The appellant's foster parents, Mr and Mrs Beattie, each gave  evidence
    that the appellant's regular contact with his parents in Iran  resulted
    in the appellant receiving what appears to have been distressing  news.
    The  appellant  claims  his  parents  telephoned  with  news   of   the
    authorities' continued interest in him. His case is that his father was
    detained on one occasion, when the authorities came looking for him.

33. At paragraph 6 of her statement  dated  14  August  2017,  Mrs  Beattie
    writes that on 1 August 2014 (that is, shortly  after  the  appellant's
    initial placement with them) the appellant took a phone call  from  his
    uncle, and reported that his uncle had told him  that  the  police  had
    taken his father away and wanted to know where he, the appellant,  was.
    On 29 August 2014, Mrs  Beattie  states  that  the  appellant's  mother
    informed him that his father had been released from detention, upon the
    payment of a bribe. On 22 October 2014, the appellant's mother informed
    him that a friend of his was due to be hanged. A similar telephone call
    took place on 1 June 2016, writes Mrs  Beattie,  concerning  the  court
    documents which related to  the  execution  order  issued  against  the
    appellant. Mr Beattie gives a similar account: see paragraph 10 of  his
    statement dated  14  August  2017.  Consistent  with  the  requirements
    imposed upon them as foster  parents,  the  Mrs  Beattie  recorded  the
    conversations in a diary, copies of which have  been  produced  to  the
    Tribunal.

34. There was no challenge to this aspect of either  Mr  or  Mrs  Beattie's
    evidence by the respondent; they were each invited  by  the  presenting
    officer to confirm their  accounts.   Mr  Beattie  was  asked  about  a
    discrepancy in the date he gave for one  of  the  incidents,  which  he
    stated at paragraph 10 his August 2017 statement took place on 1 August
    2015, whereas the corresponding diary entries, referred  to  accurately
    in paragraph 10 of the statement,  concern  1  August  2014,  which  is
    consistent with Mrs Beattie's evidence,  and  that  of  the  appellant.
    Nothing turns on the discrepancy.  It is clearly a typo.

35. While there  is  no  requirement  for  corroboration  in  international
    protection claims, where documentary corroboration would reasonably  be
    available, the claimant can be expected to provide it.  This  appellant
    has not provided copies of the execution order he claims to  have  been
    issued against him. He is in contact with the people who claim to  have
    received and viewed the document, namely his parents and uncle. In  his
    evidence, he has not responded to the concerns set out in the RFRL that
    he has not provided the  document,  even  though  it  would  have  been
    straightforward to do so. Alternatively, he has not  explained  why  he
    has not provided the document. This is a significant feature.  While  I
    accept Ms Wilson's submissions that the background materials do  indeed
    demonstrate that those who are perceived to have insulted Islam, or the
    Prophet Mohammed can be at risk of capital punishment, the question for
    my consideration is whether the appellant is wanted for those offences,
    not merely whether, in principle, a person wanted for such crimes would
    face such a risk.

36. The appellant's case was that his parents had to move house as a result
    of the interest of the authorities in him, yet  he  also  claimed  that
    they only moved  to  the  next  road.  It  is  not  credible  that  the
    appellant's  parents  would  move  to  the  next  road  in   the   same
    neighbourhood if they sought to evade the adverse attention  they  were
    attracting on the appellant's account. Again, I remind  myself  of  the
    need to be  cautious  before  purporting  to  re-characterise  what  is
    reasonable in the appellant's claim, but on any view flight  from  risk
    as deadly  as  that  the  appellant  claims  to  face  would  take  the
    appellant's parents further than a street away.

37. In light of my overall assessment of the evidence in the round, and the
    inconsistency  between  the  mosque   complaint   documents   and   the
    appellant's case, I find the documents the appellant provided from  the
    mosque to attract little weight.

38. Drawing the above analysis together, I find that the appellant did  not
    urinate as claimed on the door to the mosque. Even  taking  account  of
    the need to calibrate my assessment of his evidence by reference to the
    appellant's vulnerability, his age at the time,  and  the  need  to  be
    cautious when making  assumptions  about  the  inherent  likelihood  of
    events which have taken place in a very different  context,  I  do  not
    find the account that he has given to be credible. I do not accept that
    it would be possible for the appellant urinate for such a distance, and
    with such accuracy so as to hit the door to the mosque, three  to  four
    meters away, from three stories up. I find the lack of  detail  in  the
    account he provided, the inconsistencies between  his  case  and  those
    documents he has provided, and the unwillingness he demonstrated during
    his evidence to provide  answers  to  the  questions  put  to  him,  as
    evidenced by his challenge to the premise of the questions put to  him,
    rather than simply admitting that  he  did  not  know  the  answer,  to
    undermine the account that he gave.

39. Before reaching this view, I considered whether the evidence of Mr  and
    Mrs  Beattie  operated  to  render  credible  an  otherwise  incredible
    account. I do not consider that it has that effect. It  is  clear  that
    the appellant's family in Iran have had some form of  distressing  news
    (or purportedly distressing news) to pass onto the appellant. I  accept
    that Mr and Mrs Beattie were sincere, and therefore accurate, in  their
    evidence that the appellant seemed genuinely distressed.  Whatever  the
    distressing news was that the appellant received, it was not,  I  find,
    genuine news in relation  to  the  authorities'  interest  in  him  for
    insulting Islam. At the time he received the initial distressing  phone
    calls from his family, the appellant would have been a  child  who  had
    endured a horrific journey to the United Kingdom, which required him to
    use two different false documents, following periods under the  control
    and direction of people smugglers. He had just  arrived  in  a  foreign
    land, and had been placed  under  the  care  of  Mr  and  Mrs  Beattie,
    following a period of uncertainty during which it was not clear whether
    the local authority in Belfast would take responsibility for him, or in
    Glasgow, where his maternal uncle lives.  Under  the  circumstances,  I
    find that it is hardly surprising that the  appellant  was  distressed,
    even  to  a  significant  extent,  upon  contacting  his  family.   The
    appellant's family had clearly gone to considerable lengths, and  great
    expense, to facilitate his exit from Iran, journey through Europe,  and
    eventual arrival in the United Kingdom. It is  also  entirely  possible
    that they have equipped the  appellant  with  a  persecution  narrative
    which the appellant believes to be true but which, for the reasons  set
    out above, is not.

40. In conclusion, therefore, the appellant's account of what took place in
    Iran is not credible.  I find that  the  appellant  is  not  reasonably
    likely to face being persecuted upon his return on  account  of  having
    insulted Islam through urinating on the mosque.

41. I do not consider  this  finding  to  affect  the  appellant's  overall
    credibility.  The claimed events took place when he was very young, and
    he is clearly vulnerable.  Much of his case is based  on  what  he  has
    been told by other people about the consequences of what he did, and he
    may well have been being misled by them in order  to  mount  an  asylum
    claim in this jurisdiction, without knowing it.

 Conversion to Christianity

42. In contrast to the account the appellant provided of the  events  which
    he claims took place in Iran, the account the appellant has provided of
    his conversion to Christianity is detailed, compelling,  and  supported
    by two witnesses from his current church. It is also supported  by  the
    evidence of Mr and Mrs Beattie.

43. The account provided by the appellant appears to have evolved in detail
    and Christian maturity in the two and a half years  which  have  passed
    since he first wrote about his conversion in  his  statement  dated  14
    August 2017.  At paragraph 41 of that statement,  the  appellant  spoke
    about feeling at peace spiritually through attending the Thriving  Life
    Church in Newtownards.  In his statement dated  22  January  2019,  the
    appellant provided further details. At paragraph 5, he wrote that Islam
    was not the right expression for his spirituality. At paragraph  7,  he
    wrote that he was unable to explore other religions in Iran,  which  is
    consistent with the background materials concerning the suppression  of
    proselytization by other  religions  in  Iran.  At  paragraph  12,  the
    appellant wrote that Christianity had  made  him  happy,  and  that  he
    wanted to tell other people about God's word and  Jesus  Christ.  In  a
    further statement dated 27 November  2019,  the  appellant  wrote  that
    Christianity had made him feel "free". He wrote of being "newborn [sic]
    in Christ... I am a new person." In my view, the  appellant's  evidence
    concerning his conversion has evolved, as would be expected in the life
    of a new Christian coming to terms with  their  new-found  faith;  what
    began as a more accurate expression of the appellant's perceived  inner
    spirituality, culminated in the appellant professing to  be  reborn  in
    Christ, which reflects  the  Christian  doctrine  of  regeneration  and
    rebirth.

44. Under cross-examination, and in response  to  questions  from  me,  the
    appellant explained  that  one  of  the  reasons  he  believes  in  the
    Christian faith is because "Jesus Christ sacrificed  himself  for  us".
    Again, that is an accurate reflection  of  the  Christian  doctrine  of
    substitutionary atonement, which is at the  heart  of  the  message  of
    forgiveness upon which Christianity is based. He explained that he  had
    changed elements of his lifestyle, for example going to nightclubs  and
    drinking,  and  engaging  in  prayer.  This  reflects   the   Christian
    expectation of repentance  and  change  which  must  accompany  claimed
    conversion.

45. In isolation, the appellant's self-professed  conversion  accounts  may
    not be sufficient to demonstrate that it is reasonably likely  that  he
    has converted to Christianity. The  evidence  of  Rev  Steen  and  Prof
    Dawson, in writing, and in person before Judge Rintoul and myself,  was
    detailed and compelling.   When  the  appellant's  evidence  is  placed
    alongside their evidence, I find  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant has converted to Christianity.

46. On 22 January 2019, Mr Steen wrote that he had known the appellant  for
    "some time", but that he had been attending  the  Windsor  Presbyterian
    Church for around 3 to 4 months. The general thrust of this  letter  is
    that the appellant was, at  that  stage,  a  person  claiming  to  have
    converted, but in the early stages of their faith. Mr Steen wrote  that
    the appellant was,  at  that  point,  attending  an  Alpha  course  and
    exploring the future possibility of baptism. He wrote that he had  seen
    nothing to undermine the appellant's claim of genuine conversion.

47. On 3 December 2019, Mr Steen wrote a supplementary  letter,  concerning
    the progress in the appellant's faith. By this point, the appellant had
    completed the Alpha course, and had "really began to understand and ask
    questions  of  the  Christian  faith."  He  had  maintained   excellent
    attendance at church, been baptised (described as  a  "big  celebration
    with many of his local family present and friends"). He  was  assisting
    with Farsi translation at church meetings. The tone of Mr Steen's first
    letter was optimistic; the tone of his second  letter,  nearly  a  year
    later, was confident: "I am very happy to commend him as a Christian".

48. In cross-examination before Judge Rintoul, Mr Steen accepted that there
    was a social element to the appellant's initial interest in the Windsor
    Presbyterian Church, which features large numbers of Persian believers.
    However, Mr Steen said that he was particularly encouraged by comparing
    the contents of his January 2019 letter with the progress the appellant
    had made by the time he wrote the December 2019 letter. He said that he
    had not made it easy for the appellant, whom he  had  seen  weekly  for
    prolonged periods. He added  that  he  had  not  made  the  process  of
    acceptance as a believer within the church congregation  easy  for  him
    and had actually been "quite hard" on  him.  He  had  attempted  to  be
    rigorous. Mr Steen accepted that there are no "fool  proof"  processes,
    but that it  would  be  difficult  for  the  appellant  to  feign  true
    conversion over a significant period, to a number of people. There  are
    individuals within the church who are there for social reasons, but the
    appellant was not one of  them.  The  appellant  is  not  the  finished
    article, added Mr Steen; he himself had been a Christian for 35  years,
    and it was a journey.

49. Before me, Mr Steen explained that the appellant has begun to engage in
    public prayer in the church congregation, and that he  understands  the
    imperative of sharing his faith. The appellant has  begun  to  bring  a
    young woman from a Catholic background with him to church, and Mr Steen
    considered that that was evidence that  the  appellant  is  looking  to
    share his faith with others. The appellant has started to take part  in
    an eight week course on the practices of Christianity, which is for the
    entire congregation.

50. Prof  Dawson's  letter  dated  24  November  2019  explained  that  she
    previously served as the Clerk of Session to the church, a position  of
    responsibility which required her, amongst other  matters,  to  develop
    guidelines to be followed in asylum cases. She wrote that  the  purpose
    for doing so was to accept candidates for baptism  without  the  church
    being used solely to boost the chances of asylum applicants. She  wrote
    that the appellant engaged actively  in  discussion  during  the  Alpha
    course, and that at his baptism he made a credible  and  very  personal
    expression of faith in English. The appellant still has a  young  faith
    but once to live his life by it. Prof Dawson concluded by stating  that
    the appellant wants to learn and to live his life by his new faith, "of
    this, I have no doubt", she concluded.

51. Under cross-examination before Judge Rintoul, Prof Dawson said that the
    church asylum protocol prevents  asylum  seekers  from  being  baptised
    until at least the first Home Office  decision  has  been  issued.  The
    purpose,  she  explained,  was  that  the  church  did  not  want   the
    availability of baptism to be used to improve asylum claims. Even after
    baptism, there is  a  delay  before  somebody  can  be  a  "communicant
    member", which means having a vote in church affairs.  The  purpose  of
    that delay, she explained, was  for  the  church  to  ensure  that  the
    behaviour of newly baptised converts was consistent with the profession
    of faith they made in their baptism. The church had some experience  of
    people  claiming  to  be  Christians  and  disappearing   following   a
    successful grant of asylum, or for other reasons. The church was  alive
    to the need not to allow itself to be used by  people  making  spurious
    claims to be Christians. In relation to this  appellant,  she  did  not
    consider that he was a fraud. He was straightforward, and  honest,  she
    said.

52. Bearing in mind  the  lower  standard  of  proof  applicable  to  these
    proceedings, I find that the evidence  of  the  appellant,  his  foster
    parents - who each wrote of the appellant's  involvement  in  different
    churches,  culminating  in  the  Windsor  Presbyterian  Church  -  and,
    crucially, the two church  witnesses,  all  combines  to  lead  to  the
    conclusion that it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant  is  a
    Christian. The evidence of Mr Steen and Prof Dawson  was  credible  and
    compelling. I have no basis to conclude that they are  mistaken,  which
    would entail finding that the  entire  process  of  engagement  by  the
    appellant with the church had been in order  feign  genuine  belief  in
    circumstances where there was no underlying faith (see, for example, TF
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH 58 at [60] for
    a discussion of that phenomenon). Moreover, the  appellant  would  have
    had to have engaged in such  deception  in  a  sufficiently  convincing
    manner so as to evade detection by the robust processes put in place by
    the Windsor Presbyterian Church to prevent false claims  of  conversion
    being used as a means to bolster a protection claim. I have  no  reason
    to doubt the sincerity or, crucially, the accuracy of the  evidence  of
    Mr Steen and Prof Dawson. It is to their credit that they were  willing
    to attend the tribunal  on  the  second  occasion  in  support  of  the
    appellant, despite the personal inconvenience which doing  so  entailed
    (as  demonstrated  by  an  pre-hearing  application  to   adjourn   the
    proceedings to  accommodate  their  availability,  which  was  refused,
    thereby necessitating their attendance on 14 February 2020 at  personal
    inconvenience).

53. In an unchallenged passage of his witness statement dated  27  November
    2019, the appellant wrote that, "Telling people about the Word  of  God
    is very important to me.  I couldn't do this  in  Iran."   This  chimes
    with what Rev. Steen said about the appellant's commitment  to  sharing
    his  faith;  as  mentioned  in  paragraph  49,  above,  the   appellant
    understands the "imperative" of sharing his faith.  He has begun to  do
    so by bringing a girl  from  a  non-protestant  background  to  church,
    which, in the Northern Ireland context, explained Rev.  Steen,  crosses
    both cultural and religious divides.   I  accept  this  aspect  of  the
    appellant's evidence.  I find that he wants to share his faith  at  the
    moment, and that he would want to  do  so  in  Iran,  because  "telling
    people about the Word of God is very important to me."

54. The appellant's unchallenged evidence  was  that  he  has  changed  his
    lifestyle since his conversion to Christianity.  He has  stopped  going
    to clubs and getting drunk.  He is prayerful.  He is  part-way  through
    an eight week discipleship course which, as Rev Steen explained, covers
    many  aspects  of  Christian  life  and  disciplines.   I  accept  this
    evidence.

55. The overall picture of the appellant that emerges, when assessed to the
    lower standard, is of a  young  man  who  has  genuinely  converted  to
    Christianity.  His changed lifestyle matches his profession  of  faith,
    and he seeks  to  tell  others  about  his  faith  and  the  claims  of
    Christianity.  He would want to do that in Iran, but he "couldn't",  if
    he were returned.





Risk analysis

56. The country guidance applicable to my  findings  in  PS  (Iran)  is  as
    follows, at point 3 of the Headnote:

         "Decision makers should begin by determining whether  the  claimant
         has demonstrated that it is reasonably likely that he or she  is  a
         Christian.   If   that   burden   is   discharged   the   following
         considerations apply:

               i) A convert to Christianity seeking to openly practice  that
                  faith in Iran would face a real risk of persecution.

              ii) If the claimant would in fact conceal his faith, decision-
                  makers should consider why.  If any part of the claimant's
                  motivation is a  fear  of  such  persecution,  the  appeal
                  should be allowed.

             iii) If the claimant would choose to conceal his  faith  purely
                  for other reasons (family  pressure,  social  constraints,
                  personal  preference  etc)  then  protection   should   be
                  refused.  The  evidence  demonstrates  that  private   and
                  solitary worship, within the  confines  of  the  home,  is
                  possible and would not in general entail a  real  risk  of
                  persecution.

57. The appellant's faith is manifested in his community, not  in  private.
    It takes place at church and across the religious and sectarian divides
    in Northern Ireland, as  demonstrated  by  him  bringing  his  Catholic
    background girlfriend to his Protestant church.  Rev.  Steen  explained
    that a person identifying as Catholic  in  Northern  Ireland  does  not
    necessarily mean that they are  a  Christian;  it  can  be  a  cultural
    identification, with significant baggage.  I accept that  evidence.   I
    find  to  the  lower  standard  that  the  appellant  understands   the
    imperative of sharing his faith and has written that he would  want  to
    do so in Iran, as outlined above.  Rev. Steen explained, in response to
    a question from me, that the Windsor Presbyterian church is  constantly
    trying to give people the opportunity in their lives to  express  their
    Christian faith.  Nothing in the evidence or submissions  leads  me  to
    conclude that it is anything other  than  reasonably  likely  that  the
    appellant would seek to do the  same  in  Iran,  but  for  the  general
    persecutory  environment  which  would  have  a  significant  deterrent
    effect.

58. In my view, the  appellant  seeks  to  practice  his  faith  openly  in
    Northern Ireland and would want to do so in Iran.  As he wrote  in  his
    27 November 2019 statement, he "couldn't" do that in Iran.  I take that
    to mean that he would be prevented, either through the force of law (as
    demonstrated by the extensive background  materials  submitted  on  his
    behalf), or through the fear of the force of the law.  There is nothing
    in the evidence, and no submissions from  the  respondent,  to  suggest
    that the reason the appellant "couldn't" share the Word of God in  Iran
    is anything other than the fear of persecution.

59. The atmosphere in Iran is one of deliberate intimidation and oppression
    of Christians,  as  confirmed  by  the  findings  in  PS  (Iran).   The
    reception that would await the appellant, as a genuine convert, is  one
    of "serious difficulties": see [111].  The appellant would be asked  to
    sign a written denouncement  of  Christianity,  once  it  became  clear
    through the inevitable questioning that he will be subject to upon  his
    return that he is a Christian.  If he refuses to recant, he will be "on
    the road to martyrdom"; if he buckles under the pressure  and,  despite
    his convictions, signs the declaration, he will be under  surveillance,
    and would lose the ability to practice his faith  in  any  event,  and,
    having been subject to the requirement to denounce his faith, will have
    been forced to  "surrender  the  very  protection  that  the  [Refugee]
    Convention is intended to secure him" (HJ  (Iran)  [2010]  UKSC  31  at
    [110], as cited at [128] of PS (Iran)).

60. I find that, if the appellant were to suppress his faith  in  Iran,  it
    would be on account of the persecution that he fears.  Nothing  in  the
    submissions made by the respondent at the hearing, or through her  non-
    compliance  with  my  directions  afterwards,  leads  to  the  opposite
    conclusion, when assessed to the lower standard.

61. I find that the appellant has a well-founded fear of  being  persecuted
    on account of his religion in  Iran.   Accordingly,  he  satisfies  the
    definition of "refugee" in  the  Qualification  Regulations,  and  this
    appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

62.  In  light  of  the  above  findings,   the   appellant's   alternative
    humanitarian protection appeal falls away,  and  consideration  of  any
    Article 8 ECHR rights he may otherwise enjoy is otiose.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Stephen  H  Smith                                   Date  22  April
2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
