
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07031/2014
                                                               AA/07032/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 21st January 2015                          |On 23rd January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

            Mariyan Nishamani Silva Kihimbiyage (First Appellant)
            Isari Takshana Gajanayaka Mudalige (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss E Harris, Counsel instructed on behalf of Nag
Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Oakley)  who,  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 28th November 2014 allowed the appeals of the Appellants
    against the decisions made by the Secretary of State on  4th  September
    2014.  Whilst this is the appeal of the Secretary of State, it will  be
    convenient to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Background

 2. The First Appellant is a  national  of  Sri  Lanka  as  is  the  Second
    Appellant, although it is stated that she was born in Italy.  The First
    Appellant married her husband in 1988 and in 1991 they moved to  Italy.
    It was stated that she had been granted indefinite leave to  remain  in
    Italy in 2011 on the basis of long residence, and whilst it was  stated
    by her that she believed that the  Second  Appellant  was  entitled  to
    apply for naturalisation, given the length of time  they  had  been  in
    Italy, and on the basis that the Second Appellant was born there, there
    has been no attempt to establish that position.  It was claimed by  the
    First Appellant that there were problems  arising  from  her  husband's
    employment as a bodyguard for politicians and that they often travelled
    to Italy, and as a  result  of  what  she  knew  about  their  business
    activities she believed that they had targeted  her  and  harassed  and
    threatened her son and other family members.  Notwithstanding the death
    of one of the men in 2008, the First Appellant's problems continued and
    she believed that she would be the subject of interest because  he  had
    been involved in activities that she had known about.  Thus she claimed
    that she was not safe in Italy nor in Sri Lanka.

 3. She had applied for a visit visa to the United Kingdom on 18th  January
    2013 which had been granted, valid to 23rd July 2013.  She  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 12th February 2013 and  claimed  asylum  on  22nd
    April 2013.  The Second  Appellant  had  also  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom and began her GCSE studies in or about April 2013.

 4. The Respondent refused the claim for asylum and  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State is summarised in the determination of the First-tier
    Tribunal at [33]-[36].

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

 5. The  Appellants  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on both asylum and  human  rights  grounds  and  the
    appeal came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Oakley)  on  19th
    November 2014.  The judge considered the evidence on  both  the  issues
    raised on asylum and human rights grounds.  At paragraphs [40]-[52]  he
    set out his findings and conclusions on the issue of asylum and reached
    the conclusion that he did  not  find  the  Appellants  discharged  the
    burden of proof of having a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason and thus dismissed their claim for asylum, having not
    accepted the First Appellant's account of the  problems  that  she  had
    alleged had occurred in Italy and in Sri Lanka.

 6. Thus he dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Refugee  Convention  and  on
    Article 3 grounds (at [54]).  There is no appeal against  the  decision
    made as to asylum on behalf of the Appellants.

 7. He then went on to consider the claim made under Article 8 of the  ECHR
    at [55]-[65].  At [55] he considered Article 8 under  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraphs 276ADE-DH of the Immigration Rules.  There  was  no  dispute
    between the parties that the Appellants could not meet the requirements
    under the Immigration Rules, thus the judge went on to consider Article
    8 outside of the Rules and to consider whether it had been demonstrated
    that  the  decision  to  remove  them  to  Sri   Lanka   would   be   a
    disproportionate interference of their Article 8 rights.

 8. It is plain from reading the determination that he found that Article 8
    was engaged and that there  would  be  an  interference  and  thus  the
    decision rested upon the issue of proportionality.  In considering  the
    proportionality balance, the judge took into account  Sections  117A-D.
    He also considered the best interests of the Second Appellant who was a
    minor.  She had been in the United Kingdom  from  April  2013  she  had
    begun her GCSE studies and was due to take  those  examinations  in  or
    about May 2015.  He found that she was in the last six  months  of  her
    study for those examinations and that her education that had previously
    been undertaken in Italy was disrupted by her mother  who  had  brought
    her with her to the United Kingdom.  He  found  that  that  was  not  a
    decision that the Second Appellant had taken herself as a minor, but it
    had been taken for her by her mother.  He found that if she were to  be
    removed to Sri Lanka at  this  stage  in  her  education  it  would  be
    disruptive at what was a critical time, and that whilst he  found  that
    Sri Lanka had a reasonably operating educational  system  it  would  be
    difficult in the last few months of  her  study  to  change  to  a  new
    education system.  He took into account that  she  had  not  taken  the
    decision to be in the United Kingdom herself, but that was  a  decision
    that had been made for her.

 9. As part of the balance,  he  paid  weight  and  regard  to  the  public
    interest questions set out in Sections 117A-D and in particular 117B(5)
    that little weight should be given to a  private  life  established  by
    someone at the time their immigration status  was  precarious.   Taking
    that  into  account  alongside  the  matters   weighing   against   the
    Appellants, he reached the conclusion that the best  interests  of  the
    Second Appellant would be to remain in the United Kingdom to  undertake
    her studies and as a result of the current state and the critical stage
    that she was at, that it would be a disproportionate response  at  this
    time for the Second Appellant to be removed from the United Kingdom.

10. It is plain from his decision at [64] and [65] that he  did  not  reach
    the conclusion that both the Second  and  First  Appellants  should  be
    granted leave to remain indefinitely or in the long term,  but  to  the
    contrary, he found that there would be nothing to  prevent  the  Second
    Appellant's  removal  following  her  completion  of  her  GCSEs   (and
    therefore the First Appellant) since she could follow the remainder  of
    her education in Sri Lanka.  Thus it was clear from paragraph [65] that
    the decision he made was that any leave granted should be for a limited
    period to cover the circumstances that he had found would  make  return
    disproportionate at this particular time, it was to be limited  to  the
    period when she was taking her GCSEs in the United  Kingdom.   Thus  he
    allowed the appeal on that basis.



The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

11. An application was made by the Secretary of  State  for  permission  to
    appeal that decision and permission was granted by a Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal on 12th December 2014.

12. For the Secretary of State, Mr Tarlow  relied  upon  the  grounds.   He
    submitted that  the  judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  as  to  why  the
    Appellants should remain and  why  that  outweighed  the  Secretary  of
    State's responsibilities in immigration control  and  in  the  view  of
    Parliament having passed Sections 117A-D as inserted by the Immigration
    Act 2014.  He reminded  the  Tribunal  that  neither  Appellant  was  a
    British citizen  and  that  the  education  system  in  Sri  Lanka  was
    identified by the judge as adequate.  He  submitted  the  determination
    disclosed an error  of  law  and  that  was  inadequate  attention  and
    reasoning  on  the  judge's  part  and  considering  the   balance   of
    proportionality and the importance of maintaining immigration  control.



13. As the grounds asserted,  the  judge  had  failed  to  properly  direct
    himself in relation to the public interest  consideration  set  out  in
    Section 117B of the  2002  Act  and  in  this  regard  had  attached  a
    significant weight to the private life of the Appellants and  erred  in
    law by finding that the minor's private life and ability to finish  her
    education outweighed the public interest.

14. He also relied upon the grounds in which it was said that the judge did
    not properly take into account the decision of Zoumbas [2013]  UKSC  74
    and that the conclusion he reached was contrary to the findings in both
    Zoumbas and the decision of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

15. Miss Harris, who appeared on behalf of the Appellants,  had  served  by
    fax on the afternoon of the hearing a Rule 24  response.   It  was  not
    served in accordance with the directions and no explanation  was  given
    for the delay (see paragraph  2  of  the  response).   Nonetheless  she
    relied upon that response and supplemented it by her oral  submissions.
    She began her submissions by outlining to the court  that  the  written
    grounds advanced  by  the  Secretary  of  State  were  not  a  "reasons
    challenge" as the case was now  being  advanced.   In  any  event,  she
    submitted that the reasons given by the judge were wholly adequate  and
    open to him on the evidence that was before him.

16. As to the legal framework, she submitted that the judge did have regard
    to the considerations set out in Section 117B,  but  that  the  Section
    itself did  not  state  how  the  proportionality  exercise  should  be
    conducted or that it required a judge in every case to agree  with  and
    follow  every  consideration  within  117B.   She  submitted  that  the
    weighing of factors remained a  matter  for  the  judge  based  on  the
    circumstances of each individual case and that having regard to factors
    is not the same as a mandatory requirement to follow  them.   Thus  she
    submitted that the grounds of the Secretary of State were incorrect  in
    that regard  and  that  so  long  as  the  judge  had  regard  for  the
    considerations listed, he was free to discount  them  if  the  specific
    circumstances of the case so required.  In this context  she  submitted
    the judge considered Sections 117A-D at paragraphs [63]-[64] and  there
    had been no error of law in the proportionality exercise conducted  and
    that the conclusion reached was open to the judge.  In  any  event  she
    submitted the considerations in 117B(2) and (3) had no  materiality  as
    the Second Appellant was studying in English and  the  First  Appellant
    claimed English as one of the languages that she was able to speak.  As
    regards financial independence, the First Appellant had stated  in  her
    interview that she did not want financial support.  Thus those were not
    matters that were relevant to the balance and the  relevant  matter  at
    117B(5)  was  considered  by  the   judge   when   carrying   out   the
    proportionality balance.

17. She submitted that there was no misdirection in the case of Zoumbas for
    the reasons given at paragraph [22] to [27] of  the  Rule  24  response
    that she had drafted.  As to the ground in which it was  asserted  that
    the finding that the Second Appellant should be allowed to complete her
    GCSEs ran contrary to the findings  in  Zoumbas  and  the  case  of  EV
    (Philippines) she submitted  that  that  was  a  finding  made  on  the
    specific facts of the case.  The judge was not stating that the  United
    Kingdom should "educate the world" but had reached the conclusion  that
    with such a short period  left  to  go  until  her  GCSEs  it  was  not
    proportionate at this juncture to remove her at the  critical  time  of
    her education.  Such a finding was open to the judge to make.

18. I reserved my determination.

Discussion:

19. The Secretary of State does not argue that the judge erred  in  law  in
    his decision by considering Article 8 outside of the Rules.  The thrust
    of the grounds refer to the proportionality balance  conducted  by  the
    judge and whether or not he properly applied or misapplied, the  public
    interest considerations set out in Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as inserted  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014).

20. It is necessary to set out those new Sections 117A-D.  They provide  as
    follows:-

         "117A    Application of this Part

              (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
                    determine whether a decision made under the  Immigration
                    Acts-

                    (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for  private
                        and family life under Article 8, and

                    (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of
                        the Human Rights Act 1998.

              (2) In considering the public interest question, the court  or
                    tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                    (a)    in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in
                        section 117B, and

                    (b)    in cases concerning the  deportation  of  foreign
                        criminals, to the considerations listed in  section
                        117C.

              (3) In subsection (2), 'the public  interest  question'  means
                    the question of whether an interference with a  person's
                    right  to  respect  for  private  and  family  life   is
                    justified under Article 8(2).

         117B     Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
                all cases

              (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
                    the public interest.

              (2) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                    interests of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  because
                    persons who can speak English-

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

              (3) It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                    interests of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons-

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

              (4) Little weight should be given to-

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,
                        that is established by a person at a time when  the
                        person is in the United Kingdom lawfully.

               (5)  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

              (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
                    the  public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
                    removal where-

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom.

         117C     Article 8 additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
                foreign criminals.

              (1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
                    interest.

              (2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                    criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public   interest   in
                    deportation of the criminal.

              (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has  not  been
                    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four  years  or
                    more,  the  public  interest  requires  C's  deportation
                    unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

              (4) Exception 1 applies where-

                    (a)    C  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
                        Kingdom for most of C's life,

                    (b)    C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
                        United Kingdom, and

                    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to  C's
                        integration into the country to which C is proposed
                        to be deported.

              (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
                    relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
                    subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a   qualifying
                    child, and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner
                    or child would be unduly harsh.

              (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
                    to a period of imprisonment of at least four years,  the
                    public interest requires deportation  unless  there  are
                    very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
                    described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

              (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
                    taken  into  account  where  a  court  or  tribunal   is
                    considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal only
                    to the extent that the reason for the decision  was  the
                    offence or offences for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                    convicted.

         117D     Interpretation of this Part

              (1) In this Part-

                    'Article 8' means Article 8 of the  European  Convention
                    on Human Rights;

                    'qualifying child' means a person who is under  the  age
                    of 18 and who-

                    (a)    is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous
                        period of seven years or more;

                    'qualifying partner' means a partner who-

                    (a)    is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the
                        meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 -  see  section
                        33(2A) of that Act)."

21. Section 19 of the 2014 Act introduced into the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 a new Part 5A containing new Sections 117A-D.  This
    new  part  is  headed  "Article  8  of  the   ECHR:   public   interest
    consideration".  The new Sections 117A-D set out  statutory  guidelines
    that must be applied when a court or Tribunal has to decide whether  an
    immigration decision to remove someone from the UK would be  in  breach
    of his or her Article  8  rights.   The  new  Section  117A  is  headed
    "Application of this Part"; and new Section 117B is headed  "Article  8
    public  interest  considerations  in  all  cases".   117C   refers   to
    additional considerations in cases involving foreign criminals which is
    not relevant to this particular appeal.

22. The judge made a self-direction at paragraph [59] of the  determination
    in which he plainly had regard to the  public  interest  considerations
    and properly identified that those were matters that formed part of the
    decision in the proportionality balance.  In this regard he  began  the
    proportionality assessment by considering the  best  interests  of  the
    Second Appellant who was a minor; an approach which could not  properly
    be criticised by the Secretary of State and  cited  the  Supreme  Court
    decision of Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC  74.   Lord  Hodge,  giving  the
    judgment of  the  court  at  paragraph  [10]  set  out  the  principles
    applicable to the removal of children from the United Kingdom with  (or
    without) their parents.

23. Whilst the grounds submit that the judge  in  citing  the  decision  of
    Zoumbas and failed to take into account the entirety  of  the  judgment
    and in particular [24],  and  that  in  doing  so  he  misapplied  that
    decision, I do not find that such an argument is made out.  It is plain
    from reading the determination  that  the  judge  cited  what  was  the
    Supreme Court summary of the law as to the best interests of the  child
    and what this encompassed  (at  [61])  citing  paragraph  [10]  of  the
    judgment and nothing more.  In  considering  the  issue  as  a  primary
    consideration, he began his assessment of the  best  interests  of  the
    Second Appellant on the basis that they would be met by  her  remaining
    with her mother, the First Appellant, and that if she were removed this
    would be the outcome and that they  would  be  removed  together.   The
    judge plainly had in mind that they were not British citizens as in the
    decision of Zoumbas and that as a result they did not have  the  rights
    that would flow from such citizenship  such  as  the  right  to  future
    education or health.  However, the  case  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants was not that the Second Appellant  or  the  First  Appellant
    were seeking to remain in the UK to continue her  education  throughout
    her minority, but for a short finite period until the end of  May  2015
    when  she  had  finished  her  GCSE  examinations  to  prevent  further
    disruption and the likelihood of harm that  that  would  cause  to  her
    future wellbeing.  The judge found  that  in  Sri  Lanka  there  was  a
    "perfectly reasonable operating educational system" (see [62]) and that
    this was not a case of comparing the quality  of  education  available,
    nor about the right to ongoing future education,  but  whether  it  was
    reasonable at this particular stage to expect the Second  Appellant  to
    follow her mother, who had no right to  remain  in  the  country.   The
    question  the  judge  asked  himself  was   that   identified   in   EV
    (Philippines) & Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [59];  that  where
    the parent has no right to remain, the assessment must be made  against
    that background  and  that  the  ultimate  question  would  be:  is  it
    reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with  no  right  to
    remain to their country of origin?  Contrary to the grounds, the  judge
    did ask himself the question identified by EV (Philippines) and applied
    it to the specific factual matrix in this appeal.

24. In considering that question, the  judge  made  an  assessment  of  the
    evidence before him.  He found that the Second  Appellant  was  in  her
    last six months study of her GCSE course and those  examinations  taken
    at the end of two years of study would be in May  2015.   The  evidence
    before him in the Appellants' bundle demonstrated that she had attended
    school in the UK since April 2013, having joined school in Year 9.  The
    evidence in the form  of  early  school  reports  in  the  bundle  made
    reference to her having missed most of the GCSE course which the  other
    students had begun, but that she had caught up and was making progress.
     The later reports made reference to some of the progress she has  made
    at the time she was studying for her GCSE examinations and  some  grade
    predictions.  He properly considered that Sri Lanka  had  a  reasonably
    operating educational system, but that the particular circumstances the
    Second Appellant was in and the stage that she  had  reached,  that  it
    would be difficult for the last few months of her study to change to  a
    new education system.  Thus he concluded from the evidence  before  him
    that removal at this particular stage would be disruptive to her.   The
    written grounds make no challenge that this was a finding that was  not
    reasonably open to him to make.  Having determined what were  the  best
    interests of the Second Appellant, a  minor,  he  then  turned  to  the
    question of whether the need for immigration control  outweighed  those
    best interests.

25. The Secretary of State submits that  the  judge,  in  considering  that
    balance, misdirected himself as to the public  interest  considerations
    set out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  At [63] it is plain  that  he
    did have regard to those public  interest  considerations  set  out  in
    Section 117B when considering the question  of  whether  the  need  for
    immigration  control  outweighed  the  best  interests  of  the  Second
    Appellant and reaching an overall  conclusion  on  the  proportionality
    balance.  Section  117B(1)  made  it  clear  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is in the public interest; a  matter  the
    judge made reference to as "the paramount one of which is  the  control
    of immigration" (see [59]).  Sections 117B(2) and (3) make reference to
    the public interest considerations of being able to speak  English  and
    as to financial independence.  Whilst the judge made no specific regard
    to those matters, it is not material to the  overall  consideration  of
    the public interest question as there appears to be no dispute that the
    Second Appellant was able to speak English, given that  she  was  being
    educated in the language, and that the Second Appellant gave English as
    one of the languages she spoke.  As to financial independence it has to
    be seen against the factual background and the way that  the  case  was
    advanced on behalf of the Appellants that  they  were  not  seeking  to
    remain beyond the short period of time that was indicated by the judge,
    namely until the end of her examinations in May 2015.  Thus contrary to
    the grounds, the judge did give the sufficient amount of  consideration
    to the matters and the public interest considerations.  As  to  Section
    117B(5) and the issue of precariousness at [63] he recorded that little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a person at the
    time their  immigration  status  was  precarious  and  considered  that
    factor.

26. Whilst the public interest considerations must be taken  into  account,
    the weighing of the factors are a matter for the judge applying them to
    the specific facts of  the  case.   In  this  context,  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach the conclusion and place in the balance  that  whilst
    the Second Appellant's private life was  formed  at  a  time  when  her
    immigration status was precarious, this was not a  situation  that  the
    Second Appellant had brought upon herself, but was as a result  of  the
    decision taken for her by the First  Appellant  (see  determination  at
    [50], [62] and [63]) who had brought her to the United Kingdom and  had
    made a claim for asylum.  In this context the judge considered that the
    precariousness of her situation was not a result of her own actions but
    those of her mother and took into account what had  been  said  in  the
    decision of Zoumbas at [10] that  "a  child  must  not  be  blamed  for
    matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as the conduct  of
    a parent".  Having considered those matters, the  judge  concluded  the
    balancing exercise at [64] and [65] stating:-

         "64. I conclude in the particular  circumstances  that  the  Second
             Appellant, having weighed the issues of  proportionality,  the
             facts of Section 117 coupled with the best  interests  of  the
             Second Appellant and the current state of her  education  that
             it would be a disproportionate response at this  juncture  for
             the Second Appellant to be removed, notwithstanding  the  fact
             that I can see  nothing  whatsoever  to  prevent  her  removal
             following the completion of her GCSEs since she  could  follow
             the remainder of her education in Sri Lanka where there  is  a
             perfectly good functioning education system.

         65.  It follows from that clearly  the  First  Appellant  would  be
             required to remain with the  Second  Appellant  and  in  those
             circumstances the fact that I find the decision of the  United
             Kingdom  would  breach  the   obligations   under   the   1950
             Convention, any exceptional  leave  that  is  granted  by  the
             Respondent should only be for a very  limited  period  and  to
             cover the period when the Second Appellant will be taking  her
             GCSEs in the United Kingdom only."

27. From those paragraphs it can be seen that the judge did  properly  take
    into account and apply Sections 117A-D and gave specific  consideration
    to  Section  117B(5),  which  in  reality   was   the   only   relevant
    consideration and reached a conclusion on the  proportionality  balance
    that it would be disproportionate at this particular time to remove the
    Second Appellant and answer the question posed in EV (Philippines) that
    it was not reasonable or proportionate  for  the  Second  Appellant  to
    follow her parent (the First Appellant) to Sri Lanka at this time.

28. It is plain from the way  the  case  was  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants and the decision of the judge himself, that he, at no  time,
    made a finding that there was any indefinite entitlement for the Second
    Appellant to continue her education in  the  UK,  but  that  there  was
    nothing to prevent the removal (and that of her mother)  following  the
    completion of her GCSEs, and that any leave granted to  the  Appellants
    by reason of the decision should be for a very limited period to put in
    effect his decision.  In that context, he was  not  taking  a  contrary
    approach to that set out in Zoumbas or EV  (Philippines),  but  reached
    the conclusion that with a short period until  the  GCSEs  were  to  be
    completed and the disruption that this  would  cause  to  her  at  this
    critical stage in her life, but even taking  into  account  the  public
    interest considerations it would be disproportionate to remove her.

29. For those reasons, I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  judge
    discloses no error of law.  The question is not whether  I  would  have
    reached the same conclusion, but whether  the  conclusion  reached  was
    open to the judge to make on the evidence before him.  I have concluded
    that it was and that in  doing  so  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    demonstrated any error of law in his approach.  Thus  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

30. In the Rule 24 response that was not served until  shortly  before  the
    hearing began, there was an application  for  costs.   No  details  are
    given in the Rule 24 response.  In those circumstances, I indicated  at
    the conclusion of the hearing that if an application for costs were  to
    be made, it could be filed on the Tribunal and a  copy  served  on  the
    Secretary of  State  within  seven  days  of  the  determination  being
    received.  The Secretary of State then has fourteen days  to  make  any
    submissions by way of response and  I  will  make  a  decision  on  any
    application that is made.

Notice of Decision

31. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  The decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal stands.

32. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 22/1/2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

