
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07662/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 10 August 2015                    |On 2 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                     N M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi counsel instructed by Brighton Housing
Trust
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. An anonymity order was made in this case and shall continue.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Webb promulgated after a hearing on 5 December  2014  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds .

Background

 3. The Appellant was born  on  1  February  1994  and  is  a  national  of
    Afghanistan.

 4. On 1 October 2010 the Appellant applied for asylum when he was 16 years
    old after leaving Afghanistan in  September  2008.  The  Appellant  was
    refused international protection  on  13  July  2010  but  was  granted
    Discretionary Leave until 1 August 2011. On 29 July 2011 the  Appellant
    submitted an application for further leave to remain.

 5. On 16 September 2014 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application and made directions for his removal under section 47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The  refusal  letter  at
    paragraphs 20-109 gave a number of reasons for the refusal:

      a) The application for further leave was not to be treated as a  fresh
         claim for asylum as all of the issues raised had been dealt with in
         the refusal letter of 13 July 2011.

      b) In view of the lack of detail about his paternal  uncles'  role  in
         the Taliban it  was  not  accepted  that  they  were  high  ranking
         fighters in the organisation or that he would be forced by them  to
         become a suicide bomber. Therefore it was  not  accepted  that  the
         Appellant would have any fear of the Taliban  or  from  the  Afghan
         authorities associating him with the Taliban.

      c) The Appellant was an adult male  in  good  health  and  thus  could
         return to Afghanistan.

      d) As someone with no  profile  the  there  would  be  sufficiency  of
         protection.

      e) As a returning failed  asylum  seeker  it  would  be  open  to  the
         Appellant to relocate to Kabul.

      f) The relationship with his girlfriend Emma Williams did  not  amount
         to family life within the Rules.

      g) The Appellant has regular contact with his brother who lives with a
         foster family but his brother does not have settled status and  the
         relationship could be maintained in other ways.

      h) The Appellant did not meet the private life requirements of 276ADE.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Webb ("the Judge") in a 24 page  decision  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision. The Judge set out in the decision:

      a) The documentary evidence at paragraphs 7-9.

      b) The oral evidence of the Appellant at paragraphs 10-16.

      c) The oral evidence  of  the  Appellant's  17  year  old  brother  at
         paragraphs 17-21.

      d) The oral evidence of the Appellant's girlfriend at  paragraphs  20-
         21.

      e) The submissions of the HOPO at paragraph  22  in  9  bullet  points
         which were in essence that the  decision  in  the  brothers  asylum
         appeal was the starting point in this case; there were  credibility
         issues due to the failure to claim in other countries; there was no
         evidential  basis  on  which  it  could  be  concluded   that   the
         Appellant's paternal uncles were in the Taliban or  were  prominent
         members; the claim was based on one conversation which amounted  to
         a request and no consequences apparently flowed from  his  refusal;
         his credibility was damaged by his failure to ask his mother  about
         his paternal uncles after he left; the Appellant could relocate  to
         Kabul; there was nothing sufficiently compelling about the case  to
         warrant a grant of leave  outside  the  Rules  in  that  he  had  a
         girlfriend but they were not co habiting and his brother was in the
         UK but his status was precarious..

      f) The submissions of the Appellant's counsel Mr Hoshi at paragraph 23
         in 11 bullet points which were in  essence  that  he  accepted  the
         decision made in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  brother  was  the
         starting point but the fresh evidence including that related to the
         Appellant and the country situation mean that the  decision  should
         be made afresh; the failure to claim in order countries and in 2010
         should not be held against him given his age;  in  respect  of  the
         claim that his evidence was vague account should be  given  of  his
         age when he left Afghanistan and  he  referred  to  AA  (Unattended
         Children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC); if credible he is
         at risk on return and relocation would be unreasonable; the  breach
         of the tracing duty had caused him prejudice in that he  would  not
         have family support on return; in relation to Article 8  he  relied
         on the relationship between the Appellant and  his  girlfriend  who
         was very vulnerable; his relationship with  his  brother  was  more
         than normal emotional ties and as he was a child his best interests
         should be a primary consideration;  there  were  no  countervailing
         factors to outweigh the best interests of the Appellant's  brother.



      g) The legal framework in  relation  to  international  protection  at
         paragraphs 24- 28 and that included reference at  paragraphs  26-28
         of  how  to  approach  claims  made  by  minors  which  the   Judge
         acknowledges apply in this case as the Appellant was a  child  when
         he left Afghanistan .

      h) The legal framework of Article 8 at paragraphs 29 - 32 and he  sets
         out the requirement to look firstly at the Rules and  then  whether
         there are circumstances not recognised under the rules which  would
         make the decision to remove disproportionate.

      i) The relevance of Devaseelan [2003] Imm  AR  1  to  the  Appellant's
         appeal was considered in cases involving different  Appellants  but
         where there was a material overlap in the facts.

      j) At paragraph 38 he stated that there  was  a  material  overlap  of
         evidence and the two brothers were  relying  on  the  same  factual
         matrix as they left on the same day. He set out the  findings  made
         by the Judge in the Appellant's brothers case and summarised  those
         findings at paragraph 39 that there was  no  evidential  basis  for
         concluding that the Appellant's uncles were  Taliban  activists  or
         fighters who wished the Appellant or  his  brother  to  be  suicide
         bombers ; no threats were issued to ensure  the  brothers  complied
         and plans for their departure took some days while  living  in  the
         same compound as the uncles; nor did the Appellant or  his  brother
         fit the profile of Afghani born child bombers.

      k) At paragraph 40-41 he set out the background country  material.  He
         refers to the expert's view that forced  recruitment  is  rare  and
         suicide bombers are very rarely pre selected before training  which
         is consistent with what is said in the relevant OGN.

      l) At paragraph 42-47 he analysed the evidence of  the  Appellant  and
         his brother and found  discrepancies  between  their  accounts  and
         aspects of the Appellant's evidence that 'did not stand up well  to
         cross examination.'

      m)  At paragraphs 48-52 he set out his overall assessment of the claim
         for international protection concluding at paragraph 51 that he did
         not find the core account credible.

      n) At paragraphs  53-60  he  set  out  the  Article  8  considerations
         recording counsel's concession that the Appellant did not meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE1 or Appendix FM.  Given  that  the
         Appellant's brother was 17 years and  11  months  at  the  date  of
         hearing he found it artificial to pply the principles  set  out  in
         ZH. He did not accept that  the  relationship  went  beyond  normal
         emotional ties. He considered the  relationship  with  between  the
         Appellant and his girlfriend and found that it did  not  amount  to
         family life. He considered the  suicide  risk  to  the  Appellant's
         girlfriend  and  concluded  that  it  would  be  managed   by   the
         girlfriend's family and the NHS.

      o) He found no causal link between the failure to trace and the issues
         relevant to the appeal.

      p) He found removal to be proportionate.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 16 March 2015 First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Shimmin gave permission to appeal on all grounds

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Hoshi  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

    (a)    He accepted that the decision was a lengthy one and that was why
         his grounds were long.

    (b)    He suggested that there were  two  errors  in  relation  to  the
         assessment of the claim for refugee status and  6  in  relation  to
         Article 8.

    (c)    In relation to the refugee claim the Judge failed to  take  into
         account the Appellant's age at the time the events described.

    (d)    There was no recognition of the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
         recounting events that happened when  he  was  14  years  old  that
         occurred  7  years  previously:  there  was  no   child   sensitive
         assessment.

    (e)    In relation to the consideration of Judge  Malin's  decision  he
         set out the legal framework  and  acknowledged  that  there  was  a
         material overlap between their cases. He failed however to  make  a
         clear finding as to whether he was prepared to  depart  from  Judge
         Malin's decision and if not why not.  The  reasons  that  had  been
         advanced by Mr Hoshi for departing from the previous  decision  was
         that Judge Malin  heard  no  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant's
         brother and this Appellant had also not  given  evidence  and  that
         Judge Malin had also failed to take into account  the  age  of  the
         Appellant's brother.

    (f)    In relation to the Appellant's brother it was an  error  of  law
         not to take into account his brothers best interests.

    (g)    The Judge had misapplied the  test  in  Kugathas  suggesting  at
         paragraph 56 that there was a requirement for dependency.

    (h)    The Judge did not make a clear finding in  paragraph  57  as  to
         whether the  Appellant  and  his  girlfriend  enjoyed  family  life
         together and the impact pf her mental health on that assessment.

    (i)    The Judge failed to assess  the  girlfriend's  suicide  risk  by
         reference to both Article 3 and 8.

    (j)    The judge  was  wrong  to  find  that  there  was  no  causative
         prejudice in relation to the breach of tracing duty. The  Appellant
         is 20 years old and if he has no family in Afghanistan  that  could
         support him this was relative to the assessment of proportionality.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Holmes submitted that :

      a) In relation to the submission that the judge  had  failed  to  take
         account of the  Appellant's  age  he  was  clearly  mindful  of  it
         directing himself at paragraph 26 of the vulnerability  of  minors.
         He was not required to repeatedly make reference to it.

      b) The judge also made adverse findings about the Appellant's evidence
         at the time of the hearing not in relation to when he was  a  minor
         and his recall of that period.

      c) In relation to Judge Malins findings, which were never  challenged,
         there was tacit acceptance of them by the Judge.

      d) The Judge made no findings about the brother's best  interests  but
         given his age at the time of the hearing and his findings about the
         nature of their relationship it would have made  no  difference  to
         the decision. There was no evidence of a relationship  between  the
         brothers such as to allow the Appellant to benefit from it.

      e) The Judge made clear that he did not accept that the Appellant  and
         his girlfriend enjoyed family life together.

      f) In relation to the girlfriends mental health issues  even  if  that
         had been separately considered under Article 8 it would  have  made
         no difference to the outcome of the decision.

      g)  In relation to tracing the Judge found that there was no causative
         prejudice and this was a finding open to  him.  He  also  made  the
         point that the Appellant was not a minor anymore and the  relevance
         of this as an issue must diminish with age.

10. In reply Mr Hoshi on behalf of the Appellant submitted :

      a) The Judge set out the relevant caselaw to assessing the evidence of
         children but had to demonstrate that he had applied it.

      b) It was not clear what  approach  the  Judge  had  to  Judge  Malins
         decision.

      c) In relation  to  the  assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
         Appellant's brother there was evidence before  the  Judge  of  more
         than normal emotional ties: they did not live together but intended
         to do so and had an unusually close relationship.

      d) In relation to the suicide risk  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
         girlfriend under Article 8 the threshold for  saying  this  failure
         was not material was a high one.

      e) There was no authority for saying that the  failure  to  trace  was
         only of relevance up to the age of 18.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law. I am satisfied that looking at
    this  decision  in  the  round  the  appeal  is  simply   a   sustained
    disagreement with the findings reached by the Judge after  hearing  the
    same arguments advanced by Mr Hoshi in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. In relation to the argument that the Judge failed to take into  account
    that the Appellant was a  child  when  the  events  relied  on  by  him
    occurred I am satisfied that the  Judge  clearly  demonstrated  in  his
    'Findings of Fact' which start at paragraph 24 that he directed himself
    by reference to relevant law and guidance in considerable detail as  to
    how the approach the evidence of children specifically at paragraphs 26-
    28 and recognised the fact that he had already recorded in the decision
    on a number of occasions that the Appellant was 14 when the  events  in
    issue occurred. Having opened his findings in this  way  with  a  clear
    analysis of the correct legal guidance I am  satisfied  that  I  cannot
    agree with the argument that he  misdirected  himself.  Ultimately  the
    fact that the Appellant was 14 at that time did not mean that the Judge
    had to accept he was a credible witness or indeed that the  account  he
    gave sustained an asylum claim. The Judge had the  benefit  of  hearing
    from the Appellant and his  brother  about  those  events  and  reached
    findings that were open to him about the claim they made.

13. In relation to the argument that the Judge made no clear finding as  to
    what approach he had taken in relation to the decision of Judge Malin I
    am satisfied that again he fairly set out the  law  as  it  applied  to
    previous decisions involving different Appellants  where  there  was  a
    material overlap of evidence (Paragraphs 33-37). I am satisfied that he
    correctly applied that law by using as his starting point the  findings
    of fact of Judge Malin at paragraph  38.  He  heard  and  recorded  the
    arguments from Mr Hoshi as to why he should go behind the  decision  of
    Judge Malin  but  in  rejecting  them  he  nevertheless  evaluated  the
    evidence of the Appellant and his brother and  decided  the  Appellants
    case on its own merits.

14. In relation to the challenges raised in  respect  of  Article  8  I  am
    satisfied that Mr Hoshi has not identified any  factor  that  that  the
    Judge failed to consider but is disagreeing  with  the  weight  he  has
    given  to  the  various  findings  he  made  in   the   assessment   of
    proportionality: that is not an error of law. In relation to  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's brother the  Judge  clearly  addressed  at
    paragraph 55 the fact that at the time of the decision the brother  was
    17 years and 11 months old. He therefore came to the conclusion that it
    would be 'artificial' to apply the principles set out in ZH  (Tanzania)
    v SSHD and I am satisfied that this was a finding open to him.

15. It was argued that the Judge misapplied the guidance given in  Kugathas
    v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ31 but I disagree as  the  Judge  clearly  agreed
    with Mr Hoshi's argument that the case had previously been too narrowly
    interpreted (paragraph 56). He was nevertheless entitled to find on the
    basis of the very limited evidence before  him  that  the  relationship
    between the two brothers did not go beyond normal sibling ties or  find
    that they were 'dependent' in the same  way  as  a  married  couple  or
    parent and minor child: he was manifestly not stating  that  dependency
    or such a relationship was the applicable test.

16. I am satisfied that the judge made clear findings in paragraph 57  that
    the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his  non  co  habiting
    girlfriend who was at  University  in  Portsmouth  while  he  lived  in
    Worthing was not a family relationship. That was a finding open to him.
    I find that the Judge made clear and detailed findings at paragraph  57
    and 58 about the girlfriend's suicide risk and on the  evidence  before
    him was entitled to conclude that her family and the NHS would take the
    appropriate measures to guard against her  committing  suicide  if  the
    Appellant was removed. The weight the Judge has given to this aspect of
    the Appellant case in the proportionality exercise  was  a  matter  for
    him.

17. The challenge to the  Judges  assessment  of  the  tracing  failure  in
    paragraph 59 is I find unsustainable. The Judge has correctly  directed
    himself as to the relevant law and applied it in a careful and detailed
    analysis of the facts of this case.

18. I remind myself of what was said Piglowska v  Piglowski  [1999]  1  WLR
    1360 Lord Hoffmann said at p. 1372 that "The exigencies of daily  court
    room life are such that reasons for judgment will always be capable  of
    having been better expressed ... These reasons should be  read  on  the
    assumption that, unless he has demonstrated  the  contrary,  the  judge
    knew how he should perform his functions and which  matters  he  should
    take into account. ... An appellate court should resist the  temptation
    to subvert the principle that they  should  not  substitute  their  own
    discretion for that of the judge by a  narrow  textual  analysis  which
    enables them to claim that he misdirected himself."

19. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were underpinned by a  meticulous  analysis
    of the law in relation to every issue raised and  application  of  that
    law to the facts of the case.

CONCLUSION

20. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

21. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 31.8.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
