
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07551/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Belfast                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 November 2016                           |On 18 November 2016            |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
                                     P P
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Muldoon, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge S  Fox,  dismissing  his  appeal  under  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the respondent's decision made on
   23 April 2015 to refuse his claim for asylum and to remove him  from  the
   United Kingdom




2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran whose case is that he is  at  risk  of
   serious ill-treatment on return to Iran on account of  imputed  political
   opinion, that flowing from his consumption of alcohol and then  urinating
   from the roof of his house towards the mosque, an act video  recorded  by
   people at the mosque. This was taken so  seriously  that  a  warrant  was
   issued against him for a sentence of  death  to  be  carried  out.  As  a
   result, his family made arrangements for him to be smuggled out of  Iran.




3. The respondent did not  accept  the  appellant  account  apart  from  his
   nationality.

4. The appellant's representatives had, prior to the  hearing  on  15  March
   2016, prepared a substantial bundle of material which,  it  appeared  had
   not reached the Tribunal.  The judge records in  his  decision  [3]  that
   despite an offer from the appellant's representatives to provide a second
   bundle, this in  fact  did  not  occur  before  the  judge  proceeded  to
   determine the appeal.

5. There is now no dispute between the parties that the bundle was  in  fact
   served on the First-tier Tribunal. For  reasons  which  are  not  at  all
   clear, that bundle appears to  have  been  forwarded  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal in Birmingham.  The parties are in agreement that  there  was  a
   procedural error of which the judge was unaware (and could not have  been
   aware), capable of amounting to a  material  error  of  law  whereby  the
   appellant did not have a fair hearing. It is  thus  agreed,  pursuant  to
   rule 40(3) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  that
   the appeal is allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
   decision on all relevant issues.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an
      error of law and I set it aside.
   2.  I  remit  the  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
      determination on all relevant issued.
   3. The appeal is not to be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox.


Signed                                  Date:  17 November 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

