
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07449/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 November 2016                  |On 02 February 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
                                     P A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Grant promulgated on 3 December 2015 in  which  she
    dismissed his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 8 September 2014 to refuse his claim for asylum and  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom.

Procedural History

 2. This appeal has come before me on  a  number  of  occasions.   For  the
    reasons set out in my  decision  promulgated  on  1  April  2016  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision is set out  in  an  annex  to
    this decision.  The matter then came before me on 9 June 2016 when  the
    appellant  was  represented,  as  he  was  on  this  occasion,  by   Mr
    Paramjorthy.  It became apparent at that hearing that the appellant  no
    longer had mental capacity to instruct representatives  or  to  conduct
    the case on his own behalf.  On that basis I gave directions  following
    R (C) v First-tier Tribunal [2016] EWHC  707  (Admin)  to  adjourn  the
    matter to permit an application so that the  appellant's  sister  could
    act as his litigation friend.  For reasons which are not entirely clear
    no action was taken in respect of an application  for  the  appellant's
    sister to be appointed as a litigation friend and the next hearing on 6
    September 2016 was adjourned.  The hearing on 24 October 2016 was  also
    adjourned owing to lack of  an  interpreter  but  it  was  possible  to
    appoint the applicant's sister as litigation friend.

The appellant's case

 3. The appellant's case is that he is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka,  of  Tamil
    ethnicity, originally from Jaffna.  His brother had been  a  member  of
    the LTTE.  Following  a  bomb  explosion  near  where  he  worked,  the
    appellant was questioned and when it became apparent his brother was in
    the  LTTE  he  was  arrested  accused  of  involvement  with  the  bomb
    exposition, detained and  tortured.  Although  released  he  was  again
    detained, imprisoned  and  tortured  and  after  his  release  in  2009
    travelled to Colombo. With the assistance of an agent he  travelled  to
    France where he claimed asylum. His claim was refused and  he  returned
    to Sri Lanka.  He was again arrested in 2012  and  detained  and  later
    released through bribery.  He then went to live  in  Colombo  where  he
    obtained employment and was  again  arrested,  detained  and  tortured.
    After his release was obtained arrangements were made for him to  leave
    Sri Lanka using a false passport and a false name.  He  then  travelled
    to the United Kingdom and has lived  with  his  sister  since.  He  has
    attended demonstrations against the Sri Lankan Prime Minister's visits.
     This, it is said, had led to visit by the authorities and other groups
    to his mother in Sri Lanka enquiring as to his whereabouts.

 4. The appellant claimed asylum and a screening interview took place on 20
    May 2013.  A substantive asylum interview was held on 8 November 2013.

 5. The appellant also, it is said, suffers from a number of mental  health
    problems including depression and PTSD and to be in a  catatonic  state
    rendering him incapable of looking after himself.  It is also said that
    he is at risk of committing suicide on return to Sri Lanka.  The mental
    illness is said to have arisen from what he suffered in Sri Lanka.

The Respondent's Case

 6. The respondent's case  is  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  8
    September 2014. In summary, although accepting that the appellant is  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka and is a Tamil, she did not accept the account  of
    involvement with the LTTE or that his brother had joined  the  LTTE  or
    that  he  had  been  arrested,  detained  and  ill-treated  given   the
    substantial  number  of  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies   in   his
    accounts. Other accepting that he obtained asylum in France she did not
    accept the account of his return to Sri Lanka nor did  she  accept  the
    account of arrest in 2012 or of his arrest and detention and torture in
    Colombo, again given discrepancies and inconsistencies in his  account.
    She did not accept either that he had travelled to the  United  Kingdom
    in the manner claimed.

 7. Accepting that the appellant may have attended  various  demonstrations
    in London she rejected the reasons for him so doing.

 8. The respondent drew inferences adverse to the appellant for failing  to
    claim asylum on arrival and to the use of false documents  and  refused
    his claim.

 9. The respondent was not satisfied either that his removal  would  be  in
    breach of Articles 2, 3 or 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention  or  that
    there was any basis on which he should be granted  discretionary  leave
    to remain.

The Hearing on 28 November 2016

10. I heard evidence from the appellant's sister  who  gave  her  testimony
    through  an  interpreter.   I  also   heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives.

11. In addition I had the following materials before me:-

      1) the respondent's bundle including the interview records and refusal
         letter;

      2) respondent's final written submissions;

      3) appellant's bundle;

      4) appellant's supplementary bundle;

      5) witness statement from the appellant's sister, 21 October 2016;

      6) letter from appellant's GP, 15 November 2016;

      7) appellant's skeleton argument.

    Discussion

12. In assessing the appellants' claims I have applied the  lower  standard
    of proof insofar as it relates to asylum and article 3 claims.  I  have
    born in mind the very detailed assessment of current country conditions
    in GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT
    319 (IAC).    I have  considered  also  the  material  which  has  been
    produced and which is later in date. It is of note that there has  been
    a change of government in Sri Lanka since  GJ  was  decided.  President
    Rajapaksa is no longer in power, and there are indicators that  he  and
    his  family  are  being  investigated  primarily  in  connection   with
    allegations of  corruption.   There  appears  to  be  a  diminution  in
    abductions of the "white van" nature, but, viewing the  evidence  as  a
    whole, I do not consider that it comes anywhere  near  showing  that  I
    should not follow GJ.

13. In the context of this case where  the  appellant  did  not  give  oral
    evidence and is not now able to  instruct  a  representative  owing  to
    problems with his  mental  health  it  is,  unusually,  appropriate  to
    consider first the medical evidence.  The evidence comes from a  number
    of sources, not just the two reports from Dr Persaud.

14. The sources are as follows:-

      1) copy of the appellant's GP  records  from  7  November  2013  to  3
         October 2016;

      2) report by Dr Raj Persaud, 27 November 2014;

      3) addendum report by Dr Persaud, 3 June 2016;

      4) letter from Dr Peter De Backer, consultant clinical psychologist, 7
         October 2016.

15. In addition it is clear from the GP's records that  the  appellant  was
    referred to specialists including initially to the intake  and  liaison
    team at  Oxleas  NHS  Foundation  Trust  which  generated  a  secondary
    referral to "Greenwich Time to Talk".

16. The respondent challenges  Dr  Persaud's  diagnosis  for  a  number  of
    reasons which can be grouped into three categories:-

      1) inconsistencies with the  other  medical  evidence  including  that
         disclosed by the GP;

      2) inconsistencies between the diagnosis and the  appellant's  ability
         to provide detailed answers in his asylum interview;

      3) reliance on the error of the evidence of the sister which  is  also
         challenged as lacking credibility;

      4) the failure of Dr Persaud to consider challenges to the appellant's
         credibility.

17. It is appropriate to bear in mind that Dr Persaud's conclusions  relate
    to interconnected issues: PTSD and depression and the risk of  suicide.



18. While Mr Melvin submits that the  appellant  did  not  provide  medical
    evidence prior to the refusal and had stated in his screening interview
    that he had no medical problems, I do not  consider  that  any  adverse
    conclusions can be drawn.  No challenge is made to the GP's notes which
    in respect of a consultation held on 20 November 2013  notes  suspected
    depression, suppression,  symptoms  of  anxiety,  other  post-traumatic
    stress  disorder  combined  with  insomnia,  dizziness  and  that   the
    appellant presented as agitated and in fear.  It is also recorded  that
    the  doctor  prescribed  fluoxetine,  an   antidepressant,   which   is
    consistent with those observations.

19. It is evident that this drug was prescribed for  a  significant  period
    until the medication was changed in, it appears, April  2015  when  the
    appellant was prescribed mirtazapine, also an  antidepressant.   It  is
    not therefore  correct,  as  Mr  Melvin  submitted,  that  no  relevant
    medication had been prescribed until two weeks before the  consultation
    with Dr Persaud which took place on 20 November 2014.  That  assessment
    postdates the reference by the  appellant's  GP  for  a  mental  health
    assessment which was made  on  5  November  2014.   The  date  of  that
    assessment is unclear but it must have taken place on 21 November  2014
    at the latest given that there is a letter to the GP of that date  from
    the intake and liaison team stating that he has been assessed and  that
    the consultant psychiatrist Dr  Desai-Gupta  recommended  a  change  in
    medication and a referral to Greenwich Time to Talk.

20. The assessment from Time to Talk records a  low  risk  and  no  current
    active thoughts of  suicide.   The  letter  does,  however,  record  as
    follows:-

         "[The  appellant]  presented  with  symptoms  indicative  of  post-
         traumatic  stress  disorder  (PTSD)  following  multiple  traumatic
         events.

         [The appellant] reports flashbacks and nightmares of torture and as
         a result avoids going to sleep,  increased  social  withdrawal  and
         reports frequent panic attacks following  flashbacks  of  traumatic
         events.

         As a result of these traumatic events [the appellant] reports  that
         this is affecting his mood presenting the  symptoms  indicative  of
         severe depression and anxiety."

21. The outcome was that Greenwich Time to Talk was unable to  provide  the
    appropriate PTSD treatment.  A  further  assessment  took  place  on  6
    February 2015 that notes that the onset  of  current  presentation  was
    when the appellant was detained  at  Dover  Detention  Centre  and  the
    presenting problem is recorded  that  the  appellant  reports  multiple
    traumatic events including capture  and  torture  at  the  age  of  18,
    recaptured for interrogation where he was held for two or  three  days,
    beaten and threatened to have his nails removed.  Details are given  of
    flashbacks and nightmares.  The scores are recorded as PHQ9 of  20  and
    GAD7 of 21 indicating severe depression and anxiety.  Again it is noted
    that there were no active thoughts of suicide, no plans and no  intent.



22. The GP records also disclose a letter to the GP from Dr Ruben Ezeaka  a
    psychiatrist whose diagnosis is post-traumatic stress disorder and  the
    care plan includes a reference to psychological therapy, trauma focused
    CBT.  The response to that from Dr Fairley dated 15 April 2015 is  that
    appellant cannot be accepted for referral because  of  his  immigration
    status not confirmed and that he is living in a stressful situation and
    therefore any trauma work undertaken is more likely to hurt him  rather
    than help him.  A further referral then took place  and  the  appellant
    was assessed again on 28  April  2016.   The  letter  of  24  May  2016
    reporting that the re-referral was due to the concern of  the  GP  that
    the appellant's symptoms were  worsening  despite  regular  medication.
    Unfortunately only one page of that  letter  is  included  but  it  is,
    however, clear from the letter of Dr De Backer that there was continued
    engagement at the Erith Centre, Dr De Backer having met  the  appellant
    on two separate occasions  4  July  and  7  October  2016  having  been
    referred by Dr Soshana Cross.

23. The presenting situation as summarised by Dr De  Backer  is  consistent
    with the previous history as referred to  above.   In  addition  it  is
    recorded  that  the  appellant  would  not  leave  the   house   unless
    accompanied by his sister, he does not  interact  with  people,  avoids
    speaking to his mother on the phone as  he  believes  she  is  not  his
    mother but someone else despite being assured to the  contrary  by  his
    sister; that in terms of self-care unless assisted he will not ask  for
    food or fluids and it is noted  that  in  March  2016  his  weight  had
    decreased to 38 kilos.  There  then  follows  a  summary  of  what  had
    happened to the appellant in Sri Lanka and  the  following  conclusions
    follow:-

      1) [The appellant] meets the full criteria for a  diagnosis  of  post-
         traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  His  experiences  in  Sri  Lanka
         involve  the  actual  threat  to  his  life.   Since  then  he  has
         experienced cognitive intrusions (nightmares and flashbacks), hyper-
         vigilance and avoidance of remainders of the traumatic events.   He
         has also experienced a marked personality change and  that  he  has
         become withdrawn, inactive, fearful and distrusting of others.

      2) It seems likely that [the appellant]'s detention in Dover may  have
         added a secondary layer of trauma to the  difficulties  he  already
         had.  Due to his experiences in Sri Lanka he would have been highly
         sensitised to the potential threats inherent in  being  taken  into
         custody by a governmental organisation.  It would appear that there
         was an exacerbation of his symptoms at  this  time,  activating  an
         extreme sense of helplessness which continues to  manifest  in  his
         inability to take care of himself  (including  not  being  able  to
         attend to his hygiene and nutritional needs unprompted.  ...

    (4)  [The appellant] would in  future  benefit  from  a  trauma-focused
         psychological therapy however at this  point  he  seems  unable  to
         partake in the interactions that  talking  therapy  would  require.
         Once his basic needs have been addressed (i.e. his personal safety)
         it is likely that he would be able better to attend to his personal
         care (including eating,  drinking  and  hygiene,  interacting  with
         others) at which point he  may  be  better  placed  to  be  offered
         psychological treatment.

24. There are, as Mr Melvin submitted, a number of  comments  in  the  GP's
    report which would appear, at first glance, to be inconsistent with the
    diagnoses referred to above.  In particular, on 16 April 2015, that  he
    is feeling well and 14 October 2014 that he is currently  working  and,
    more importantly, on 11 June 2015,  a  report  that  the  appellant  is
    feeling extremely well and is now working in a shop stacking shelves.

25. Each of these entries are  letters  from  consultant  chest  physicians
    reporting back to the GP on the appellant  as  a  result  of  suspected
    tuberculosis and copied into the records. I accept, as  Mr  Paramjorthy
    submitted, that the short observation from a chest physician  that  the
    appellant was well was simply referring to  his  physical  symptoms.  I
    accept also that there is the possibility of a  misunderstanding  about
    working on the first occasion, given  there  is  no  indication  of  an
    interpreter being present and it is recorded that the appellant  speaks
    limited English, (and indeed  that  the  letter  of  19  November  2014
    indicates that there have been clear miscommunications) the  letter  of
    11 June  2015  records  that  there  was  a  review  together  with  an
    interpreter and the doctor states "I am pleased to report he is feeling
    extremely well and is now working in a shop stacking shelves".

26. The appellant did not give evidence and the letter from the GP who  was
    asked about these entries simply confirms the appellant would be unable
    to work and does not directly address  the  apparent  anomaly.   Given,
    however, that the psychiatric evidence is consistent and  the  evidence
    of working is in direct contrast to the rest of the evidence, I  attach
    little weight to the letter of 11 June 2015. It would, in any event, be
    surprising if the appellant and his sister  had  maintained  one  story
    when consulting every other  medical  professional  and  given  another
    account on one occasion to the chest consultant. In any event, I do not
    consider that it is of much relevance to the core of his claim.

27. I do, however, note in passing that the medical reports  indicate  that
    the appellant's  weight  is  between  37  and  38  kilograms  which  is
    consistent with the physical ill health and also, it would appear,  the
    fact that he has, as is recorded in several places, ceased  eating  and
    to need prompting to eat.    The letter of 11 June 2015 thus appears to
    be an unexplained inconsistency.

28. Mr Melvin submitted that Dr Persaud's report is also defective in  that
    it fails properly to consider the inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    account identified in the refusal letter which he states he  has  read;
    failed to note the  appellant's  asylum  claim  had  been  refused  and
    dismissed on three previous  occasions  yet  he  had  made  no  suicide
    attempt; and, accepted the claim as truthful without any  consideration
    of  whether  the  appellant  was  feigning  his  symptoms.   This,   he
    submitted, is contrary to the principles set out in JL (Medical reports
    - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145.

29. It is appropriate at this point to cite the headnote which provides  as
    follows:-

         "(1) Those writing medical  reports  for  use  in  immigration  and
             asylum appeals  should  ensure  where  possible  that,  before
             forming their opinions, they study any assessments  that  have
             already been  made  of  the  appellant's  credibility  by  the
             immigration authorities  and/or  a  tribunal  judge  (SS  (Sri
             Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ  155  [30];  BN  (psychiatric  evidence
             discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279 (IAC) at [49],  [53])).
             When the materials to which they should  have  regard  include
             previous determinations by a judge, they should not conduct  a
             running commentary on the reasoning of the judge who has  made
             such  findings,  but  should  concentrate  on  describing  and
             evaluating the medical evidence (IY (Turkey) [2012]  EWCA  Civ
             1560 [37].

         (2)  They should also bear in mind that when an advocate wishes  to
             rely on their medical report to support the credibility of  an
             appellant's account, they will be expected  to  identify  what
             about it affords support to what the appellant  has  said  and
             which is not dependent on what the appellant has said  to  the
             doctor  (HE  (DRC,  credibility   and   psychiatric   reports)
             Democratic Republic of Congo [2004] UKAIT 000321).  The more a
             diagnosis is dependent on assuming that the account  given  by
             the appellant was to be believed, the less likely it  is  that
             significant weight will  be  attached  to  it  (HH  (Ethiopia)
             [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [23]).

         (3)  The authors of such medical reports also  need  to  understand
             that what is expected of them  is  a  critical  and  objective
             analysis of the injuries and/or symptoms displayed.  They need
             to be vigilant that ultimately whether an appellant's  account
             of the underlying events is or is not credible  and  plausible
             is a question of legal appraisal and a matter for the tribunal
             judge, not the expert doctors (IY [47]; see also HH (Ethiopia)
             [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [17]-[18]).

         (4)  For their part,  judges  should  be  aware  that,  whilst  the
             overall assessment of credibility is for them, medical reports
             may well involve  assessments  of  the  compatibility  of  the
             appellant's account with physical marks or symptoms, or mental
             condition: (SA  (Somalia)  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1302).   If  the
             position were otherwise, the central tenets  of  the  Istanbul
             Protocol would be misconceived, whenever there was  a  dispute
             about claimed causation of scars, and judges could  not  apply
             its guidance, contrary to what they are enjoined to do  by  SA
             (Somalia).  Even where medical experts  rely  heavily  on  the
             account given by the person  concerned,  that  does  not  mean
             their  reports  lack  or  lose  their  status  as  independent
             evidence, although it may reduce very considerably the  weight
             that can be attached to them."

30. I do not consider that Dr Persaud can be faulted for  not  taking  into
    account the decisions  of  previous  Tribunals.   These  both  postdate
    initial assessment and at the time of the addendum report they had both
    been set aside.

31. It must be borne in mind that in this case,  unlike  a  number  of  the
    cases referred to in JL China, the doctors  were  not  being  asked  to
    comment on physical injuries but rather to make an assessment of  PTSD,
    that is the existence of  a  current  psychiatric  illness  along  with
    depression.  Whilst there is a significant merit in the submission that
    a doctor should consider the possibility of  other  causes  or  whether
    somebody is feigning, the existence of depression or PTSD is in no  way
    diagnostic of events in the past in  the  same  way  as,  for  example,
    particular scarring  being  consistent  or  highly  consistent  with  a
    specific type of torture or ill-treatment  as  is  dealt  with  in  the
    Istanbul Protocol.  Whilst a diagnosis such as PTSD  is  indicative  of
    past trauma it does not have the same probative value as, for  example,
    a scar highly consistent with a specific form of torture.

32. The observations made in JL China are of course relevant to the  report
    of Dr Persaud; they do not have the same resonance in  respect  of  the
    other medical evidence which was not produced for  the  purposes  of  a
    court hearing but was rather a report back to the referring  GP.   What
    is notable about the evidence viewed  as  a  whole  is  the  remarkable
    degree of consistency  in  the  conclusions  reached  by  a  number  of
    different professionals.  There is also a consistency in the  diagnosis
    of PTSD and in the underlying cause identified.

33. Whilst it is evident that a psychiatric  diagnosis  will  depend  to  a
    significant extent on what is told to the examining doctor,  there  are
    of course also the observations of the various clinicians as to how the
    applicant himself presents.  As noted above specific reference is  made
    to tests which have been administered and the results.

34. I draw no inferences adverse to him from the fact that Dr Persaud  was,
    as Mr Melvin submitted, previously suspended from the Medical Register.
     There is no indication that the suspension was not lifted, or that his
    registration is subject to conditions nor was any such submission made.
     Such evidence as there is indicates

35. It is at this juncture sensible to consider then the challenges to  the
    credibility of the appellant and his sister  made  by  the  respondent.
    Unusually, I consider it appropriate to consider first  the  challenges
    to the credibility of the sister given that much of the evidence  given
    to the various clinicians was either given  or  mediated  through  her.
    That is particularly so in the case of the report of Dr Persaud.

36. Mr Melvin made a number of challenges  to  her  testimony.   In  cross-
    examination she explained that they had waited  for  the  appellant  to
    claim asylum seeking illegal advice first and that he  had  been  in  a
    very bad state when he arrived and was not quite able to recognise her.
     She said that he had not registered with a GP immediately  as  it  had
    been difficult and the first two GPs to whom they  had  approached  had
    refused to take him onto their register.  Asked  how  he  was  able  to
    answer hundreds of questions in his interview if he was  not  well  she
    said that even when he would answer the question he  was  troubled  and
    had also mixed up a lot of his answers.  She said also  he  had  become
    worse after being in immigration detention; she had explained  this  to
    Dr Persaud to whom she had said what her brother  had  told  her.   She
    said that she did not recall if she  had  told  Dr  Persaud  about  her
    brother's initial claim for asylum in France nor whether she  had  told
    him about the appellant using an agent  to  return  to  Sri  Lanka  and
    working in a shop  for  a  while.   And  she  said  that  most  of  the
    discussion revolved around the appellant's state of health.

37. The appellant's sister said that she told Dr Persaud that  her  brother
    does wake up screaming in the night  but  she  was  not  aware  of  any
    attempt by the brother to attempt to harm himself.  She did not  recall
    whether she had said that to Dr Persaud.

38. The appellant's sister said he had not worked since his arrival in  the
    United Kingdom and, when it was put to her that the GP's  evidence  was
    that he was working she said she did not know how  this  had  occurred.
    She did not know how the information about him working stacking shelves
    in a shop had arisen.

39. Asked about continuing treatment she said that she takes her brother to
    the Oxleas Centre every two to three weeks; that he was not talking but
    when he does he does not go into details.  In response to my  questions
    the appellant's sister said that he  had  not  told  her  any  of  what
    happened to him until after he had come to  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    said that her mother had not told her either and that she has spoken to
    her mother about this after the brother had arrived and  she  had  told
    him all about it.

40. I do not accept that the appellant's sister's evidence  was  selective.
    I draw no inferences from her inability to  recall  certain  pieces  of
    information specifically the nature of a conversation which took  place
    between her and Dr Persaud more than two years ago.   Her  concern  for
    her brother was clear in her evidence; it is also clear  from  what  is
    recorded by the several different health professionals  who  have  seen
    her and her brother together, not counting Dr Persaud.   Her  statement
    that she was concerned more with her brother's state of health  in  the
    discussion with Dr Persaud has the ring  of  truth  about  it.   Whilst
    there may be differences in the account of the brother who  joined  the
    LTTE, and his whereabouts, she has been consistent;  if  there  is  any
    inconsistency on this it is in the accounts given by the  appellant  at
    sections 6.6 and 4.1 of his screening interview.

41. There is, I consider, no proper basis for the  submission  made  by  Mr
    Melvin that the sister had grossly exaggerated  the  symptoms  and  the
    evidence.  I consider, having read in detail the various  letters  from
    the health professionals that, Dr Persaud's report apart, there  is  no
    indication of exaggeration on the part of the appellant's sister and it
    would appear that the other professionals were at various times able to
    get a clearer picture of the appellant's state of health  than  was  Dr
    Persaud.  There is in reality insufficient evidence to  show  that  the
    appellant and his sister have been able  to  consistently  present  and
    feign a degree of mental illness such as to result in  a  diagnosis  of
    PTSD and major depression such as to mislead  several  clinicians  into
    reaching the same diagnosis.

42. There does, I accept, appear to be a degree  of  confusion  as  to  how
    often the appellant goes to the Oxleas Centre but,  as  Mr  Paramjorthy
    submitted, it is clear that it is not just Dr De Backer who sees or has
    seen the appellant; there are clearly a number of others  involved  and
    viewing the evidence as a whole, I am satisfied  that  there  has  been
    regular attendance albeit that the  therapy  appears  not  to  be  very
    successful.  I do not however draw any inferences from the fact that it
    has been suggested that the appellant will not be able to benefit  from
    any treatment in the form of talking therapy or CBT as he is still in a
    state of anxiety.  That is not, as Mr  Melvin  submitted,  holding  the
    United Kingdom to ransom; that is simply hyperbole.  All that is  meant
    is, as is often the case, in the  opinion  of  a  clinician  commencing
    therapy would require somebody to relive and go over what had  happened
    to them in the past and that this is more likely to  cause  harm  as  a
    result if the person is not yet in a settled position where this can be
    undertaken.  In  my  experience  of  numerous  cases  involving  mental
    health, that is the consistent approach of psychiatric professionals.

43. I do, however, have some concerns about Dr Persaud's report insofar  as
    it touches on the risk of suicide and suicidal ideation.  Informing the
    view that there is a risk to the appellant of self-harm and/or suicide,
    it stands aside from the other reports and,  taken  together  with  the
    addendum report, presents a somewhat different diagnosis  in  terms  of
    how the appellant presents. That said, this  has  to  be  seen  in  the
    context of the purposes behind the different letters and reports;  only
    Dr Persaud was asked to opine about fitness to give evidence and/or  to
    instruct solicitors. He was also, it appears,  asked  to  consider  the
    threat of suicide. In the circumstances, I do  not  consider  that  any
    adverse inferences can be drawn from the differences; in any event, the
    assessment is in part a snapshot of how the appellant  presented  at  a
    point in time. It is clear viewing the reports as a whole that  he  has
    alternately improved and  deteriorated,  albeit  the  trajectory  being
    downwards.

44. That said, what the evidence of those at the Oxleas Trust does  not  do
    is offer any commentary on whether the diagnosis of PTSD  and/or  major
    depression would affect the appellant's ability to recall what occurred
    in Sri Lanka during his interview.  They were not asked so to  do.   Dr
    Persaud's report makes little or no  comment  on  this  other  than  to
    observe that the  period  of  detention  may  have  re-traumatised  the
    appellant.

45. There is some merit in Mr Melvin's submission that the  mental  illness
    appears to have manifested itself significantly after  the  substantive
    asylum interview which took place on 8 November 2013.   It  is  in  the
    nature of psychiatric conditions that they fluctuate, can become  worse
    and also can improve.  It is unfortunate that, despite what was said in
    JL China, there is no indication that the  appellant's  representatives
    sought to direct Dr Persaud's attention to the issue  of  whether  PTSD
    and/or depression was capable of affecting the appellant's  ability  to
    recall or to answer questions.  All that Dr Persaud says at page 9E  is
    that:-

         "Although he was able to participate in interviews last year it  is
         not unusual that his mental health  has  considerably  deteriorated
         over the past year owing  to  a  continuous  and  genuine  fear  of
         returning  to  Sri  Lanka,  the  ongoing   uncertainties   in   the
         immigration case,  and  the  fact  that  he  simply  has  not  been
         receiving the treatment he requires."

    The appellant's accounts

46. The account given by the appellant in his screening interview on 20 May
    2013 and what he said in  his  substantive  interview  conducted  on  8
    November 2013 are somewhat different.  The information  volunteered  in
    the screening interview is set out at 4.1.  The appellant said that his
    problems had started in 2008; that he was involved with the LTTE and he
    had been arrested by the army in 2008;  that  he  helped  the  LTTE  to
    recruit people and arranged meetings; and, he had  been  involved  with
    the LTTE for two years.  He said he had not received any training  from
    them.  He also stated he had no medical problems  [3.1]  but  at  [4.3]
    mentions a letter from  the  hospital  which  is  consistent  with  his
    substantive interview at  Q47  to  48  where  he  said  he  was  taking
    medication for body pain in Sri Lanka.   I do not consider such a minor
    inconsistency casts doubt on the appellant's  credibility.   It  is  of
    note that the respondent did not pursue  in  any  detail  any  apparent
    inconsistencies between the  account  of  his  activities  between  the
    screening interview and the substantive asylum interview.

47. Turning to the asylum interview, I do note that it is apparent that the
    appellant did say he had suffered mental ill health in Sri Lanka.  That
    is confirmed  by  the  letter  from  the  general  hospital  in  Jaffna
    indicating that he had been of unsound mind.  Little, however, turns on
    that letter.  I do, however, note that although the appellant said that
    he was being treated for depression in Sri Lanka, this does not  appear
    to have been followed up  beyond  what  he  said.   There  are  however
    indicators in response to questions 59, 107 to 108 and  the  difficulty
    in describing his home area (Q132 to Q142), which is not in dispute, as
    well as confusion at Q144 to 147 that the appellant  was  to  a  degree
    confused during his interview.  That is consistent with  the  diagnosis
    of PTSD and depression albeit  that  his  condition  did  not  manifest
    itself in the acute form which it does now.  There are other indicators
    where the appellant expresses his fear (Q196, 197 and again Q337, Q334)
    and the observation at Q378 that he was not in a state to think.

48. In assessing the appellant's account, I have adopted the approach taken
    in the refusal letter whereby the specific incidents  and  arrests  are
    dealt with sequentially.

Arrest in 2007

49. I do not consider it reasonable  to  draw  inferences  adverse  to  the
    appellant from his failure to make statements about the  conditions  in
    the detention centre.  It was open to the Secretary of  State  to  have
    asked him that but she did not do so.  I do  not  draw  any  inferences
    either given the lapse of time, from the failure to provide any medical
    report.  There is no indication that the appellant  bears  scars  as  a
    result of his ill-treatment nor  is  there  any  suggestion  that  they
    would, after this lapse of time, be determinative.  There is,  however,
    no explanation for the discrepancy between  the  appellant's  statement
    that he was involved with the LTTE and the failure to mention  this  in
    his interview.  Whilst they are not directly inconsistent and the point
    was not put to  the  appellant  during  interview,  it  is  a  concern.
    Insofar as the respondent submits that  the  details  of  treatment  is
    externally consistent with the country information it is not adequately
    explained.

Arrest in 2008

50. Whilst the absence of any report or reference to a bombing in  2008  is
    neither determinative nor conclusive, there is a concern  arising  from
    an apparent inconsistency between the appellant  helping  the  LTTE  to
    recruit people and arranging meetings  as  set  out  in  the  screening
    interview. It is not per se inconsistent  with  the  account  of  being
    arrested or detained. It is possible to reconcile the account with  his
    statement in the screening interview that he was arrested  due  to  his
    connections with the LTTE as it is unclear if those were  perceived  or
    due to connections with his brother who he said is connected  with  the
    LTTE.   This issue was not pursued, and there are  significant  dangers
    in attaching weight to ambiguities or lack of detail in what  was  said
    in a screening interview.

51. I do not consider the lack of detail  can  properly  give  rise  to  an
    adverse inference; it was open to the Secretary of State to  seek  more
    information.  Bearing in mind the incident was five years  earlier  the
    appellant was able to state that he and another were arrested (Q181) he
    was held for about ten days, sand he had only been questioned about the
    one incident involving a bomb.  The appellant also  said  (Q194)  about
    what he told those interrogating him and the assumptions they had made.
     He also said that he had made no admissions, that  he  had  difficulty
    recalling the date other than it was in 2008.  It is also notable  that
    in response to Q196 the  appellant  stated  "at  this  time  I  do  not
    remember anything out of fear.  I was in a state of  confusion".   This
    is not, in any event, a failure to give relevant detail.

Return to Sri Lanka

52. The respondent noted a discrepancy  between  the  length  of  time  the
    appellant had said it took him to travel from India to  Sri  Lanka  and
    how long he had stayed in India.  In his screening interview he said it
    was two days; in his substantive interview he said he left on 24  July,
    stayed in India for ten days and arrived in Sri Lanka on 6  July  2011.
    There is a clear error in the respondent's assessment of  the  evidence
    in that the appellant said that he arrived in Sri  Lanka  on  6  August
    2011 not 6 July.  Further, had he stayed  in  India  for  ten  days  as
    claimed, that would have  taken  him  to  3  or  4  August  making  the
    assessment that it would have taken six days to go by a fishing boat an
    error.  The respondent submitted that  the  return  was  in  any  event
    entirely inconsistent with the claim to have been arrested in 2007  and
    2008 and to have been detained and mistreated by the authorities.  This
    point was put to the  appellant  (Q110)  where  he  said  that  he  was
    frightened if he was arrested at the airport so he arranged  to  go  to
    India and then to Sri Lanka.  He entered with the help of fishermen and
    there is no indication that he passed through any official  checkpoint.
    I consider that this is a rational explanation for his  return  and  is
    not  addressed  in  the  refusal  letter  or  indeed  in  Mr   Melvin's
    submissions.

Arrest in 2012

53. The respondent's observation that there  is  an  inconsistency  between
    what the appellant said in response to Q228 and what he said at Q231 is
    more apparent than real.  The appellant said "I don't know.  EPDP  were
    sending fax to Vanni".

         "Q230    Do you mean that EPDP were coming  to  the  shop  to  send
                faxes?

                Yes

         Q231 How do you know that they were EPDP?

                I don't know they said that they were EPDP.   They  arrested
                somebody else who came to send faxes.

         Q232 So do you mean that these people came into the shop  and  told
                you that they were EPDP?

                They didn't say but the people who were working  there  said
                it.

54. Viewing these questions and answers as a whole, I do not consider  that
    this is inconsistent when the appellant said "they said that they  were
    EPDP" the initial " they" could refer to other people which is what  he
    clarified in response to Q232.  There is therefore  no  merit  in  this
    submission that there are inconsistencies in this part of the  account.



Colombo

55. There is a degree of confusion in the appellant's  responses  regarding
    the sequence of contacting an agent and travelling to Colombo (Q257  to
    Q260).  There is no inconsistency between the appellant deciding to  go
    to Colombo and him being asked to wait a while; there is no  indication
    that he was told to wait  in  his  home  area.   The  account  of  what
    occurred in the shop in Colombo which resulted in where he was  working
    which resulted in an arrest is, I consider, somewhat confused.   It  is
    notable that although he was unable  to  remember  the  dates  when  he
    worked there he was able currently to give  the  name  and  address  of
    where he was working  (Q281  to  282).   In  particular,  the  apparent
    statement at Q270 that the human rights organisations arrested his boss
    and him.  There is, I consider, no inferences that can be fairly  drawn
    from the appellant's clarification of questions put  to  him  at  least
    given the length of time that the interview had taken by this point.

56. Contrary to the submission at [93] of  the  refusal  letter  I  do  not
    consider that the account given in response to numerous  questions  put
    could be as vague nor is it internally inconsistent significant  detail
    was given.  Similarly, I do not consider  that  the  appellant  can  be
    criticised for failing to give details which were not sought about  the
    conditions in which he was held.  He was asked about how he was treated
    and no rational basis is given for the supposition that somebody  would
    volunteer details about the poor conditions [94].

Exit to the UK

57. The respondent submits that there are inconsistencies in the account as
    part of the appellant's journey.  I do not consider it is reasonable to
    draw inferences adverse to the appellant  from  his  changing  evidence
    between Q326 and Q327 about when he was supposed to leave Colombo as he
    himself had volunteered the information.

Activities in the United Kingdom

58. I am satisfied in light of the evidence given by the appellant's sister
    and of what he said in his interview, that the appellant did attend the
    events in London.  I do,  however,  not  attach  great  weight  to  his
    attendance of these demonstrations.

Section 8, Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of claimants, etc.) Act 2004

59. I accept that the appellant entered the United Kingdom  using  a  false
    passport and that this damages his credibility to an extent  but  I  do
    not, consider, viewing the evidence as a whole,  that  this  damage  is
    material, given the other evidence.  I do  not  consider  that  Section
    8(2)(a), (b) and (c) are engaged given for the reasons above I  do  not
    consider the accounts to be contradictory and inconsistent or that  his
    actions are designed to mislead or conceal information.

60. I have considered the explanation proffered by the  appellant's  sister
    as to why he did not claim asylum.  I consider that this was due to his
    health as she perceived it and the steps taken to allow him to  make  a
    claim are a sufficient explanation for the delay in making the claim.

61. The appellant's sister's evidence does little to advance  the  evidence
    as she was not in Sri Lanka at the time.  Further,  she  was  not  made
    aware of any of the incidents contemporaneously, only becoming aware of
    what had happened after her brother had arrived in the United  Kingdom.
    I accept her evidence on that point and also that she  then  questioned
    her mother about this once she became aware of the problem.

62. In conclusion, I considered that the  respondent's  challenges  to  the
    appellant's account do not, when viewing the evidence as a whole,  show
    that his account is incredible or implausible.  Whilst I accept, as  is
    shown in GJ, that there is less activity with regard to LTTE supporters
    or their perceived supporters, there is evidence that arrests do occur.
     Interestingly, the last incident appears to have been provoked because
    of the nature of the photographs, presumably  potentially  damaging  to
    the Sri Lankan State, were discovered.

63. Whilst I note Mr Melvin's submission that it was not accepted that  the
    appellant had in fact returned to Sri Lanka from France, I am satisfied
    for the reasons set out above that the account of his return  and  what
    occurred thereafter is correct.

64. In light also of GJ, I draw no inferences from the fact  the  appellant
    was able to Sri Lanka with the assistance of an agent nor do I consider
    that there is any basis in the submission that because the  appellant's
    mother received support from relatives  abroad  that  she  was  somehow
    unable to fund, as is claimed, the payment of  agents  to  smuggle  the
    appellant out of Sri Lanka.  There is, in any event, no indication that
    he left using his own  passport  or  that  he  had  obtained  an  entry
    clearance to any country.  Accordingly, bearing  in  mind  the  account
    that the appellant is suffering from PTSD and major depression I accept
    that there is good reason why he did  not  give  evidence  on  his  own
    behalf.  I find that viewing the evidence  as  a  whole  his  story  is
    consistent with the background evidence and is plausible.  Accordingly,
    I make the following findings of fact:

      1) that the appellant was arrested and detained in 2007 and  2008,  in
         connection with suspicion of involvement with LTTE  bombings;  that
         he was on  each  occasion  detained,  tortured  and  released  upon
         payment of bribes with assistance of a lawyer and upon  payment  of
         money from his mother;

      2) that the appellant fled to France with the assistance of an  agent,
         claimed asylum and, after his  rejection,  returned  to  Sri  Lanka
         where he was again arrested, detained  and  tortured  in  2012  and
         again later in Colombo where he had fled  from  his  home  area  of
         Jaffna.  I accept also that he was put on reporting  conditions  by
         the police and did not adhere to them.   I accept also the evidence
         that the police have visited his mother enquiring about him,  given
         that I am satisfied that the rest of his account is reliable.

65. Having made these findings of fact I must consider what  is  likely  to
    happen to the appellant on return.  In doing so I  apply  the  guidance
    given in GJ and Others in particular at points (7) to (9).  It  is  not
    submitted that he falls to be excluded from protection  by  application
    of Article 1F or otherwise, nor am I  satisfied  in  the  light  of  my
    findings that this would be so.

66. On the basis of the facts as accepted, it appears that whatever reason,
    the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  maintain  an  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant and perceive him, rightly or wrongly, to be a threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka. It is also apparent that, given his failure  to
    comply with reporting restrictions, that this interest  was  maintained
    long after the ceasefire.  There is also, given his failure  to  comply
    with those restrictions, a real risk that he would be on a stop list.

67. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that there is a real risk that the
    appellant will be arrested on return to Sri Lanka and will  again  face
    ill-treatment of sufficient severity to constitute persecution  and  to
    engage article 3 of the Human Rights Convention. I am satisfied that is
    on account of perceived or actual political opinion.

68. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant is a refugee,  and
    that his removal from the United Kingdom would  be  in  breach  of  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under both the Refugee  Convention  and/or
    article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  I therefore allow the appeal
    on those grounds.   It follows from the finding that he  is  a  refugee
    that he is not entitled to Humanitarian Protection.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights
    grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 1 February 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07449/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 March 2016                      |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
                                     P A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Benfield, Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant promulgated on 3 December 2015  in  which
    she dismissed his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State
    made on 8 September 2014 to refuse his claim for asylum and  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom.

 2. The first appeal against the Secretary of State's decision was heard by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar on 28 November 2014 who  dismissed  it
    in a decision issued on 30 March 2015. That decision was set  aside  on
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to
    be reheard de novo.

 3. The appellant's case is that he is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka,  of  Tamil
    ethnicity, originally from Jaffna.  His brother had been  a  member  of
    the LTTE.  Following  a  bomb  explosion  near  where  he  worked,  the
    appellant was questioned and when it became apparent his brother was in
    the  LTTE  he  was  arrested  accused  of  involvement  with  the  bomb
    exposition, detained and  tortured.  Although  released  he  was  again
    detained, imprisoned  and  tortured  and  after  his  release  in  2009
    travelled to Colombo. With the assistance of an agent he  travelled  to
    France where he claimed asylum. His claim was refused and  he  returned
    to Sri Lanka.  He was again arrested in 2012  and  detained  and  later
    released through bribery.  He then went to live  in  Colombo  where  he
    obtained employment and was  again  arrested,  detained  and  tortured.
    After his release was obtained arrangements were made for him to  leave
    Sri Lanka using a false passport and a false name.  He  then  travelled
    to the United Kingdom and has lived  with  his  sister  since.  He  has
    attended demonstrations against the Sri Lankan Prime Minister's visits.
     This, it is said, had led to visit by the authorities and other groups
    to his mother in Sri Lanka enquiring as to his whereabouts.

 4. The appellant claimed asylum and a screening interview took place on 20
    May 2013.  A substantive asylum interview was held on 8 November 2013.

 5. The appellant also, it is said, suffers from a number of mental  health
    problems including depression and PTSD and to be in a  catatonic  state
    rendering him incapable of looking after himself.  It is also said that
    he is at risk of committing suicide on return to Sri Lanka.  The mental
    illness is said to have arisen from what he suffered in Sri Lanka.

The Respondent's Case

 6. The respondent's case  is  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  8
    September 2014. In summary, although accepting that the appellant is  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka and is a Tamil, she did not accept the account  of
    involvement with the LTTE or that his brother had joined  the  LTTE  or
    that  he  had  been  arrested,  detained  and  ill-treated  given   the
    substantial  number  of  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies   in   his
    accounts. Other accepting that he obtained asylum in France she did not
    accept the account of his return to Sri Lanka nor did  she  accept  the
    account of arrest in 2012 or of his arrest and detention and torture in
    Colombo, again given discrepancies and inconsistencies in his  account.
    She did not accept either that he had travelled to the  United  Kingdom
    in the manner claimed.

 7. Accepting that the appellant may have attended  various  demonstrations
    in London she rejected the reasons for him so doing.

 8. The respondent drew inferences adverse to the appellant for failing  to
    claim asylum on arrival and to the use of false documents  and  refused
    his claim.

 9. The respondent was not satisfied either that his removal  would  be  in
    breach of Articles 2, 3 or 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention  or  that
    there was any basis on which he should be granted  discretionary  leave
    to remain.

The Appeal

10. The appellant did not give  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge as he was  unable  to  do  so  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  a
    psychiatric report dated 27 November 2014 prepared by Dr Raj Persaud, a
    consultant psychiatrist.  The Tribunal did, however, hear evidence from
    the appellant's sister and submissions from both representatives.

11. Having set out in considerable detail the appellant's sister's evidence
    [5] and the report of Dr Persaud [11] the judge found:-

      i) That there was a significant discrepancy in the medical evidence in
         that Dr Persaud had said  that  the  appellant's  detention  at  an
         immigration removal centre in Dover had "tipped him over  the  edge
         in terms of his psychiatric disorder" [13] yet  the  appellant  had
         been able four months after his  release  to  give  an  account  of
         himself and to speak unhindered in his asylum interview in contrast
         to the presentation he gave on 20 November 2014 a  year  later,  it
         not being credible  that  a  detention  in  May  2013  led  to  the
         appellant's catatonic state given he had  not  been  in  difficulty
         later;  that  whilst  the  appellant  might  be  suffering  from  a
         psychiatric disorder she was not  satisfied  it  had  arisen  as  a
         result of mistreatment in Sri Lanka as alleged,  if  at  all  [14];
         that given the inconsistencies and discrepancy in his account, that
         the appellant had given a credible account of what happened to  him
         in Sri Lanka and she attached little weight to his  claim  to  have
         been detained and treated his application as mistreated [15];

     ii) That had he been of any interest to the Sri Lankan  authorities  he
         would have been arrested on his arrival in 2012 and certainly would
         not have been able to travel out of Sri Lanka as he claims that  he
         did in 2013 [16] and that he had fabricated his  claim  for  asylum
         [17];

    iii) That despite the recommendation of Dr Persaud that there be  urgent
         treatment this had not been put  into  motion  since  she  was  not
         satisfied that he required the treatment recommended as alleged  or
         that he was as ill as was claimed before Dr Persaud [18];

     iv) Whilst there is some form of psychiatric disorder he could  receive
         treatment for  this  in  Sri  Lanka  as  it  would  appear  he  had
         previously done so [19] and that it would not amount to inhuman  or
         degrading treatment or a breach of his rights to return him to  Sri
         Lanka [19];

      v) That it would not be a breach of Article 8 to remove the  appellant
         to Sri Lanka and that there would be appropriate medical safeguards
         in place to ensure his safe return there, it not being accepted  he
         represents a suicide risk, absent up-to-date medical evidence  that
         the appellant is as ill as was  described  by  Dr  Persaud  a  year
         earlier [21].

12. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) The judge's approach to the medical evidence was flawed in that the
         judge appeared to conclude that the appellant  had  fabricated  his
         condition and was not as ill as claimed,  yet  found  that  he  was
         suffering from some psychiatric disorder  [2];  and,  that  it  was
         irrational to set aside  the  entirety  of  Dr  Persaud's  clinical
         findings on the basis that the appellant was able to participate in
         an interview on 8 November 2013 yet was unwell and unable to engage
         with Dr Persaud over a year later;

     ii) The judge had erred in respect of her findings in  respect  of  the
         appellant's sur place activities [4], failing to assess the risk on
         return due to his involvement with PTTE;

    iii) The judge had failed properly  to  consider  whether  there  was  a
         sufficiency of treatment  for  the  appellant's  condition  on  his
         return to Sri Lanka given what was said in GJ at [441] to [456];

     iv) That the judge had failed to give proper  reasons  as  to  why  the
         appellant was not  credible,  he  had  provided  no  rationale  for
         accepting the respondent's challenges to credibility.

13. When the matter came before me it was conceded by  Mr  Duffy  that  the
    judge had failed to make proper findings with respect to the sur  place
    activities.  He conceded also that it would be difficult to support the
    judge's  findings  with  respect  to  the  report  of  Dr  Persaud  and
    consequently as to the appellant's mental health.

14. I was satisfied that there was no basis on which I  could  properly  go
    behind this concession and  that  in  the  circumstances,  given  these
    concessions, that I was satisfied that there was an  error  of  law  in
    that the judge had failed to assess the risks to the appellant  of  his
    sur place activities.  I was satisfied also that the judge  had  erred,
    for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal, in  her  approach  to
    the evidence of Dr Persaud.  Accordingly, it follows that the  decision
    must be set aside.

15. Given the nature of these errors, particularly the findings with regard
    to mental health, I am satisfied that it would be necessary  to  remake
    the decision in its entirety, making fresh findings of fact.

16. Given that there will be no live evidence from the appellant and  there
    would be limited from his sister, I consider that it is appropriate  to
    retain the matter within the Upper Tribunal and for the  matter  to  be
    remade within the Upper Tribunal.

17. I therefore give the following directions:-

      i) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  an
         error of law and I set it aside;

     ii) The appellant is directed to produce and serve any further  medical
         evidence upon which it is sought to  rely,  dealing  in  particular
         with any follow-up from the appellant's  referral  for  psychiatric
         assistance by his GP made on 29 November 2014;

    iii) Any new material must be served 10 working  days  before  the  next
         hearing.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

