
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07515/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Manchester CJC                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Papers                            |On 07 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     HKM
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                                  DECISION

 1. This matter has been settled by consent between the parties who further
    agreed that the appeal could be determined without further hearing. The
    agreement between the parties, communicated by way of  email  from  the
    Respondent dated the 20th  May  2019,  is  that  the  Appellant  should
    succeed in his appeal on protection grounds.


 2. The salient facts as found by the First-tier  Tribunal  were  that  the
    Appellant is a 'Bidoon' from Kuwait. The matter in issue in the  onward
    appeal was whether the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find, by its
    decision  of  the  24th  September  2018,  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    documented - as opposed to  undocumented-  Bidoon  without  giving  the
    parties an opportunity to address it on that matter. As the  Respondent
    now accepts, it is not the Respondent's case  that  the  Appellant  was
    documented.  On the contrary, it is accepted that he was  undocumented.
    Given the  binding  country  guidance  in  NM  (documented/undocumented
    Bidoon -risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356, the Respondent accepts  that
    the proper course would be for the appeal to be allowed  on  protection
    grounds.



    Anonymity

 3. The Appellant is a refugee. As such I am satisfied,  having had  regard
    to the guidance in  the  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders, that it would be appropriate  to  make  an  order  in
    accordance with Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 in the following terms:


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decisions


 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and it is set aside.


 5. The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

 6. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                              [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                26th May 2019



