

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07713/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court    |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 3 February 2015                   |On 6 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     IA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Trevelyan, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity order

    1. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in  relation  to
       the appellant because of the nature of the case  and  the  fact  the
       appellant has two dependent children.  It is appropriate to  make  a
       similar order in the Upper Tribunal under Procedure  Rule  14(1)  to
       prohibit the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to  lead
       members of the public to identify the appellant or her children.  To
       give effect to this order, the appellant is to be referred to as IA.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    2. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the decision and
       reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal that  was
       promulgated on 19 November 2014.  Judge  Hawden-Beal  dismissed  the
       appeal against the immigration decisions of  18  September  2014  to
       remove her to Nigeria.  The appellant had overstayed and her  asylum
       and human rights claims had been refused.

    3. Mr Trevelyan relied on the grounds of appeal (which were the grounds
       of application)  and  his  skeleton  argument.   Before  considering
       either document I must comment on the fact that early in the  course
       of his submissions in relation to whether there was an  error  on  a
       point of law in Judge Hawden-Beal's decision and reasons  statement,
       Mr Trevelyan had to admit that he did not have and never had seen  a
       copy of the statement against which the  appeal  was  brought.   His
       instructing solicitors had not provided a copy despite his  repeated
       requests.  This makes it somewhat surprising that Mr Trevelyan makes
       reference to specific paragraphs of the statement  in  his  skeleton
       argument.  I accept that Mr Trevelyan did not intend to mislead  the
       Tribunal  and  his  apology  for  any  inconvenience  is   accepted.
       However, it was no way to proceed.  In the interest  of  justice,  I
       provided him with a copy of the  statement  and  gave  him  time  to
       prepare.

    4. The grounds of appeal focus on the single  issue  of  whether  Judge
       Hawden-Beal properly considered the fact that one of the appellant's
       children had received  substantial  medical  treatment  relating  to
       burns and that she  remained  under  medical  supervision.   It  was
       argued that the judge had not had proper regard to the evidence  and
       therefore her findings in relation to the private  and  family  life
       rights of the appellant and  her  children  had  not  been  properly
       assessed.  The  grounds  took  particular  issue  with  two  points.
       First, the judge had misread the medical evidence and had  concluded
       that future treatment was not likely even though the consultant  had
       indicated  that  future  treatment  was  likely  to  be   necessary.
       Secondly, the judge  had  failed  to  take  proper  account  of  the
       appellant's inability to fund treatment in  Nigeria,  even  assuming
       such treatment would be available.

    5. Mr Trevelyan amplified the grounds of appeal and made the  following
       additional submissions.   He  alleged  that  Judge  Hawden-Beal  had
       conflated issues relating to article 3 and article 8  of  the  human
       rights convention.  He drew this from the fact that at the start  of
       paragraph 34 the judge made reference to the case of N v SSHD [2005]
       UKHL 31.  The case of N clearly relates to article 3 issues and  not
       to private and family life rights.

    6. To support the submission relating to whether the judge had  misread
       or misapplied the medical evidence, Mr Trevelyan took me to the  two
       letters from the consultant doctor, Mr  Bruce  Philp,  of  15  April
       and18 October 2014.  Mr Trevelyan admitted that  he  only  had  poor
       copies but said that the letters clearly show  that  the  consultant
       had advised that it was more likely than not  that  the  appellant's
       child would require further reconstructive surgery.   The  fact  the
       judge minimised the likelihood of future  treatment  undermined  her
       reasoning.  In addition to these  points  relating  to  the  medical
       evidence, Mr Trevelyan also argued that the fact that there  was  no
       timescale regarding such surgery  was  immaterial  since  the  judge
       should have been concerned with assessing the best interests of  the
       child.

    7. As to the final issue, whether the appellant would be able to afford
       similar treatment in Nigeria, Mr Trevelyan admitted that no evidence
       of her financial ability or likely cost had  been  provided  to  the
       First-tier  Tribunal.   In  addition,  he  acknowledged   that   the
       appellant and her children  could  not  expect  to  benefit  from  a
       circular argument that they  are  entitled  to  free  NHS  treatment
       indefinitely.  The National  Health  Service  (Charges  to  Overseas
       Visitors) Regulations 2011 establish the family's entitlement whilst
       being dependents of a student (as  they  were)  and  whilst  seeking
       asylum.   Otherwise  they  have  no  entitlement.    There   is   no
       explanation  as  to  how  the  appellant  would  pay  for  continued
       treatment in  the  UK,  and  as  identified  by  Maurice-Kay  LJ  at
       paragraph 9 of AE (Algeria) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 653,

"Moreover, I do not consider that it would be inappropriate for  the  future
cost and duration of Maya's treatment and care in this  country  to  play  a
part  in  the  balancing  exercise  as  matters  relating  to  the  economic
wellbeing of this country, given the strains on the public finances."

    8. Of course, the failure of the appellant to provide relevant evidence
       means that this ground must fail.

    9. I turn to the other issues.  As I indicated  to  Mr  Trevelyan  when
       discussing his complaint that Judge Hawden-Beal conflated article  3
       and article 8 issues by reference  to  N,  his  argument  is  wholly
       misguided.  Not only was the judge merely putting the article 8 case
       in context, she did so to ensure that the  different  approaches  to
       each right were identified.  As I pointed out, the Court  of  Appeal
       has done exactly the same (albeit with more eloquence) in the recent
       judgment of GS (India) and others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40  and  as
       Mr Trevelyan admitted he would have no similar complaint with regard
       to the Court of Appeal's approach.

   10. As to his complaint regarding the judge's  reading  of  the  medical
       evidence, as I indicated to Mr Trevelyan both he and the  author  of
       the grounds of appeal are seeking to read more into the consultant's
       comments than is  there.   The  consultant  indicates  that  further
       reconstructive surgery is often necessary in children and  therefore
       it remains a possibility for the appellant's child.  However, no one
       would know what surgery would be required until the child had grown.
        There is nothing in what the  judge  found  that  contradicts  that
       conclusion.  It is further of note that the judge uses  the  wording
       employed by the consultant in the  latest  letter  which  is  highly
       conditional.  The idea that the evidence shows that  future  surgery
       was more likely than not to be required or that the judge  minimised
       the child's condition is nonsense and a deliberate attempt  to  read
       into the medical evidence something which is not there.

   11. The fact that I am satisfied that the judge has shown that  she  was
       fully cognisant with the medical evidence means that I find no error
       on a point of law in her assessment of the  child's  medical  needs.
       The judge clearly had these in mind when assessing the child's  best
       interests.  As indicated by the Supreme  Court  in  Zoumbas  v  SSHD
       [2013] UKSC 74 and by the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) v SSHD
       [2014] EWCA Civ 874, the best interests of a child are to be weighed
       in the balancing exercise when considering  whether  an  immigration
       decision that will in full or in part require a child to  leave  the
       UK is reasonable or proportionate.  It is clear  from  the  decision
       and reasons statement that Judge Hawden-Beal undertook this approach
       and there is nothing to undermine her findings.

   12. I mention that permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that
       Judge Hawden-Beal had failed to have proper regard to  the  guidance
       in AE (Algeria) in that she did not have  regard  to  the  different
       approaches required by article 3 and  article  8  in  medical  cases
       involving children.  As I have indicated, I do not find there is any
       such error, the reference to N  in  paragraph  34  merely  being  to
       identify the contrast.  This is a case where  the  medical  evidence
       was not sufficient to show that removal would undermine the physical
       or moral wellbeing of the child and therefore  would  not  meet  the
       article 8 test,  which  is  what  Judge  Hawden-Beal  identified  in
       paragraphs 32 and 33. As I have  already  indicated,  the  Court  of
       Appeal in GS (India) also draws parallels between the thresholds for
       engaging articles 3 and 8 on medical grounds and identifies that  to
       succeed on article 8 alone would require some additional significant
       factor to be established.  That is, in effect, all that can be drawn
       from the guidance in AE (Algeria),  therein  the  additional  factor
       being the need to take account of the young age of  the  person  who
       has medical needs.  However, it is clear that Judge Hawden-Beal  had
       regard for the child's age throughout.

   13. As the grounds were obviously wholly without  merit,  there  was  no
       need to hear from Mr McVeety in detail.  The appeal fails as none of
       the grounds establishes that Judge Hawden-Beal's statement  contains
       any error on a point of law.



Decision

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed because  there  is
no legal error in the decision and reasons statement of First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hawden-Beal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

[NB The Upper Tribunal has made an anonymity order as set out  in  paragraph
1 above.]




                                   Signed   Date 6 February 2015


                                   Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
