
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07953/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 13th March 2015                  |On 19th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                            Mr Hamid Adam Sabeel
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Madubuike, AJO Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant claims to be a national of Sudan born on the 1  January
       1983. He appeals with permission[1] the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge E.M.M Smith)[2] to dismiss  his  appeal  against  the
       Respondent's decisions to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant
       to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999[3]. That  decision  had
       followed from rejection of the  Appellant's  claim  to  international
       protection.

    2. The matter in issue before the First-tier Tribunal  was  whether  the
       Appellant is a national of Sudan. It was accepted that he is a member
       of the Zaghawa tribe, but not that this necessarily placed  as  being
       from Darfur. It was common ground that if he  could  show  it  to  be
       reasonably likely that he was Sudanese, his appeal would be  allowed.
       In the refusal letter of 19th  September  2014  the  Respondent  gave
       numerous reasons for rejecting the Appellant's assertions  about  his
       nationality.  In  summary  it  was  considered  that  much   of   the
       Appellant's knowledge about Sudan was inaccurate or incorrect.

    3. On the morning of the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
       Appellant's representative informed the Tribunal that some  important
       evidence had come to light late in the day.  This evidence  consisted
       of:

             a) The Appellant's High School certificate issued in Sudan;

             b) The Sudanese identity card of his brother;

             c) The Sudanese identity card of his paternal cousin.

       These documents had been emailed to the Appellant directly  and  were
       available on his mobile telephone.  Copies had been  printed  by  the
       solicitors and had been faxed to court.   Mr Madubuike requested that
       the case be adjourned, or at least stood down to later in the day  to
       enable the documents to be translated.

    4. The Tribunal declined to adjourn or set the matter back. The  reasons
       for doing so are set out at paragraph 14 of the determination:

           "It transpired that in fact  the  documents  had  been  sent  by
           telephone by the appellant's brother who lives in Sudan.  Whilst
           I did not inspect the telephone the appellant said the documents
           actually relate to his brother. They were neither the  originals
           nor copies and had  only  been  captured  by  telephone.  I  was
           satisfied that even if translated  they  were  of  no  probative
           value. The respondent would be unable to assess the integrity of
           each document and they had nothing to  do  with  supporting  the
           appellant's case".

       The Tribunal proceeded to hear, and dismiss, the appeal. At paragraph
       21 of the determination the Tribunal records the standard of proof as
       being the balance of probabilities; at paragraph 41 it is found  that
       the Appellant has not shown himself to be Sudanese "even to  the  low
       standard".  Paragraphs 24-27 deal with  the  Appellant's  failure  to
       claim asylum in Libya, Italy  or  France  en  route  to  the  UK.  In
       paragraphs 28-32 the Tribunal identifies a number of discrepancies in
       the evidence which lead to a rejection of  the  evidence  overall  as
       "incredible". At paragraph 32 the evidence of a witness  is  rejected
       as being "insufficient" to assist the appellant. This witness was  Mr
       Yagoob who is a Darfuri Zaghawa: having met with and  spoken  to  the
       Appellant Mr Yagoob was satisfied that they were from the same tribe.
       The witness had asserted that he had established through conversation
       that he knows members of the Appellant's family;  this  evidence  was
       dismissed as the witness had  agreed  that  this  was  based  on  the
       Appellant's "self reporting".

    5. The grounds of appeal are, in summary, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in its approach in the following respects:

        i) In refusing to adjourn  the  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  the
           overriding objective set out in the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
           tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  that
           the appeal be disposed of fairly and justly. The  late  material
           could have been translated relatively quickly, went to the heart
           of the matter in the appeal and contrary to  the  assertions  at
           paragraph 4 was of probative value;

       ii) Unfairly and irrationally rejecting the evidence of the witness.
           The principle reason given for declining to place weight on  the
           opinion of Mr Yagoob was that he had not taken an opportunity to
           speak  to  the  Appellant's  father  by  telephone.  Whilst  the
           Appellant agrees that such a conversation might  have  bolstered
           Mr Yagoob's conclusions,  the  failure  to  have  it  could  not
           logically lead to rejection  of  the  matters  asserted.  It  is
           further submitted that the HOPO had not challenged the  evidence
           of this witness;

      iii) Applying the wrong standard of proof;

       iv) Failing to address the central issue of whether the Appellant is
           in fact from Sudan. It is submitted that the determination fails
           to take into account material evidence  such  as  the  US  State
           Department Report and the fact that the Appellant conducted  his
           interview in Arabic.

    6. For the Respondent  Ms  Johnstone  defended  the  decision  with  her
       customary vigour. She pointed out  that  the  determination  contains
       numerous reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account of persecution
       in Sudan and highlights several  gaps  in  his  knowledge  about  his
       claimed home area. The late evidence would have  made  no  difference
       and the Tribunal was correct to say  that  it  was  of  no  probative
       value. Looking at it on the phone it was not legible. The standard of
       proof is set out wrongly at paragraph 21, but  it  is  apparent  from
       paragraph 41 that the standard  actually  applied  in  assessing  the
       evidence was the correct one.  As for the evidence of the witness  Mr
       Yagoob he had confirmed that he had not known the Appellant in  Sudan
       and his evidence was based on what the Appellant had told him in this
       country.

  Error of Law

    7. There is no merit in the  suggestion  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       failed to engage with the question of whether the  Appellant  was  in
       fact Sudanese.  It was open to the Tribunal to approach the  question
       of nationality by looking at the credibility of the account  overall,
       and it is  apparent  from  paragraphs  29-31  that  the  Tribunal  in
       addition directed itself to the specific question of nationality.

    8. I am further satisfied that the Tribunal did  direct  itself  to  the
       correct standard of  proof.  Paragraph  21  contains  an  unfortunate
       reference to the "balance of probabilities' but it is clear  from  41
       that the lower Sivakumaran  standard  was  applied  to  the  evidence
       overall.

    9. I am satisfied however that the  Tribunal  did  err  in  refusing  to
       adjourn. The refusal gave rise to a material unfairness.   There  was
       arguably little probative value in the identity cards of two Sudanese
       men whom the Appellant identified as his brother and  cousin.  As  Ms
       Johnstone pointed out, there was no way of knowing whether they  were
       actually related to him at all.   The matter of the  Appellant's  own
       high school certificate  is  however  different.  This  document  was
       capable of placing him in Sudan.  It  might  have  been  said  to  be
       incompatible with his earlier evidence that he has had  no  education
       (see paragraph 28(a) of the determination), but I find  that  it  was
       nevertheless evidence which merited attention.  It  is  trite  asylum
       law that the task of the decision-maker is to  evaluate  all  of  the
       evidence before it in the round. That evidence, albeit produced late,
       was in fact available to the Tribunal in written form: it is  in  the
       court file, having been  faxed  by  the  solicitor.  It  is  a  short
       document and it would not have taken long  to  translate:  indeed  Mr
       Madubuike offered to endeavour to have it done  the  same  day.   The
       objective of a speedy disposal should not be elevated at the  expense
       of justice.  I find the reasons given  for  proceeding  without  that
       document being admitted into the evidence are not  sustainable.   The
       document was capable of attracting weight - not least if it could  be
       established that it had emanated  from  the  Appellant's  brother  in
       Sudan.  It was an error to proceed without permitting the Appellant a
       chance to rely upon it.

   10. I am further satisfied that the Tribunal erred in its approach to the
       evidence of the witness Mr Abdelazeez Abdallah Yagoob,  delegated  to
       appear at the hearing by the Zaghawa Community in Greater Manchester.
        He and the Chair of that organisation have both been  recognised  as
       refugees from Darfur. Paragraph  3  of  his  statement  explains  the
       background to his attendance at court:

           "We take a number of measures to decide whether an applicant  is
           from the Zaghawa ethnicity or not.  For  example,  we  call  the
           applicant for interview in our office and we ask questions about
           his background and his family and we speak to him in our  mother
           tongue of Zaghawa. This is usually done  by  three  members  and
           elders of the community. It is only if we  are  fully  satisfied
           that he belonged to the Zaghawa community  from  Sudan  that  we
           write a support letter and we send someone  to  court  from  our
           community to be a witness in support of his appeal".

       Paragraph  5  sets  out  the  particular  evidence  relating  to  the
       Appellant:

           "Following a detailed chatting with Mr Sabeel, I  came  to  know
           his family from Sudan. Therefore, I can claim I know his  family
           and relatives and that I can confirm  he  is  from  the  Zaghawa
           ethnicity and from the Wogie sub-tribe. I am from the same  sub-
           tribe. We have a distinctive dialect within our sub-tribe and  I
           can confirm he speaks the same dialect as me"

   11. It was this latter evidence that was dismissed on the basis  that  it
       arose from the Appellant's "self reporting". With respect, I  am  not
       clear what this means. If it means  that  the  Appellant  named  some
       people and Mr Yagoob was able to identify them as  individuals  known
       personally to him, I fail to see how that diminishes the weight to be
       attached to the evidence.  On the other hand, if Mr Yagoob had  asked
       the Appellant if he knew  a  number  of  named  individuals  and  the
       Appellant simply agreed that he did, this would not be of much use at
       all. The determination does  not  however  find  that  this  is  what
       happened: indeed if it did this would be  contrary  to  the  evidence
       offered by the  Zaghawa  Community  about  how  they  approach  these
       interviews. Nor was there any regard had to the  evidence  about  the
       specific dialect spoken by the Appellant and identified by Mr  Yagoob
       as  being  spoken  by  his  Darfuri  sub-tribe.   I  find  that   the
       determination did not give due weight or attention to the evidence of
       Mr Yagoob and the Zaghawa Community of Greater Manchester.  This  was
       evidence at the heart of the Appellant's case and as such it  merited
       greater attention than it got.

   12. The Respondent's case before me was in essence that the Appellant has
       been such a poor  witness  that  any  of  error  identified  in  this
       determination would not be material.  It may well be the case that in
       the final analysis the Appellant is not able to discharge the  burden
       of proof in showing himself to be Sudanese.  The fact remains however
       that he is entitled to have the evidence he relies upon  -  the  high
       school certificate and that of Mr Yagoob - properly considered.  That
       is particularly so where the matter in  issue  is  a  narrow  one.  I
       remind myself that it is of course  the  case  that  the  Appellant's
       account of persecution may  all  be  untrue,  but  his  claim  to  be
       Sudanese genuine.

   13. I am satisfied that the errors identified are such that the  decision
       must be set aside.

   14. The parties agreed that if the decision were  to  be  set  aside,  it
       should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.  This  is  an  asylum
       appeal which requires full re-making;  Mr  Madubuike  indicated  that
       this would be with at least three witnesses giving  evidence  through
       an interpreter. It is likely  to  take  at  least  four  hours.   The
       Practice Statements for the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the
       Upper Tribunal provide at paragraph 7  (b)  that  an  appeal  may  be
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal where "the nature or  extent  of
       any judicial fact  finding  which  is  necessary  in  order  for  the
       decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having  regard  to
       the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate  to  remit  the
       case to the First-tier Tribunal".  Having regard to that  guidance  I
       agree that the matter should be remitted.

       Decisions

   15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors  of  law
       such that it is set aside.

   16. The matter is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             30th April 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on the 18th
December 2014
[2] Determination promulgated on the 24th November 2014
[3] Dated 25th September 2014

