
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07238/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th July, 2016                            |On 9th August, 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                             Mr farid eskandari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott an OSC representative, instructed by
Broudie Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr McVitie, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born  on  13th  July,  1971.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 3rd October, 2014 and  applied  for
    asylum the same day.

2.   The respondent's application for asylum was refused  by  the  Secretary
    of State and on 31st March, 2015, she made a  decision  to  direct  his
    removal from the United Kingdom.  The appellant appealed this  decision
    and his appeal was heard in Manchester  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Brookfield on 28th July, 2015.

3.   The appellant asserted that it would be unsafe for  him  to  return  to
    his native Iran because, having been a Muslim from birth, he  converted
    to Christianity in April 2014, and following his arrival in the  United
    Kingdom he has continued to  explore  Christianity  and  has  now  been
    baptised.  He claimed to regularly  attend  services  at  the  Anglican
    Cathedral in Liverpool and also attend Bible study  classes.   He  also
    claims to study Bible classes at Devonshire  Christian  Fellowship  and
    were he  to  return  to  Iran  he  will  be  punished  because  of  his
    conversion.  He also claimed that he would be at risk because  he  left
    Iran illegally.

4.   In a detailed and  carefully  reasoned  determination,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge made adverse findings against the  appellant.   She  did
    not believe that the appellant had converted from  Islam  or  discussed
    the possibility of conversion with one of his customers in Iran  called
    Ahmed.  The appellant claims that he kept his Bible and other Christian
    documents in his car and one day he was stopped by the Basij while  his
    car was being repaired and the Bible and  other  documents  were  being
    carried by him in a shoulder bag.  The judge did not  believe  that  he
    would risk carrying a Bible and other Christian documents  through  the
    streets of Tehran and did not accept that he had been  stopped  by  the
    Basij and accused of being a Christian.  Neither did the judge  believe
    that it was credible that the appellant would hand  over  his  shoulder
    bag to strangers.  She did not accept his account and  did  not  accept
    that he had been  interested  in  Christianity  or  that  he  had  been
    apprehended and accused of being a Christian or  that  he  was  of  any
    adverse interest to the Iranian authorities when he left Iran.  She did
    not find his account of why he left Iran to be credible  and  concluded
    that he did not have any interest in  Christianity  when  he  lived  in
    Iran.  She did not find it reasonably likely that the appellant was  of
    any interest to the authorities.

5.   She similarly made adverse findings of credibility in relation  to  the
    appellant's claim of what happened to him in the United  Kingdom.   She
    did not accept  that  the  appellant  attended  church  in  the  United
    Kingdom, because of his  interest  in  Christianity.   She  heard  oral
    evidence from the Reverend Canon White and while she accepted  that  he
    was a  truthful  witness  and  that  he  genuinely  believed  that  the
    appellant was a genuine convert to Christianity, she noted that he  had
    only met the appellant some eight or nine months  previously  and  that
    his belief in the appellant's conversion was based on  the  appellant's
    attendance at an Alpha course, services and Bible study at  the  church
    and one hour interview and an undisclosed input from other people.  She
    noted the evidence of Mr  Peter  Moffat  an  elder  of  the  Devonshire
    Fellowship Church but did not find that that evidence established  that
    there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that  the  appellant  is  a
    genuine convert to Christianity.

6.   The judge noted the appellant's inability to explain why  he  had  been
    chosen to be baptised into the Anglican faith which suggested  that  he
    had not carried out any  research  into  Christianity  or  its  various
    branches, but simply that he had chosen the Anglican faith  because  it
    was convenient and the church  was  opposite  his  hotel.   Whilst  the
    appellant was able to display some knowledge of  Christianity  and  the
    New Testament of the Bible the appellant had not explained why  he  had
    undertaken such an extensive Bible study and neither had  he  explained
    what spiritual need this intensive  attendance  at  the  Bible  classes
    fulfilled.  She did not  believe  it  reasonably  likely  that  he  had
    developed a genuine interest in Christianity  over  the  past  nineteen
    years.

7.   The judge heard oral evidence from Miss Renwick,  but  again,  did  not
    believe that her evidence established that only Christians were capable
    of behaving in a caring way.  The judge noted the  letters  of  support
    that the appellant had provided  from  fellow  Iranians  who  had  been
    granted refugee status in the United Kingdom, but placed little  weight
    on them since none appeared to have any experience or qualifications in
    assessing credibility and they  were  friends  of  the  appellant  with
    nothing to lose by providing him with a character reference.  They  did
    not attend to give oral evidence.

8.    The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  claimed  that  he  left  Iran
    illegally.  She pointed out that there was no evidence  before  her  to
    support this claim and, since she had found him to  be  unreliable  and
    not a credible witness, she was unable to conclude that  he  did  leave
    Iran illegally simply because he says it is the case.   She  considered
    whether the appellant would be at  risk  of  harm  on  return  to  Iran
    without a passport.  She noted that the background information did  not
    indicate that there was  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  a
    sentence of imprisonment would be imposed upon him without  an  adverse
    profile.  She noted the country  guidance  in  SB  (risk  on  return  -
    illegal exit) Iran CG [2009]  UKAIT  00053  and  BA  (demonstrators  in
    Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).  She noted that
    she had not found the appellant to be a genuine convert and neither had
    she found there  to  be  any  reason  for  thinking  that  the  Iranian
    authorities would take any adverse interest in  the  appellant  on  his
    return.  She found that he had not established that he  had  left  Iran
    illegally. The judge  also  believed  it  highly  improbable  that  the
    Iranian authorities were aware that the appellant had been attending  a
    number of Christian churches in the United Kingdom.  She dismissed  his
    appeal.

9.   There were several challenges to the judge's determination.

10.  The first suggested that the  judge's  approach  of  going  behind  the
    written and oral evidence of the  Reverend  White,  a  senior  Anglican
    Church clergyman of Liverpool Cathedral, the oral evidence of Mr  Peter
    Moffat an elder of 25 years' standing  from  the  Devonshire  Christian
    Fellowship Church and the oral and written evidence of Shirley Renwick,
    a long-standing parishioner and experienced manager of a refugee  based
    organisation, all of whom independently testified their belief that the
    appellant  was  a  genuine  Christian  convert,  indicated   that   the
    Immigration Judge applied a higher standard  of  proof  when  assessing
    whether the appellant's conversion was genuine.

11.  The first challenge suggested that it was highly  speculative  for  the
    judge to infer that both a senior clergyman and a long-standing  elder,
    together with the experienced parishioner, may all have been misled  by
    the appellant about the genuineness of  his  conversion  and  that  the
    status of these individuals and in  particular,  Canon  White  and  the
    elder would collectively be better qualified to be able  to  assess  an
    individual's integrity over a period of  months,  in  which  they  have
    congregated with the appellant, in contrast to the short period of time
    in which the judge had to assess him.

12.  Permission to appeal was not granted in respect of that challenge.   In
    refusing permission Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds found no arguable  error
    of law in the approach of the judge when considering her assessment  of
    whether the appellant was a genuine Christian  convert.    She  pointed
    out that the judge was  entitled  to  reach  an  adverse  view  on  the
    evidence from each of the  witnesses  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    determination.

13.  There is no need for me to set  out  the  second  ground  of  challenge
    which was also refused by Judge Reeds.  However  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Reeds granted permission in respect of the appellant's third challenge.
     Ground 3 is brief and it says:

         "The IJ's reasons in regards to his claimed illegal exit  is  based
         on her assessment of his credibility.  It is respectfully submitted
         that the credibility of the substantive claim is not  determinative
         of whether the appellant left Iran  illegally.   Nor  is  the  IJ's
         alternative reason that he had not been apprehended in a lorry.  It
         is permitted that the  IJ  is  required  to  assess  the  available
         current evidence  and  conclude  irrespective  of  his  core  claim
         whether it is reasonably likely that he left illegally and  whether
         that factor alone would give rise to a risk on return."

14.  At the hearing before me Mr Mynott made  application  to  re-argue  the
    first ground.  He advised  me  that  permission  had  been  granted  in
    another of this particular judge's cases, heard on the  same  day  with
    the same three witnesses giving oral evidence before  her.   I  pointed
    out that simply because in a similar case heard the same day leave  had
    been granted, did not indicate that there was an error of law  in  this
    determination,  merely  that  there  was  a  properly  arguable   error
    identified in another determination.  Mr Mynott suggested that the fact
    that it had been found that there was  a  properly  arguable  error  in
    another  determination  by  the  same  judge  hearing  the  same  three
    witnesses on the same day does indicate that she may have erred in  her
    assessment of this appellant's appeal.  She did not give any  probative
    weight to the evidence that she heard from three independent  witnesses
    who all believe that the appellant's conversion was genuine.

15.  I did not invite any submissions on  the  point  from  Mr  McVitie.   I
    indicated to the appellant's representative that I was  not  minded  to
    give leave to appeal in respect of this challenge.  The  challenge  was
    nothing more than a simple disagreement with the judge's decision.  The
    grounds do not identify any properly arguable error of law and  neither
    had Mr Mynott.  The mere fact that in  a  completely  different  appeal
    heard by the same judge on the same day with the same three witnesses a
    different appellant has been granted  permission  to  appeal,  did  not
    suggest that there was any error of law on the part  of  the  judge  in
    this appeal.

16.  The judge appeared to me to have given very careful  attention  to  the
    evidence of the three witnesses.   She  heard  and  saw  them  and  the
    appellant give evidence.   The  findings  she  has  made  are  properly
    reasoned and were open to her to make on the evidence before her.

17.  Having  indicated  to  Mr  Mynott  that  I  was  not  minded  to  grant
    permission on ground 1, he addressed me on ground 3.  He  asked  me  to
    note that in  answer  to  question  27  at  the  asylum  interview  the
    appellant had indicated that he had not had a  passport  when  he  left
    Iran.  Paragraph 11 of the Reasons for Refusal  Letter  also  makes  it
    clear that the appellant entered the United Kingdom without  travel  or
    other identification.  However, the judge has not dealt with the  issue
    of risk on return of someone who will not be in a position  to  lie  on
    return and if asked what he was doing in the United  Kingdom  would  be
    bound to answer truthfully that he claimed asylum.   If  asked  why  he
    claimed asylum, he would be bound to tell them that he had converted to
    Christianity and that would  cause  him  to  be  at  risk.   Mr  Mynott
    referred me to SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  Iranian
    CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) and in particular to paragraph 23.  There is
    a danger that on return the appellant  will  be  questioned  about  his
    activities in the United Kingdom and will be  forced  to  disclose  his
    apostasy suggested Mr Mynott.

18.  Mr McVitie pointed out that it was the first time that this  submission
    had ever been made.  It had not been advanced in the  grounds  and  was
    not advanced at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   It
    cannot have been an error of law for the judge not to have considered a
    matter that she was not asked to consider.  The judge was not satisfied
    that the appellant had left Iran illegally but even if he had,  all  he
    would have to say on his return was that he  had  lied  to  the  United
    Kingdom authorities about his conversion to Christianity having made up
    an asylum claim in an attempt to remain here.  It was absurd to suggest
    that he would be at risk because of his conversion when the judge found
    that he had not converted.  If the appellant told  the  authorities  in
    Iran anything different then he would not be telling the truth.

19.  Mr Mynott suggested that  this  point  had  been  made  in  a  skeleton
    argument submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.   I  pointed  out  that
    there was no record anywhere on  the  Tribunal's  file  of  a  skeleton
    argument ever having being sent to  the  Tribunal  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors and there was no copy of any skeleton argument  in  the  IAT
    file.  Mr McVitie told me that no skeleton argument had ever been given
    to the Home Office.

20.  I reserved my determination.

21.  The judge's findings in  this  determination  are  clear  and  properly
    reasoned.  The judge points out that there is no evidence before her to
    support the  claim  made  by  the  appellant  that  he  had  left  Iran
    illegally.  She had found him not to be a credible witness.  He was  an
    unreliable witness and simply because he asserted that he had left Iran
    illegally without further evidence, she was not prepared to accept that
    he had.

22.  The judge was entitled to make such a  finding.   The  judge  does  not
    claim that the appellant's assessment of credibility  is  determinative
    of whether or not he left Iran illegally.  She is merely  pointing  out
    that simply because he asserts that he left illegally is not sufficient
    for her to make a finding that he did, given that she has found him  to
    be such an unreliable witness.   She  has  made  extensive  credibility
    findings and believed nothing which was relevant to  the  core  of  his
    claim.  There was nothing further that she need do in  respect  of  the
    appellant's claimed illegal departure.  He asserted that  he  had  left
    illegally, but has failed to discharge the burden of proof  on  him  to
    show that he did.  However, she went on to consider whether there would
    be any real risk on his return  and  found  that  there  would  not  be
    because, at the time he left Iran, the judge believed that he was of no
    interest to the Iranian authorities at all.

23.  I do not believe that the judge has  made  any  error  of  law  in  her
    determination.

24.  If questioned on  his  return  to  Iran,  the  appellant  will  not  be
    expected to lie.  He can quite truthfully tell the authorities that  he
    invented a story with a view to being accepted  as  a  refugee  in  the
    United Kingdom but was not believed.  If he is asked  to  explain  what
    his  story  was  there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  not  tell  his
    questioners.  He is not a true convert to  Christianity.   His  account
    was not believed by the United Kingdom immigration authorities, nor  by
    the Immigration Judge and there is no reason at  all  why  the  Iranian
    authorities should take any further interest in him.

25.  The judge made no  error  of  law  and  I  uphold  the  decision.   The
    appellant's appeal is
    dismissed.


    SUMMARY

    The judge made no error of law in her determination which shall  stand.
    The appellant's asylum appeal  is  dismissed.   The  appellant's  human
    rights appeal is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable and there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


