
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07139/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                         mr abdiaziz abdullahi haji
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Brennan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms M O'Brian, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 25 March 1992.  The date
    of his arrival in the UK is not entirely clear  from  the  respondent's
    decision, but appears to be 20 July 2013.  His claim for asylum is said
    to have been made on 9 September 2013.

 2. The respondent refused the asylum claim  and  made  a  decision  on  20
    August 2014 to remove the appellant to Somalia.  The appellant appealed
    against that decision and his appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge Grimes at a hearing on 21 April 2015 whereby  she  dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.

 3. It is not necessary to set out in detail the basis of  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum.  Suffice to say, he claimed  that  he  was  abducted,
    detained and ill-treated by  Al-Shabaab  but  managed  to  escape.   He
    claims, and it is accepted that, he is a member of the Reer Hamar clan,
    a minority clan in Somalia.

 4. Judge Grimes accepted the appellant's  account  of  his  abduction  and
    detention by Al-Shabaab and his  escape  from  an  Al-Shabaab  training
    camp.  She also accepted that he had given a consistent account of  his
    journey to Mogadishu (from whence he came to the United Kingdom).

 5. Having considered the decision in  MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to  Mogadishu)
    Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), she concluded  that  the  appellant
    would be able to return to  and  live  in  Mogadishu  without  fear  of
    persecution and that it would be reasonable, and not  therefore  unduly
    harsh, to expect him to do so.

 6. Complaint is made in the  grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  about  the
    judge's assessment of the appellant's ability to live in Mogadishu,  in
    terms of the support that he could expect there and the extent to which
    it could be said that there was no real risk of his having to  live  in
    make-shift accommodation within an IDP camp.  It is submitted that  the
    judge's decision overlooks part of the guidance in MOJ and  factors  to
    be taken into account.

 7. Those grounds were amplified in submissions before  me.   Reliance  was
    also placed on the skeleton argument that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and which it is argued the First-tier  judge  failed  to  have
    regard to.  It was submitted that the judge appears  to  have  expected
    the appellant to rely on minority clan members, it being accepted  that
    he is himself a member of a minority clan.  However, this fails to take
    into account the guidance in MOJ.

 8. Although aspects of the appellant's  account  were  not  accepted,  for
    example in terms of the availability of funds for him, and his claim of
    having lost contact with his aunt, there was  no  evidence  before  the
    First-tier judge to the effect that support  from  his  aunt  would  be
    available to him.  The evidence was that the aunt had borrowed money to
    fund the appellant's journey and there was no evidence that  she  could
    borrow such funds again.

 9. If it was accepted that there  would  be  no  funds  available  to  the
    appellant, and other factors in his favour within the guidance set  out
    in MOJ apply, he would therefore, have to have resort to an IDP camp in
    Mogadishu which would be unduly harsh.

10. Ms O'Brian relied on the rule 24 response.  It was submitted  that  the
    appellant's argument is in  reality  a  simple  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings.  The factors set out in MOJ needed to be  taken  into
    account as a whole.  A 'person-centred'  approach  was  required.   The
    judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant previously having had
    support, for  example  from  an  imam  in  Mogadishu,  and  significant
    financial support from his family, would be able to  avail  himself  of
    those sources of support on return.  The judge did not believe that the
    appellant's aunt could not be called upon again to assist.  It was  not
    accepted by the judge that there was a loss of contact with his aunt.

11. She had also taken into account the short time that the  appellant  had
    been away from Somalia.

12. The appellant had not established why he could not avail himself of the
    economic opportunities available in  Mogadishu.   He  had  some  skills
    which he could avail  himself  of.   The  judge  had  considered  every
    relevant factor.

13. In reply, Mr Brennan relied again on  the  matters  identified  in  the
    skeleton argument and reiterated that the appellant  was  an  unskilled
    and uneducated person, those being relevant factors  in  terms  of  his
    ability to live in Mogadishu.

    My conclusions

14. It is helpful to summarise  the  First-tier  judge's  conclusions.   As
    already indicated, she found that the core of the  appellant's  account
    as to what happened to him in his home area has been consistent,  aside
    from a matter that she resolved in his favour, and is  consistent  with
    the background evidence.  She accepted his account  of  his  abduction,
    detention and escape from  Al-Shabaab.   However,  she  concluded  that
    there were "difficulties" with his account in terms  of  contact  being
    made  through  an  imam  with  his  aunt  in  Saudi  Arabia,  and   the
    arrangements thereby made for funding his journey out of Somalia.

15. She found that his account suffered from inconsistency,  and  concluded
    that it was not credible that the appellant's  mother  had  his  aunt's
    number and that  the  imam  got  his  aunt's  number  in  a  market  in
    Mogadishu.  She found  that  it  was  difficult  to  believe  that  the
    appellant's aunt would have found  sufficient  money  to  pay  for  the
    appellant's journey to the UK, having spoken to him for the first  time
    ever as a result of the imam's enquiries.  She concluded  that  it  was
    not clear how she could have  been  satisfied  as  to  the  appellant's
    identity on the basis of such tenuous means of contact [12].

16. At [13] she concluded that it was not credible that the appellant would
    not have contacted his aunt on his arrival in the UK to  let  her  know
    that he had arrived safely.  After referring to other  aspects  of  the
    evidence, she stated that she did not accept that he would have  failed
    to obtain his aunt's contact details and rejected  the  claim  that  he
    could not contact her after he arrived in the UK.

17. At [15] she rejected the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had  also  lost
    contact with his mother, for the reasons given in that paragraph.

18. She summarised her conclusions at [16] to the effect that she  accepted
    that the appellant left his home area for the reasons he gave  but  did
    not accept his account of making contact with his aunt in Mogadishu  or
    his account of (lack of) contact with his mother and aunt since  coming
    to the UK.

19. As to risk on return, she set out the guidance in MOJ in its  totality.
    At [20] she referred to the appellant being a member of a minority clan
    whose clan members live in the Hamaar Weyne  area  of  Mogadishu.   She
    referred to his having been able to access the assistance  of  an  imam
    there, and the claim that he was able to make contact with his aunt  in
    Saudi Arabia through people in that area.  She concluded therefore that
    despite the fact that he is from a minority clan he could access social
    support mechanisms and assistance with access to a livelihood from  the
    imam and members of his clan in Hamaar Weyne.

20. She referred to the fact that the appellant left  Mogadishu  in  August
    2013, less than two years earlier, that not being a lengthy absence.

21.  She  also  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  accessed  significant
    resources to finance his journey from Somalia.   She  referred  to  her
    rejection of his claim that he had not had contact with his aunt  since
    he left Somalia or that his mother is no longer in  contact  with  her.
    She did not accept that he had lost contact with his aunt  or  that  he
    could  not  secure  financial  support  from  his  aunt  on  return  to
    Mogadishu.

22. She further noted that the appellant said in oral evidence that he  had
    been learning English in Belfast, and that he is a fit  young  man  who
    had previously sold samosas in his home area.  She  concluded  that  he
    could  secure  a  livelihood  through  employment  or  self-employment.
    Finally, she stated that the appellant had not explained why  he  would
    not be able  to  access  the  economic  opportunities  that  have  been
    produced by the 'economic boom'.

23. The guidance in the headnote to MOJ reflects the substance of the Upper
    Tribunal's decision.  The guidance is as follows:

    (i)  The country guidance issues addressed in  this  determination  are
         not identical to those engaged with by  the  Tribunal  in  AMM  and
         others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM)  Somalia  CG
         [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore, where country guidance  has  been
         given by the Tribunal in AMM in respect of issues not addressed  in
         this determination then the guidance provided by AMM shall continue
         to have effect.

    (ii) Generally, a person  who  is  "an  ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
         associated with the security forces; any aspect  of  government  or
         official administration or any NGO or  international  organisation)
         on returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence  will  face  no
         real risk of persecution  or  risk  of  harm  such  as  to  require
         protection under Article 3 of the ECHR  or  Article  15(c)  of  the
         Qualification Directive. In particular, he will not be at real risk
         simply on account of having lived in  a  European  location  for  a
         period of time  of  being  viewed  with  suspicion  either  by  the
         authorities as a possible supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al  Shabaab
         as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose  Islamic  integrity  has  been
         compromised by living in a Western country.

    (iii)    There has been durable change in the sense that the Al Shabaab
         withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and there is no real prospect
         of a re-established presence within the city. That was not the case
         at the time of the country guidance given by the Tribunal in AMM.

    (iv)  The  level  of  civilian   casualties,   excluding   non-military
         casualties that clearly fall within Al Shabaab target  groups  such
         as politicians, police officers,  government  officials  and  those
         associated with NGOs and  international  organisations,  cannot  be
         precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence   which   is
         incomplete and  unreliable.  However,  it  is  established  by  the
         evidence considered as a whole that there has been a  reduction  in
         the level of civilian casualties since 2011,  largely  due  to  the
         cessation  of  confrontational  warfare  within  the  city  and  Al
         Shabaab's resort to  asymmetrical  warfare  on  carefully  selected
         targets.  The present level of casualties  does  not  amount  to  a
         sufficient risk to ordinary  civilians  such  as  to  represent  an
         Article 15(c) risk.

    (v)  It is open to an ordinary citizen of Mogadishu to  reduce  further
         still his personal exposure to the risk of "collateral  damage"  in
         being caught up in an Al Shabaab attack that was  not  targeted  at
         him  by  avoiding  areas  and  establishments  that   are   clearly
         identifiable  as  likely  Al  Shabaab  targets,  and  it   is   not
         unreasonable for him to do so.

    (vi) There is no real risk of forced  recruitment  to  Al  Shabaab  for
         civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for recent returnees from
         the West.

    (vii)    A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence will
         look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,  for
         assistance in re-establishing himself and  securing  a  livelihood.
         Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his clan  members
         who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is  only  likely  to  be
         forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans  may  have
         little to offer.

    (viii)   The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has  changed.
         Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
         assist with access to livelihoods, performing less of a  protection
         function than previously. There are no clan militias in  Mogadishu,
         no clan violence, and no clan based discriminatory treatment,  even
         for minority clan members.

    (ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu after
         a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the
         city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will
         need to be a careful assessment of all of the circumstances.  These
         considerations will include, but are not limited to:

       . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

       . length of absence from Mogadishu;

       . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

       . access to financial resources;

       . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be  employment  or
         self employment;

       . availability of remittances from abroad;

       . means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;

       . why his ability to fund the journey to the West no  longer  enables
         an appellant to secure financial support on return.

    (x)  Put another way, it will  be  for  the  person  facing  return  to
         explain  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access   the   economic
         opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
         especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are
         taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.

    (xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or  family  support
         who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who  have
         no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on  return  who
         will face the prospect of living  in  circumstances  falling  below
         that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

    (xii)    The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those who
         originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live  in
         the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk or facing
         a real risk of  destitution.  On  the  other  hand,  relocation  in
         Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with no former links  to
         the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or
         social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in conditions   that  will  fall
         below acceptable humanitarian standards.

24. The complaint made on behalf of the  appellant  is  that  although  the
    judge took into account the factors set out at (ix)  of  the  guidance,
    she had overlooked what was said at (vii).  To repeat,

         "A person returning to Mogadishu after a  period  of  absence  will
         look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,  for
         assistance in re-establishing himself and  securing  a  livelihood.
         Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his clan  members
         who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is  only  likely  to  be
         forthcoming for the majority clan members, as  minority  clans  may
         have little to offer."

25. Furthermore, the guidance at (xii) is to the effect that relocation  in
    Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan with no former links  to  the
    city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or  social
    support is unlikely to be unrealistic as, in the absence  of  means  to
    establish a home and some form of ongoing financial support, there will
    be a real risk of having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
    accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a real  possibility  of
    having  to  live  in  conditions  that  will  fall   below   acceptable
    humanitarian standards.

26. The skeleton argument relies on the appellant's claim that  he  has  no
    close  relatives  currently  living  in  Mogadishu   and   no   current
    connections with that city, as well as the fact  that  the  appellant's
    aunt who previously assisted the  flight  from  Somalia  is  no  longer
    contactable.  It is asserted that  the  appellant  was  assisted  on  a
    temporary basis by the imam at the mosque but does not have friends  or
    relatives residing in Mogadishu.  The length of time he has been absent
    from Mogadishu is said to be a substantial period of absence  from  his
    country of origin and that he would therefore  be  out  of  touch  with
    everyday life in Mogadishu, and generally in Somalia.   Similarly,  his
    minority clan status is relied on  in  terms  of  the  lack  of  family
    connections or associations with Mogadishu.

27. It is also said that he has no contact with relatives  outside  Somalia
    and no ability to call upon the financial  resources  of  others.   His
    lack of education and lack of employment  skills  would  make  it  very
    difficult if not impossible for him  to  obtain  employment  given  the
    other difficulties referred to, it is argued.  It is also said that  he
    does not have access to remittances from abroad.

28. Although it is asserted that the judge  did  not  have  regard  to  the
    guidance overall, I  do  not  accept  that  proposition.   Furthermore,
    applying the guidance I am satisfied that she was entitled to  conclude
    that the appellant would be able to live  in  Mogadishu  without  undue
    hardship.  Although  it  is  said  that  the  appellant  only  had  the
    assistance of the imam on a temporary basis, the fact remains  that  he
    was able to secure that  assistance  in  Mogadishu  without  apparently
    having had  any  connection  there  before.   The  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's claim that he no longer had any contact with his mother, in
    his home  area,  or  with  his  aunt  who  provided  substantial  funds
    apparently to secure his departure from Somalia.  She was thus entitled
    to conclude that he had  not  established  that  he  could  not  secure
    further financial support from his aunt  on  return  to  Mogadishu.  No
    complaint is made in the grounds in relation to the judge's credibility
    assessment, notwithstanding what could be said to be some inconsistency
    between [12] and the findings at [20].

29. This was not a case of the judge concluding  simply  that,  having  had
    some assistance although a minority clan  member,  he  could  therefore
    turn to his minority clan for support.  There was  more  depth  to  her
    conclusions than that.  The conclusion was that he would not be cut off
    from financial or other support mechanisms given that in terms of other
    support mechanisms he had been able to secure assistance previously.

30. Furthermore,  the  conclusion  at  [20]  that  the  appellant  had  not
    explained why he would not be able to access the economic opportunities
    available in Mogadishu is a significant one.  This forms  part  of  the
    guidance at (x). This is to the effect that it would be for the  person
    facing return to explain why he would  not  be  able  to  access  those
    economic opportunities, the guidance stating that there is evidence  to
    the effect that returnees are taking jobs at the expense of  those  who
    have never been away.  The judge noted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    learning English in Belfast and had had employment of his  own  in  his
    home area.  Added to which is the fact that  the  appellant  is  a  fit
    young man.

31. In conclusion, I am satisfied that the  First-tier  judge  undertook  a
    holistic approach to the issue of  return  to  Mogadishu,  taking  into
    account all relevant factors.  I am satisfied  that  she  gave  legally
    sustainable reasons for concluding  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to return to Mogadishu and that it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh to expect him to do so.

32. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds therefore stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  27/01/16
