
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07566/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2016                 |On 11th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                              Rosemary Sakhula
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Campbell of Counsel instructed by Acharyas
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of  Judge  D  Wilson  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 15th February 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Malawi born 29th August  1953  who
    on 7th July 2014 applied for further leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant relied upon  Articles  3  and  8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 3. The Appellant claimed that she would be at risk as the family member of
    a refugee, as her daughter, born 6th June 1992, had been granted asylum
    in August 2011 on the basis of her sexuality.

 4. The application was refused on 21st April 2015.  The Respondent did not
    accept that the Appellant could satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules in relation to family life.

 5. In  relation  to  private  life  the  Respondent  considered  paragraph
    276ADE(1) noting that the Appellant first entered the United Kingdom as
    a visitor in 2002, and therefore had not resided in  this  country  for
    twenty years as required by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).

 6. The Respondent did not accept that there would be any very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration into Malawi,  and  therefore
    she could not satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

 7. The Respondent  did  not  consider  that  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances which would justify granting leave to remain pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention, outside the  Immigration  Rules.   It
    was noted that the Appellant had previously been granted  discretionary
    leave to remain based upon her private and family life, and this  leave
    was granted on 3rd August 2011,  valid  until  2nd  August  2014.   The
    Respondent  contended  that  the  Appellant  had  failed   to   provide
    satisfactory evidence to show that the circumstances  of  the  previous
    grant of leave remained the same, and therefore further leave  was  not
    granted.   In  addition,  the  Respondent  did  not  accept  that   the
    Appellant's adult daughter was dependent upon her.

 8. The Respondent noted that the  Appellant  had  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2002 as a visitor, and was first granted leave to remain  as
    a student on 4th March 2003.  Her leave as a student was then  extended
    on a number of occasions until 2011  but  when  the  Appellant's  leave
    expired on 22nd March 2011,  she  thereafter  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom illegally until encountered on  5th  July  2011  when  she  was
    served with removal directions, but these directions were cancelled  on
    16th July 2011 when the Appellant claimed asylum.  Her asylum claim was
    refused  on  3rd  August  2011,  but  she  was  granted  three   years'
    discretionary leave to remain.

 9. The Appellant's appeal was heard by the FtT on 28th  January  2016  and
    dismissed.  The FtT found that the Appellant would not be  at  risk  if
    returned to Malawi, and did not find that the Appellant had established
    a family life with her adult daughter.  The FtT found that  there  were
    no very significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  integration  into
    Malawi,  and  took  into  account  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) in finding  that  little
    weight should be given to the private life established by the Appellant
    in the United Kingdom, because that private life had  been  established
    when her immigration status was precarious.

10. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission to appeal was granted by Judge Astle of the FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  The grounds argue that the  judge  erred  in  not  considering
             adequately whether the  Appellant  and  her  daughter  enjoyed
             family life together and the impact of the Appellant's removal
             on her daughter.  He failed to consider the Home Office  'case
             notes' adequately.  He failed to consider the full reasons for
             the previous grant of discretionary leave to  remain  and  the
             continuing level of support given  by  the  Appellant  to  her
             daughter.  Lastly it is argued that the judge erred in failing
             to consider fully the  reason  why  the  Appellant  was  given
             discretionary leave to remain.

         3.   It is arguable that the judge adopted too narrow  an  approach
             in his consideration of the existence of family  life  on  the
             particular facts of this case  which  include  the  daughter's
             circumstances, her refugee status and the bond that can  exist
             following such a history.  Having found that family  life  did
             not exist it follows that he did not consider  the  effect  of
             the decision on the Appellant's  daughter.   The  grounds  are
             arguable and permission is granted."

Error of Law

11. At a hearing before me on 4th August 2016 I heard submissions from both
    parties regarding error of law.  On behalf of  the  Appellant  reliance
    was placed upon  the  grounds  contained  within  the  application  for
    permission.  I was referred to the Respondent's  reasons  for  granting
    the Appellant discretionary leave to remain dated 2nd August  2011,  in
    which it was accepted that family life existed  between  the  Appellant
    and her daughter and that there were clear elements of dependency,  and
    their circumstances could be described as inextricably linked.

12. Oral submissions were made on behalf of the Respondent and reliance was
    placed upon a rule 24 response dated 14th March 2016 in  which  it  was
    contended that the FtT directed itself appropriately and did not err in
    finding there  was  no  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    daughter.

13. I set out below my conclusions and reasons for finding an error of  law
    and setting aside the decision of the FtT;

         "12. The circumstances before the FtT  were  that  the  Appellant's
             daughter, born 6th June 1992, was 23 years of age and had been
             granted refugee status based upon membership of  a  particular
             social group, because of her  sexuality.   The  Appellant  has
             been resident in the United Kingdom with limited  leave,  from
             2002.  She overstayed her leave in 2011, and  made  an  asylum
             claim which was refused.

         13.  The Appellant and her daughter had resided  together  in  this
             country since 2005, and on 2nd August 2011 the  Appellant  was
             granted discretionary leave to remain for a  period  of  three
             years, based upon her family life with her daughter,  and  her
             private life.

         14.  I reserved my  decision  following  submissions  made  at  the
             hearing, as I wanted to consider further whether  the  grounds
             submitted on behalf of the  Appellant  amounted  simply  to  a
             disagreement with findings made by the FtT, or whether they in
             fact disclosed a material error of law.

         15.  Having reflected, I conclude that the grounds  do  disclose  a
             material error of law in relation to Article  8  of  the  1950
             Convention.  There was no challenge to the  findings  made  by
             the FtT in relation to  Article  3,  and  those  findings  are
             preserved.

         16.  In my view the FtT failed to consider fully the reasons  given
             by the Respondent for  granting  discretionary  leave  on  2nd
             August 2011.  The FtT found at paragraph 56 that in the  main,
             discretionary  leave  was  granted  because  the   Appellant's
             daughter was  still  at  school.   This  is  not  an  accurate
             conclusion.   When  discretionary  leave  was   granted,   the
             Appellant's daughter was 19 years of age and  an  adult.   She
             had  been  granted   refugee   status   and   the   Respondent
             unequivocally found  that  family  life  existed  between  the
             Appellant and her daughter, notwithstanding that the  daughter
             had attained her majority.  The Respondent found at page 2  of
             the grant of discretionary leave;

                  "There  are  clear  elements  of  dependency   and   their
                  circumstances could be described as  inextricably  linked.
                  Beoku-Betts applies and the mother's  removal  would  also
                  breach the daughter's Article 8 rights."

         17.  The Respondent noted that the Appellant and her daughter lived
             together and had done so since 2005 and had no other relatives
             in the UK.  The daughter could not return to Malawi because of
             her fear of persecution.

         18.  I do not find that the FtT has adequately explained why it  is
             that family life no longer exists between  the  Appellant  and
             her daughter.  Both gave evidence as to their dependency  upon
             each other, and I do not find that adequate reasons have  been
             given for disregarding that evidence.  Although  the  daughter
             is a student at university, the evidence  indicated  that  her
             family home remained with her mother, with whom she resided at
             weekends and holidays.

         19.  I therefore conclude that the FtT erred in considering whether
             family life existed between the Appellant  and  her  daughter,
             and failed to  take  into  consideration  the  effect  of  the
             Appellant's removal upon her daughter.

         20.  I am satisfied that these errors are material,  and  may  have
             affected  the  FtT  conclusions  in  relation   to   paragraph
             276ADE(1)(vi).

         21.  Therefore the decision of the FtT in relation to Article 8  is
             set aside and the decision needs to be re-made."

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 3rd November 2016

14. At the commencement of  the  hearing  I  ascertained  that  I  had  all
    documentation upon which the parties intended to rely.  I had  on  file
    the documentation that had been before the FtT which comprised the Home
    Office bundle with Annexes A-F, two bundles submitted on behalf of  the
    Appellant, one containing 46 pages, and the other containing 27  pages,
    and the Appellant's witness statement dated 28th January 2016.   I  had
    also been provided with a copy of Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).

15. Both representatives indicated that no further  documents  were  to  be
    submitted.  Miss Campbell advised that no  further  evidence  would  be
    called, and the Appellant relied upon the evidence  that  she  and  her
    daughter had given to the FtT.

16. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

The Appellant's Submissions

17. In summary  Miss  Campbell  submitted  that  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and her daughter existed, which engaged  Article  8.   I  was
    asked to accept that there is a special  relationship  because  of  the
    daughter's sexuality and the fact that she  has  been  granted  refugee
    status.  The couple have lived together  since  2005,  and  still  live
    together, notwithstanding that the daughter is  away  from  the  family
    home studying,  as  she  returns  at  weekends  and  during  university
    holidays.  I was asked to accept that the Appellant  has  provided  her
    daughter with some financial support, although it was accepted that the
    daughter also has other income.

18. I was referred to paragraphs 54-61 of Ghising and  was  asked  to  note
    that the Appellant's daughter is still a student, and has one more year
    before her current studies end.

19. I was referred to the Respondent's letter dated 2nd August  2011  which
    gives reasons for granting the Appellant discretionary leave to  remain
    between August 2011 and August 2014.  It was accepted at page 2 of that
    letter that it was unlikely "given the accepted circumstances" that the
    Appellant would be able to re-establish a family life in Malawi.   Miss
    Campbell submitted that the length  of  time  that  had  elapsed  since
    August 2011 meant that the relationship between the Appellant  and  her
    daughter had grown even stronger and I was asked to allow the appeal on
    the basis of the Appellant's family and private life.

The Respondent's Submissions

20. Mr Bates relied upon the Respondent's reasons for  refusal  dated  21st
    April 2015.

21. I was asked to note the passage of time since discretionary  leave  was
    granted on 2nd August 2011, and Mr Bates commented  that  the  law  had
    changed, and the decision made on 2nd August 2011 would probably not be
    made now.

22. Mr Bates submitted that there was more dependency in  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and her daughter in 2011 than presently  existed.
    I was asked to note that the daughter was  living  away  from  home  at
    university and the evidence indicated that  she  was  undertaking  some
    part-time employment.  I was asked to  note  the  lack  of  any  expert
    evidence to prove that dependency  existed  over  and  above  what  was
    normal in a relationship between a mother and adult  daughter.   I  was
    asked to conclude that the Appellant had not proved  that  family  life
    existed between herself and her daughter, that would engage  Article  8
    of the 1950 Convention.

23. In relation to private life, I was asked to take into  account  section
    117B of the 2002 Act.  Mr Bates pointed out that the Appellant had  had
    employment in the United Kingdom and if  returned  to  Malawi  was  not
    incapable of seeking employment  there.   If  the  Appellant  left  the
    United Kingdom voluntarily she would be  eligible  to  claim  financial
    assistance.   In  relation  to  private  life,  there  were   no   very
    significant obstacles to prevent  the  Appellant's  reintegration  into
    Malawi, and she could maintain contact with her daughter,  although  it
    was accepted that the daughter could not be expected to visit Malawi as
    she had a well-founded fear of persecution in that country.

24. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

25. I have taken into account all the evidence placed before me, although I
    will not refer, in my conclusions, to all  the  evidence  that  I  have
    considered.  I have taken into account the  submissions  made  by  both
    representatives.

26. This appeal comes about because the Appellant's human rights claim  was
    refused.  The Appellant therefore has a right of  appeal  against  that
    decision pursuant to section 82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act.

27. The ground of appeal can be found at  section  84(2)  and  is  set  out
    below;

         '(2) An appeal under section  82(1)(b)  (refusal  of  human  rights
             claim) must be brought on the  ground  that  the  decision  is
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.'

28. There has been no challenge to the  FtT  findings  that  the  Appellant
    would not be at risk of treatment contrary to Article  3  of  the  1950
    Convention,  and  the  FtT  findings  in  relation  to  Article  3  are
    preserved.  The Appellant would not be  at  risk  of  ill-treatment  in
    Malawi.

29. The Appellant's claim is that the Respondent's  decision  breaches  her
    right to respect for private and family life under Article 8, and as  a
    result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.
    I set out below Article 8;

         'Right to respect for private and family life

         1.   Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         2.   There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others.'

30. I consider the Appellant's private and family  life  on  the  following
    basis.

31. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor in 2002.   She
    was subsequently granted leave to remain as a student and  was  granted
    further leave to remain on a number of occasions until 22nd March 2011.
     The Appellant returned to Malawi on  31st  March  2005  to  visit  her
    sister who was ill, and returned to the United Kingdom in  April  2005.
    The Appellant's daughter came to the United Kingdom in 2005.

32. The Appellant's daughter is now 24  years  of  age.   She  was  granted
    asylum on the basis of her sexuality in 2011.

33. The Appellant remained in the United Kingdom  without  leave  when  her
    leave expired on 22nd March 2011.  She was encountered  by  immigration
    authorities on 5th July 2011 and served with  removal  directions.   On
    16th July 2011 she claimed asylum, and that application was refused  on
    3rd August 2011 but she was granted discretionary leave to remain until
    2nd August 2014.

34. Before that leave expired, the Appellant on 7th July 2014  applied  for
    further leave to remain which application was  refused  on  21st  April
    2015 and which caused this appeal to be lodged.

35. I accept that the Appellant and her daughter  have  lived  together  in
    this country since 2005.  I accept that the Appellant is active in  her
    local church and that she has  worked  as  a  carer.   The  Appellant's
    daughter was dependent upon her financially but is  no  longer  totally
    financially dependent upon her.  The Appellant's daughter  is  studying
    in Stoke-on-Trent.  I accept that the Appellant and her  daughter  have
    no contact with any relatives  in  Malawi  and  the  Appellant  has  no
    accommodation in that country.

36. I accept the  evidence  contained  within  the  Appellant's  daughter's
    undated letter at pages 10 and 11 of the Appellant's bundle  comprising
    46 pages in that she has a very close  bond  with  the  Appellant,  she
    works hard because the Appellant  motivates  her  to  do  so,  and  she
    believes that if "denied of her presence, family and moral support will
    almost be disastrous for my welfare and well-being.  Not  to  have  her
    around will be hard for me also emotionally".

37. The Appellant's daughter explained in  her  letter  that  she  and  the
    Appellant "both play a huge part in each other's lives".

38. It is accepted by the Appellant that she cannot satisfy Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules, which sets out the requirements to be  satisfied
    in order to be granted leave to remain on the basis of family life.

39. The Court of Appeal at paragraph 33 of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387
    indicated that the general position is  that  compelling  circumstances
    would need to be identified to support a claim for a grant of leave  to
    remain outside the new rules in Appendix FM.

40. In considering Article 8 of the 1950 Convention outside the Immigration
    Rules I have adopted the  step-by-step  approach  advocated  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 which involves answering the following questions;

         (1)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?

41. I accept that the decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 means that  if
    Article  8  is  engaged,  I  must  consider  the  family  life  of  the
    Appellant's daughter as well as the Appellant.

42. I find that the Appellant has established private life in this  country
    since her arrival  in  2002.   I  must  decide  whether  she  has  also
    established family life with her adult daughter.

43. I find that it is clear that when the daughter was a minor,  there  was
    family life which would engage Article 8,  which  existed  between  the
    Appellant and her daughter.  The question is whether family life  still
    exists, notwithstanding that the daughter has attained her majority.

44. The Court of  Appeal  decided  in  Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31,  at
    paragraph 25, that a family life is not established  between  an  adult
    child and his surviving parent or other siblings unless something  more
    exists than normal emotional ties.

45. The Upper Tribunal  in  Ghising  at  paragraph  56  accepted  that  the
    judgment in Kugathas had been interpreted too restrictively in the past
    and ought to be read in  the  light  of  subsequent  decisions  of  the
    domestic and Strasbourg Courts.  This aspect of the decision in Ghising
    was subsequently approved by the Court of Appeal.  At paragraph  62  of
    Ghising the Upper Tribunal stated that there should be no blanket  rule
    with regard to adult children, and each case should be analysed on  its
    own facts, to decide whether or not  family  life  exists,  within  the
    meaning of Article 8(1).  The Court of  Appeal  in  Gurung  and  Others
    [2013] EWCA Civ 8 stated at paragraph 45 that "the question whether  an
    individual enjoys family life is one of fact and depends on  a  careful
    consideration of all the relevant facts of the  particular  case".   At
    paragraph 50 the Court of Appeal gave the following guidance;

         "The critical issue was whether there  was  sufficient  dependence,
         and  in  particular  sufficient  emotional   dependence,   by   the
         Appellants on their parents to justify  the  conclusion  that  they
         enjoyed family life.  That was a question of fact for  the  FtT  to
         determine.  In our view, the FtT was  entitled  to  conclude  that,
         although the  usual  emotional  bonds  between  parents  and  their
         children were present, the requisite degree of emotional dependence
         was absent."

46. The above indicates that there must therefore be  something  more  than
    the usual emotional bonds between parents and children, and there  must
    be sufficient emotional dependence.

47. In this case I find that there is a particularly close bond between the
    Appellant and her daughter.  I accept their  evidence  on  this  point.
    The couple have lived together since 2005 in this country.  I find that
    there has been financial support  provided  by  the  Appellant  to  her
    daughter in the past, although the present situation is that  there  is
    limited financial support.  This is  not  conclusive  one  way  or  the
    other.

48. I take into account that the Appellant's daughter is now  24  years  of
    age and a student at university.  She lives in Stoke-on-Trent where she
    studies during term time.  I accept that she returns to the Appellant's
    home in Liverpool on some weekends, and during university holidays.   I
    find that the Appellant and her daughter  still  regard  themselves  as
    living in the same family unit as they have done since 2005.

49. I find it relevant to take into account the conclusions reached by  the
    Respondent when discretionary leave was granted to the Appellant on 2nd
    August 2011.  The Respondent took into  account  that  the  Appellant's
    daughter had been granted asylum because of her sexuality, whereas  the
    Appellant's claim had been  refused.   The  Respondent  considered  the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim in the light of Razgar.   It  was  accepted
    that the Appellant had established a private life in the United Kingdom
    and established a family life with her daughter.  At the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decision the daughter was an adult, being 19 years of age.



50. It was accepted that the Appellant would not be  able  to  re-establish
    family life in Malawi and that the Appellant and her daughter had lived
    together as a family unit, and the daughter could not return to  Malawi
    because of her refugee status.  The Respondent accepted that there "are
    clear elements of dependency and their circumstances could be described
    as inextricably linked".  The Respondent went on to make  reference  to
    Beoku-Betts commenting that the Appellant's removal would  also  breach
    the daughter's Article 8 rights.

51. It was accepted that the Appellant's  family  unit  consisted  only  of
    herself and her daughter.  It was accepted that the  Appellant  had  no
    contact with any family members in Malawi.  It  was  therefore  decided
    that if the Appellant was removed from the United Kingdom,  this  would
    breach Article 8 in relation  to  her  family  and  private  life,  and
    therefore discretionary leave for a period of three years was  granted.



52. I accept that just over five years has now passed  since  discretionary
    leave was granted on the basis described above.  Mr Bates contends that
    there is no longer any dependency, whereas Miss Campbell  submits  that
    the passage of time has made the relationship stronger.  The Respondent
    in the refusal decision indicated that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    provide satisfactory evidence to show that  the  circumstances  of  her
    previous grant of leave remained the same, and therefore  she  was  not
    granted further leave.

53. Having considered all the circumstances, I find that while it  has  not
    been proved that there is an even stronger bond  now  than  existed  in
    2011, between the Appellant and her daughter, it is not correct to find
    that family life no longer exists.

54. The Appellant's daughter is not leading an independent life.  She  does
    not have full-time employment.  I am satisfied  that  she  regards  the
    Appellant's home as her home.  She has not moved away permanently.  She
    lives away from her family home in term time so  that  she  can  study.
    She has not yet completed her studies.

55. I find that there is considerable emotional  dependency,  in  that  the
    Appellant depends upon her daughter, and vice versa.  They support each
    other.  I am satisfied that they do not have other family members  with
    whom they have any contact.  The fact that the Appellant's daughter has
    been granted refugee status because of her sexuality has alienated some
    family members, and has drawn the Appellant  and  her  daughter  closer
    together and more dependent on each other.

56. I find that the circumstances at the present time are very  similar  to
    the circumstances which existed in 2011 when  the  Respondent  accepted
    that  family  life  existed,  and  I  find,  notwithstanding  that  the
    Appellant's daughter is now 24 years of age, that she and the Appellant
    have a family life that engages Article 8.

57. Therefore, going  back  to  the  Razgar  questions,  I  find  that  the
    Appellant's proposed removal would be an interference with her right to
    respect for her private and her family life, with consequences of  such
    gravity as to engage Article 8.

58. I find that the proposed interference is in accordance with the law, in
    that the Respondent  is  entitled,  and  needs  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control, and is entitled to refuse an application for leave
    to remain.

59. I then consider the fourth  and  fifth  questions  together,  and  this
    involves considering  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration  control,  and  the  proportionality  of  the  Respondent's
    decision.

60. I set out below section 117A of the 2002 Act;

         '117A(1) This Part applies where a court or Tribunal is required to
                  determine whether a decision made  under  the  Immigration
                  Acts -

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                      family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

                (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                  court or Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                      117B, and

                  (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  section
                      117C.

                (3)    In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                  means the question  of  whether  an  interference  with  a
                  person's right to respect for private and family  life  is
                  justified under Article 8(2).'

61. Subsection (1)  of  section  117B  confirms  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is in the public interest.

62. Subsection (2) confirms that it is in the public interest that a person
    seeking leave to remain can speak English, and subsection (3)  confirms
    that it is in the public interest that such  a  person  is  financially
    independent.

63. I find that the Appellant can speak English and  has  been  financially
    independent in that she has supported herself by permitted  employment.
    However I also take into account the guidance in AM Malawi [2015]  UKUT
    0260 (IAC) which confirms that an  Appellant  can  obtain  no  positive
    right to a grant of leave to remain from either section 117B(2) or  (3)
    whatever the degree of fluency in English or the strength of  financial
    resources.   Therefore  if  an  Appellant  is  fluent  in  English  and
    financially independent, that can be no higher than a neutral factor.

64. Subsection (4) confirms that little weight should be given to a private
    life established by a person when in the United Kingdom unlawfully, and
    subsection (5) confirms that little weight should be given to a private
    life established by a person when that person's immigration  status  is
    precarious.

65. Having limited leave to remain means having  a  precarious  immigration
    status.  The Appellant has only ever had limited leave to remain, apart
    from a brief period when  she  was  in  this  country  unlawfully,  and
    therefore little weight must be attached to the private life  that  she
    has established.

66. I therefore attach significant weight to the fact  that  the  Appellant
    cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules in relation to  her  family  life,
    and the maintenance of effective immigration control is in  the  public
    interest.

67. I also take into account that compelling circumstances are required  to
    justify a grant of leave to remain pursuant to Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

68. Notwithstanding the weight to be attached to the failure to satisfy the
    Immigration Rules, I find that there are  compelling  circumstances  in
    this appeal.  Those circumstances are a particularly strong family life
    established between the Appellant and her daughter, and the significant
    factor is the grant of refugee status to the daughter  because  of  her
    sexuality.  There is a very high level of dependence by the  couple  on
    each other.  They do not have any other supportive family members.  The
    Appellant would have no family support if she returned  to  Malawi,  no
    accommodation, and there would be  an  irrevocable  separation  of  the
    Appellant and her daughter, as the daughter could not travel to  Malawi
    because of her well-founded fear of persecution, which is  accepted  by
    the Respondent.

69. The Respondent in the refusal dated 21st April 2015 indicated that  the
    Appellant had not provided  satisfactory  evidence  to  show  that  the
    circumstances of the previous grant of leave remained the same.  I find
    that  the  Appellant  has  provided  such  evidence,   and   that   the
    circumstances do remain very much the same.  It is correct, as  pointed
    out by Mr Bates, that no expert evidence has been submitted to  confirm
    the level of emotional dependence, but I am satisfied having considered
    all the evidence, that such emotional dependence  does  exist  in  this
    case, that the circumstances of the  Appellant  and  her  daughter  are
    unusual, and compelling, and therefore I  conclude  that  refusing  her
    leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with the family life established with  her  daughter,  and
    therefore would breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.  On that basis
    the appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights  grounds  in  relation  to
Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and I see no need to make an  anonymity
order.


Signed                              Date 7th November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
 I do not find that it  is  appropriate.   Evidence  was  presented  to  the
Tribunal which was not before the  original  decision  maker  and  therefore
there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 7th November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
