
[pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07837/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS





|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19th July 2016                      |On 22nd July 2016                |
|                                       |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     NT

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell, instructed by Jein Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




    Introduction


    1.      The appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  born  in  1981.  He
       arrived  in  the  UK  on  8th  May  2012  and  claimed  asylum.  The
       application was refused on 30th July 2013. His appeal was  heard  by
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Prior who dismissed his  appeal  on
       4th October 2013, but an error of law was found in the decision  and
       the matter remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Grimes in a decision dated 19th May 2014. The  matter
       was heard again de novo by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Napthine
       who  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds  in  a   determination
       promulgated on the 4th December 2014.  I found  that  this  decision
       was also vitiated by an error  of  law  and  set  it  aside  in  its
       entirety with no findings preserved. My reasoning for this  decision
       is set out in my error of law decision of 20th January 2016 which is
       appended to this decision at  Annex  A.  The  remaking  hearing  was
       adjourned.

    2.      The matter came before me to remake the appeal.

Evidence and Submissions - Remaking


Evidence


    3. The appellant attended the Tribunal and gave  evidence  through  the
       Tribunal interpreter in the Tamil language.  He  confirmed  that  he
       understood the interpreter, and that his evidence in his  statements
       and information given at interview  and  to  doctors  was  true  and
       correct to the best of his belief. In summary his key evidence  from
       these statements and his oral evidence is as follows.

    4. The appellant was born in Sri Lanka and lived in Sri Lanka with  his
       parents and two brothers as a child. His  youngest  brother  KT  now
       lives in the UK as the dependent of  his  Italian  wife  having  had
       subsidiary protection in Italy. His other brother,  RT,  disappeared
       in the last period of war in Sri Lanka in 2009. He has had virtually
       no contact with his parents as he married against  their  wishes  in
       2006. He married his wife KV (married name KN) in 2006, and  he  and
       his wife have a child NN born in 2008. His family are ethnic  Tamils
       from the North of Sri  Lanka  who  have  suffered  as  a  result  of
       discrimination by the Sinhalese, and  he  was  brought  up  learning
       about horrific stories of abuse against the Tamil people.

    5. The appellant completed his A levels in 2000, and then  worked  with
       the LTTE whom he believed were the strongest force fighting for  the
       rights of Tamils and their independence. He  worked  with  the  LTTE
       police at Puthukkudiyiruppu police station doing administrative work
       between 2001 and 2006. The appellant was, from this time,  a  strong
       supporter of the LTTE.  In 2006 he was  compelled  by  the  LTTE  to
       fight for them and  become  a  full  member.  He  did  three  months
       military training at Kantham Kulam camp in Kilinochchi. He was given
       the LTTE code name "[K]" In April  2008  he  was  injured  at  Madhu
       battle: his right ear drum burst and he  was  taken  to  Ponnampalam
       hospital for treatment. He spent time in hospital and  then  at  the
       LTTE medical base. The appellant worked in  Kilinochchi  and  Mannar
       directly for "[S]" who was in charge of ammunitions in his  regiment
       doing paper work. From 2008 the Sri Lankan army made advances on the
       area held by the LTTE. The appellant witnessed  war  crimes  against
       civilians during this advance including deliberate killings, the use
       of cluster  bombs,  and  the  use  of  chemical  weapons  which  the
       appellant concluded amounted to genocide against the  Tamil  people.
       On 20th April 2009 the appellant, other LTTE members and more than a
       hundred thousand civilians were captured by the Sri Lankan  army  in
       an area known as the Maththalan box.

    6. On this date the  appellant  was  taken  to  Omanthai  and  then  to
       Arunachchalama camp by government forces. He did not surrender as an
       LTTE member but pretended to be a  member  of  his  paternal  aunt's
       family, Mrs P, whom he met  by  chance.  He  started  to  experience
       bleeding from his ears in the camp and his paternal aunt, Mrs P, got
       him to see a doctor there, and then to be  transferred  to  Vavuniya
       hospital. She communicated this to another paternal aunt, Mrs R, who
       managed to help the appellant escape from the hospital  in  Vavuniya
       which was over-run with many people so the authorities lost track of
       whom they were monitoring. The appellant hid in his aunt's (Mrs R's)
       house and did not go out.

    7. However on 29th July 2009 the appellant's ears began to bleed  again
       and he experienced unbearable pain,  and  he  returned  to  hospital
       alone  by  bike.  Before  getting  there  he  was  arrested  by  the
       authorities. He was recognised by someone called Ramanan who  was  a
       former LTTE member who had been in his regiment. The  appellant  was
       blind-folded in the van, and taken on a 10 to 15 minute drive  to  a
       place where he was taken to a room, which he understood later to  be
       an underground CID camp. Ramanan gave  the  authorities  exaggerated
       information that the appellant knew where the LTTE records were  and
       where the regiment ammunitions were. The appellant was  photographed
       and his finger prints were taken. He was made to sign a blank  piece
       of paper. He was questioned and beaten. Ramanan asked the  questions
       in Tamil, and translated the answers into Sinhalese.  The  appellant
       admitted he had been in the LTTE and maintained records but said  he
       did not know where ammunitions were hidden. He was not believed  and
       was brutally tortured. The appellant  remained  in  this  place  for
       three days, when he agreed due to the  torture  to  disclose  places
       where weapons were hidden, and was then taken to Omanthai camp.

    8. The appellant remained in Omanthai camp for 1 year and 7 months, and
       then was moved to Kilinochchi camp for a further 7  months.  He  was
       repeatedly questioned and ill-treated during this time. He disclosed
       some information and assisted in identifying where weapons  were  on
       two occasions. When he was taken  out  of  the  camp  in  search  of
       weapons he was blindfolded.

    9. The appellant escaped from detention in October 2011.  He  had  been
       taken out blindfolded in a  vehicle  and  he  assumed  that  he  was
       supposed to assist in finding weapons as  had  happened  previously,
       but he became afraid he was going to  be  shot  as  they  drove  for
       between four and four and a half hours. However in fact the  vehicle
       stopped on the Mannar Road and his blindfold was removed, and he saw
       his father-in-law coming out of a restaurant. He started to cry out,
       but his father-in-law told him to be quiet and took him  in  another
       vehicle. His father-in-law told him he had  bribed  the  authorities
       through the EPDP with 8 million lakh Sri Lankan rupees to obtain his
       release.

   10. The appellant's father-in-law took him to his friend Anthony's house
       in Mannar where he stayed for 2 days. On 11th October  2011  Anthony
       took him in a fishing boat out to sea where they met a  bigger  boat
       which took him India. He arrived in India on 12th October  2011.  He
       remained in India in hiding until 5th  May  2012  when  he  flew  to
       France via Bahrain on an Air France plane. He arrived in  France  on
       6th May 2012, and left there in a lorry on 7th May arriving  in  the
       UK on 8th May 2012. The appellant felt he was not mentally  well  at
       the time of his screening and  full  asylum  interview  due  to  the
       torture and trauma he had suffered, and found it difficult to give a
       full and complete account of his problems due to mental state.

   11. Since coming to the UK the appellant has continued  to  be  involved
       with politics. He comes from a Tamil nationalist family and  despite
       the defeat of the LTTE in 2009 continues to believe that a  separate
       country is the only solution to the ethnic problems in Sri Lanka. He
       has attended Tamil protests since November  2012  when  he  attended
       National Martyr's day at the London Excel Centre. On this day he met
       his uncle and youngest brother by chance, and through them  came  to
       know that his father and other brother were missing since the end of
       the war in 2009, and that his mother had gone to India. He has  been
       in some limited contact with his mother as  a  result  and  obtained
       documents from her.

   12. He next attended the Mullivaikkal  Remembrance  Vigil  in  Trafalgar
       Square in May 2013. There he made contact with  Tamil  organisations
       and began to attend events Tamil diaspora events regularly. He  felt
       depressed and worried in the UK  due  to  his  past  experiences  of
       torture, and was encouraged by friends to attend demonstrations  and
       give vent to his anger against the Sri  Lankan  state.  He  attended
       further events in March and July 2014. He gradually  became  a  full
       time activist doing voluntary work for the British Tamil Forum,  The
       Tamil Information Centre, National  Liberal  Party,  Nation  Without
       State and the Transnational Government of  Tamil  Eelam.  There  are
       photographs   and   DVD   evidence   showing   his   attendance   at
       demonstrations and events  organised  by  these  organisations.   He
       believes that he has attended about 200 events since his arrival  in
       the UK.

   13. The appellant knows the leaders of these diaspora organisations well
       including  Mr  Sockalingam  Yogalingam  who  is   an   MP   of   the
       Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) who gave evidence  to
       the Tribunal, and has lobbied  British  ministers  and  MPs.  He  is
       working  with  the  International  Centre  for  the  Prevention  and
       Prosecution of  Genocide  to  collect  statements  from  victims  of
       torture, having given his own statement. He has starting  work  with
       their North West Evidence Collecting Team. He fears that as  he  has
       given his statement and agreed to give evidence in legal proceedings
       against Sri Lanka at any future international court that because  of
       the Sri Lankan government's sophisticated intelligence network  that
       this will be known to them. He has met with a UN consultant  and  an
       investigator called Ms Frances Harrison and a prosecutor called Dana
       Urban QC as his evidence was found to be  significant.  His  account
       has also been used in their report with his consent.

   14. He remains committed to this work as  he  believes  the  Sri  Lankan
       government continues to attack  Tamils,  occupying  their  homeland,
       destroy Hindu temples, make  unlawful  arrests  and  detain  Tamils,
       forcibly recruit Tamils  for  military  service  and  deprive  Tamil
       victims of the right to give evidence to human rights organisations.



   15. In May 2016 the appellant and others had a dispute with the  British
       Tamil Forum for refusing to raise the national  Tamil  flag  on  the
       basis that it was banned in the UK as it looks similar to  the  LTTE
       flag. However the Anti-Terrorism Unit  at  Scotland  Yard  confirmed
       that it was not the case that the flag  was  banned,  and  when  Sri
       Lanka de-proscribed the British Tamil Forum the appellant and others
       decided that the leadership of the British Tamil Forum  had  done  a
       secret deal with the Sri Lankan government. The British Tamil  Forum
       has provided details of one of the appellant's friends  to  the  Sri
       Lankan authorities, a man called SK, and  the  British  police  have
       been involved. As a result the appellant is no longer taking part in
       their events, and is warning others not to do so.

   16. The appellant is aware that his photograph has been used as a result
       of his activism describe  above  in  a  Sinhalese  nationalist  film
       produced by Bodu Bala Sena, in which he is  mentioned  by  name  and
       said to be a traitor working to  re-group  the  LTTE.  The  film  is
       available currently on YouTube and shows a photo of him with British
       MPs and Tiger flags. Another similar film including his picture  has
       been produced by Sinhale Jeya Udesa and is also available  currently
       on YouTube. His photograph also appeared in a newspaper called  Yarl
       Thinkkural published on 19th May 2015 in  Sri  Lanka.  A  number  of
       other photographs are included  in  the  bundle  which  feature  the
       appellant often with Tiger or Tamil symbols on his  clothing.  These
       photos were taken by friends and used for the Tamil TGTE newsletters
       without names being mentioned but stating the event, time and place.



   17. The appellant remade contact with his wife through his father-in-law
       after arriving in India in October 2011. He has had sporadic contact
       with his wife and son, and her family ever since. He is  aware  that
       his  brother-in-law  (his  wife's  brother)  was  taken   away   for
       questioning because of him although he was  not  involved  with  the
       LTTE, and has since had to be released through  use  of  bribes  and
       flee Sri Lanka. His father-in-law did write some  letters  but  does
       not do this anymore as he fears  they  may  be  intercepted  by  the
       authorities. His wife is reluctant to talk on the telephone  as  she
       fears that the phone line could be tapped.

   18. The appellant's wife has had a number of visits by  the  authorities
       to her home from people who claim to be from military  intelligence.
       In December 2015 there were threats by such persons saying that  the
       appellant was trying to re-group the LTTE and  working  with  banned
       diaspora organisations in the UK. She was shown a newspaper with his
       photograph at a demonstration. She was threatened if he did not stop
       these activities so she reported the  matter  to  the  Human  Rights
       Commission on 23rd December 2015. She also  sought  assistance  from
       her local MP, Provincial Council and others.

   19.  Most  recently,  on  12th  June  2016,  some  army   and   military
       intelligence officers went to his  wife's  home,  and  searched  for
       weapons they believed were hidden in the backyard. When  they  found
       nothing they arrested SG (his mother's cousin's  son)  and  GS  (his
       wife's elder sister's son),  GS  being  a  neighbour  and  SG  being
       someone who was visiting at the time. The appellant's eight year old
       son, naturally unaware of the risks involved, took some  photographs
       with a mobile  phone  camera.  His  wife  told  him  off  for  doing
       something so dangerous, but sent the photographs  to  the  appellant
       via an app called Viber. One of these photographs has since been put
       on a website called Senpakam (the  appellant  does  not  know  how),
       which can be viewed in Sri Lanka and the UK,  along with  a  caption
       about how his wife is the wife of an ex-fighter and that CID came to
       her house looking for weapons.  His wife has informed him via  Viber
       that the relatives (SG and GS) have not been released, and that  the
       family have reported them missing to a human rights organisation.

   20. The appellant still continues  to  suffer  due  to  the  torture  he
       experienced at the hands of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.  He  has
       physical   pain,   nightmares,   flash-backs   and   problems   with
       concentration. The appellant lives  with  brother  in  Coventry  who
       provides him with support, and he  also  relies  on  medication  and
       counselling. He finds that being involved with  the  Tamil  diaspora
       gives meaning to his life as he feels he can contribute  to  justice
       by speaking out about what has happened and fighting  for  a  better
       future. He is certain that return to Sri Lanka would mean return  to
       detention and torture that he would not be able  to  face.  The  Sri
       Lankan authorities have his details as he was  previously  detained.
       They still suspect he knows about LTTE weapons, and believe that  he
       is working in the UK to re-group the LTTE.

   21. Mr Sockalingam Yogalingam attended the Tribunal and  gave  evidence.
       He confirmed his letter of 17th January 2016 was true  and  correct.
       In summary his oral and written evidence is as follows.

   22. He is an estate agent, and a MP with the Transnational Government of
       Tamil Eelam (TGTE), assistant director of Act Now  and  a  committee
       member of  Nation  without  States.  The  TGTE  is  an  organisation
       committed to bring about self-determination for  the  Tamil  people,
       and justice for those who have suffered at  the  hands  of  the  Sri
       Lankan authorities. It is a proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka.

   23. Mr Yogalingam confirms that the appellant is  a  volunteer  who  has
       suffered and witnessed crimes against humanity  by  the  Sri  Lankan
       authorities. The appellant started  work  for  his  organisation  in
       September 2013, attending meetings, putting up posters, distributing
       leaflets, and  organising  events  and  public  demonstrations.  The
       appellant is a former LTTE police member, and is  committed  to  the
       mission of the TGTE.  He now  is  given  responsible  roles  in  the
       organisation of key events such as lobbying MPs  and  ministers  and
       works in their office doing administration about once  a  fortnight.
       He is co-ordinating events in Coventry with the guidance of the TGTE
       MP, Mr Ambalawanar Ahilawanar. His photo has appeared in  the  media
       often, both in media such as the BBC and on websites such  as  Tamil
       Net and Tamil Win. The TGTE also has a minister for  media,  and  so
       they are also involved  with  publicising  their  cause  by  sending
       pictures to the press.

   24. The appellant  is  likely  to  be  of  interest  to  the  Sri  Lanka
       authorities in Mr Yogalingam's opinion. Mr Yogalingam believes  that
       the  organisation  Bola  Bala  Sana   is   an   extremist   Buddhist
       organisation who have  influence  with  the  Sri  Lankan  government
       against Tamils such as the appellant, and  that  the  Youtube  video
       could cause him problems with the authorities if he were returned to
       Sri Lanka.

   25. Mr Yogalinam does not often attend Tribunal hearings although he  is
       often asked to go: he has attended only about 12 in  total.  He  has
       attended for the appellant as he believes he is truly  committed  to
       their joint work.

   26. Other evidence can be summarised as follows:

        . Birth certificate and marriage certificate of  the  appellant  and
          birth certificate of the appellant's son and wife

        . The appellant's educational certificates - O level and A level and
          pupil record sheet

       Material Related to the UK diaspora activities by the appellant

        . Letter from Jim Cunningham (British) MP confirming that  he  works
          with the appellant as a leading Tamil activist

        . Letter confirming the appellant is a member of the British  Tamils
          Forum dated 10th October 2014

        . Letters complaining about the British Tamil Forum and  a  petition
          about the issue of a failure to hoist the Tamil flag signed by the
          appellant and others, and correspondence  with  Jim  Cunnigham  MP
          about this issue.

        . Letter from International Centre for Prevention and Prosecution of
          Genocide dated October 2014 confirming  the  appellant  had  given
          written evidence to submit to the UNHCR's OISL commission together
          with statement from Miss Ambihai Seevaratnam of this  organisation
          about her role, the commission  and  the  evidence  given  by  the
          appellant and details of the appellant's UK activism.

        .  Letter  from  World  Tamils  Historical  Society  confirming  the
          appellant's involvement with them since 2015 dated 15th July  2016
          plus event photos identifying the appellant for this organisation

        . Letter from the Transitional Government of Tamil Eelam dated  17th
          January 2016 about their group and the appellant's work with them.



        . Documents from the  Senpakam  website  showing  the  appellant  at
          events in the UK

        . YouTube screen shot showing the appellant with a  tiger  flag  and
          supporting  the  UK  labour  party  and  another  with  him  on  a
          demonstration from a  Bodu  Bala  Sena  film  clip  together  with
          information  about  Bodu  Bala  Sena  and  a  translation  of  the
          commentary

        . News reports about Tamil rallies and photos of  the  appellant  at
          demonstrations

       Documents relating to the Appellant and his family in Sri Lanka

        . Photos of  a  person  said  to  be  the  appellant  with  military
          equipment, wedding photos of  appellant  and  NK,  and  photos  of
          persons said to NK and NN in Sri Lanka.

        .  Ration cards and documents re NK being allowed to  resettle  from
          Vavuniya in November 2009 and child health record for NN.

        . Evidence from the appellant's mother that she lives in  India  and
          that the appellant and her husband disappeared in 2009 at the  end
          of the war (letter from her with envelope,  medical  test  results
          for her with address of clinic).

        . Letters from the appellant's wife (NK)  dated  15th  August  2012,
          25th December 2012 and 15th January  2013  with  envelopes  saying
          that she was approached by CID officers at her home in Iranaipalai
          and felt she had to leave for Mullaitivu, and then  returned  back
          due to their son's education and is still being approached by  CID
          with questions about the appellant.

        . Letters from Mr AV Justice of  the  Peace,  father-in-law  of  the
          appellant about enquiries made by CID  about  the  appellant,  and
          detention of his own son and ill-health of his  wife  one  undated
          and one dated 3rd April 2013

        . Letter by the appellant's wife, NK, to the Human Rights Commission
          of Sri Lanka dated 23th December 2015 regarding problems  she  has
          experienced from the authorities and the fears of a threat to  her
          life and the safety of her child.

        . Letter from St Fatima's Church, Irranaipalai, dated 20th  December
          2015 regarding the appellant's history and problems for  his  wife
          NK since he left.

        . Letter from Northern Provincial Council  dated  2nd  January  2016
          regarding the appellant's history and  current  problems  for  his
          wife NK.

        . Photographs of the appellant's wife and soldiers and  evidence  of
          these being sent to the appellant

        .  Documents  from  the  Senpakam  website  showing  photos  of  the
          appellant's wife with military and referring to the appellant, and
          Mr S and Mr G dated 16th July 2016

       Material about the appellant's mental and physical health

        . Letter from the appellant's GP  together  with  test  results  and
          referral to a psychological wellbeing practitioner

        . Medical report of Mr A Izquierdo-Martin  Consultant  in  Emergency
          Medicine  regarding  the  appellant  dated  13th  September   2013
          regarding scars found to be consistent with being  caused  between
          2009 and 2011 by torture.

        . Letter from Coventry Refugee and Migrant Centre  Therapy  Services
          dated 23rd June 2016

        . Report of Dr  Saleh  Dhumad  Consultant  Psychiatrist  dated  15th
          January 2016  concluding  the  appellant  suffers  from  PTSD  and
          moderate depression, with a moderate risk of suicide.

       Expert reports on the plausibility of  the  appellant's  history  and
       assessment of his risk on return

        . Expert report  of  Ms  Frances  Harrison  (former  journalist  and
          current  researcher  into  Sri  Lanka)  project  managers  of  the
          International Truth and  Justice  Project  Sri  Lanka  dated  14th
          January 2015 regarding the plausibility of the appellant's account
          and issues going to risk on return, together with  report  of  the
          International Truth and Justice Project Sir Lanka report Silenced:
          survivors of torture and sexual  violence  in  2015  published  in
          January 2016.

        .  Expert  report  of  Dr  Chris  Smith,  freelance  researcher  and
          associate fellow of Chatham House, regarding the  plausibility  of
          the appellant's account and risk on return.

       Background Country of Origin Evidence

        . Home Office COIS Reports on Sri Lanka  including  one  dated  July
          2016 entitled Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism

        Submissions

   27. Mr Walker relied upon the reasons for refusal letter dated 30th July
       2013. In this letter the respondent accepts that the appellant is  a
       Sri Lankan citizen [para 10] and related to  his  brother  KT  as  a
       brother [para 11]. It is accepted that the  appellant  was  detained
       and tortured by the Sri Lanka by CID officers in 2009 on account  of
       his past LTTE involvement. The respondent however contests that  the
       appellant would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka as it is  asserted
       that GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]
       UKUT 00319 shows  that  the  Sri  Lankan  government  would  not  be
       interested in the appellant due to his past LTTE activities. This is
       because the appellant has had, they  contend,  no  involvement  with
       Tamil politics since May 2009, and would not be regarded  as  having
       any significant current role in relation to  Tamil  separatism  with
       the diaspora or a renewal of hostilities in Sri Lanka. No weight  is
       given to the letters from the family as with the  exception  of  the
       one from the father-in-law they were not translated, and this letter
       is not objective or impartial, and the problems for the  appellant's
       brother-in-law may not be  linked  to  him.  The  appellant  is  not
       therefore found to be a refugee or at real risk of serious  harm  if
       returned to Sri Lanka.

   28. On consideration of Article 8 ECHR matters the  appellant  is  found
       not  to  qualify  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  Outside  of   the
       Immigration Rules medical matters are considered  and  it  is  found
       that there  are  medical  facilities  in  Sri  Lanka  to  treat  the
       appellant's mental health problems, and that there is no  obligation
       for the UK to provide this treatment in accordance  with  Article  3
       ECHR as the very high threshold has not been reached.

   29. The respondent also relies upon  a  letter  from  the  British  High
       Commission in Colombo dated 30th November 2015 which confirmed  that
       the Sri Lanka government had de-proscribed the British Tamil  Forum.



   30. Mr Walker accepted however that there was a large amount of  evidence
       before the Upper Tribunal about the appellant's sur place  activities
       for an organisation proscribed in Sri Lanka, the TGTE. There was also
       evidence that  the  appellant's  picture  had  appeared  in  a  Tamil
       newspaper and on the Sanpakam website as a person connected with  the
       LTTE and opposing the Sri Lankan government, both of which  would  be
       available in Sri Lanka. In  addition  there  was  evidence  that  the
       appellant's wife and relatives had been interrogated by the military,
       although it was unclear how the  picture  of  this  had  reached  the
       Sanpakam website. He did not have instructions to concede the  appeal
       however but  this  evidence  would  have  to  be  considered  by  the
       Tribunal.



   31. Ms Rothwell relied upon her skeleton argument and  oral  submissions.
       In summary she says as follows.



   32. She submitted that the observations of  Mr  Walker  on  the  evidence
       should be noted. She further  noted  that  the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter would appear to have applied the incorrect standard  of  proof
       as it assessed the evidence "on balance" at paragraph 15, rather than
       to the lower civil standard of proof applicable in asylum cases.



   33. The appellant's  history  of  involvement  with  the  LTTE  including
       fighting as a full member and  involvement  with  the  administration
       relating to ammunitions, and subsequent detention  between  May  2009
       and October 2011 when he was horrifically torture,  followed  by  his
       escape with payment of a bribe was accepted by the respondent.  There
       is extensive  information  about  the  appellant's  on-going  medical
       problems  following  torture  in  GP   reports,   hospital   records,
       counselling records, a report of Dr Dhumad and a letter from Coventry
       Refugee and Migrant Centre Therapy Services.



   34. Ms Rothwell noted that with respect to continuing  problems  for  the
       appellant's family that the appellant's wife had first written to him
       on 15th August 2012 prior to his being refused asylum,  and  she  had
       sent other letters the same year. There  was  also  evidence  of  his
       brother-in-law's difficulties in his father-in-law's  letters.  There
       was now further evidence of problems for relatives  in  the  material
       relating to June 2016.  It  is  possible  that  the  photographs  had
       reached the Sanpakam website because the  families  of  the  detained
       relatives had sent them or the human rights organisation to whom  the
       detentions were reported provided them. It is notable  that  Sanpakam
       got the evidence on 16th July 2016 so a month after the incident, and
       the appellant getting the photographs.  Ms  Rothwell  submitted  that
       there was highly persuasive evidence that the authorities were  still
       interested in the  appellant  as  they  maintained  pressure  on  his
       family. This was consistent with what is said at paragraph  6.6.3  of
       the latest COIS report on Sri Lanka dated July 2016.



   35. Ms Rothwell noted that there was a wealth of information showing  the
       appellant  had  extensive  involvement  with   the   diaspora   Tamil
       separatist movement, of most significance being that he was  involved
       with the TGTE. The number of photographs of different  events  showed
       he was prolific activist. It was clear from GJ that  the  Sri  Lankan
       government would be likely to  know  that  he  had  this  involvement
       because of infiltration of the diaspora movement, but also because of
       pictures and reference to the appellant in media in Sri Lanka. He had
       raised specific fears of the  Sri  Lankan  government  having  become
       involved with the BTF, and thus  of  being  aware  of  true  activist
       involved with this organisation.



   36. It was clear that it would also be normal practice for  returnees  to
       be asked about their diaspora activities on  return,  see  letter  of
       British High Commission of 25th July 2014 at page B214 of the bundle.
       By giving his  name  his  previous  escape  from  detention  and  the
       questioning of his relatives would become apparent. The  latest  COIS
       report on Sri Lanka dated  July  2016  makes  plain  that  a  serious
       possibly of a  person  such  as  the  appellant  being  detained  and
       tortured remained, see paragraphs  6.5.2,  6.5.5  and  6.6.1,  taking
       material from a number of reputable reports. Whilst the  reasons  for
       refusal  letter  had  suggested  that  the  new  government  and  new
       president might lead to change this clearly had not  taken  place  in
       any positive way. Two experts, Dr Smith and  Ms  Harrison,  had  also
       written reports supporting the appellant's contention that  he  would
       be at risk on return.



   37. The appeal should be allowed as the appellant had  shown  that  there
       was a  serious  possibility  that  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
       persecution for reason of his  political  opinions  in  favour  of  a
       separate Tamil state. This is  because  the  appellant's  history  is
       credible and in keeping with the evidence given in GJ, and because he
       is at risk in accordance with the risk factors set out in  that  case
       namely that it is likely he is on a stop list or  at  least  a  watch
       list because he is seen as a threat to the unity of  the  Sri  Lankan
       state as a result of his past and current  diaspora  activities,  and
       this interest is reflected in the on-going interest in his family and
       would as a result be detained and at real risk of torture.

Conclusions - Remaking

   38. The factual matrix is agreed in this case up to the point  when  the
       applicant escaped from Sri Lanka. In short summary it  is  therefore
       accepted by the respondent that the appellant was a  police  officer
       and a fighter with the LTTE, working for a leader who was in  charge
       of ammunition. It is accepted that from July 2009  to  October  2011
       the  appellant  was  detained  and  tortured  by  the   Sri   Lankan
       authorities, and that in October 2011 he escaped from Sri  Lanka  by
       boat and made his way to the UK where he claimed asylum in May 2012.
       The respondent does not accept that the  appellant  has  significant
       diaspora activities or that his family have suffered  enquiries  and
       worse from the Sri Lankan authorities as they are still looking  for
       the appellant. It is not accepted that  he  faces  a  real  risk  of
       serious harm as a result of his actual or imputed political opinions
       if returned to Sri Lanka.

   39. I find the appellant to be a credible witness. He gave his  evidence
       in a calm and careful way, addressing all questions put  to  him  in
       full. His oral evidence was consistent with  his  written  evidence,
       and no issues of inconsistency were raised by  the  respondent.  His
       evidence is also consistent with his witness Mr Yogalingam and  with
       the wider country of origin materials. Likewise I find Mr Yogalingam
       to be a credible witness. I have no reason to doubt the  information
       he has provided about the appellant's activism or  the  organisation
       he works for the TGTE. He is a businessman who had  clearly  made  a
       careful decision to  come  to  the  Tribunal  to  support  a  fellow
       political activist he genuinely believed to be at risk on return  to
       Sri Lanka. He was not prepared to do this for all who asked  him  to
       do this.

   40. The appellant has provided evidence in the form of letters (a number
       with envelopes and all with  certified  translations)  from  a  wide
       number of sources - his wife, his father-in-law, a parish priest,  a
       member of the Northern Provincial Council covering the period August
       2012 to January 2016 about harassment of his wife by the authorities
       seeking him because of his history and diaspora  activities.  It  is
       perhaps of some additional weight that the three  letters  from  the
       appellant's wife and at least one of the letters from his father-in-
       law were sent prior to the appellant's asylum claim  being  refused.
       It is also notable that the letters have the  ring  of  truth  about
       them, making plain for instance the appellant's  wife's  dilemma  at
       having to choose between staying a safer place or in a  place  where
       their son could receive his education, and attaching little drawings
       by the appellant's son. In addition there are  papers  concerning  a
       complaint made by the appellant's wife  made  to  the  Human  Rights
       Commission in December 2015. There are also materials  regarding  an
       incident in June 2016 when military came to the  appellant's  wife's
       home and questioned her once again about the appellant,  looked  for
       weapons and detained two relatives. These  materials  consistent  of
       photographs; evidence of the communication of these  photographs  to
       the appellant in the UK; and evidence some of these photographs were
       then reproduced on a Tamil news website, www.senpakam,org   in  July
       2016 with a commentary about the incident.

   41. The only challenge offered by the respondent  to  this  evidence  is
       that some of it was originally untranslated;  and  that  potentially
       one of the relatives said to have  been  detained  (the  appellant's
       wife's brother) might have  been  detained  for  other  reasons.  In
       response  to  this  last  issue  the  appellant's  evidence,   which
       corroborates having had all of the above communicated to  him,  says
       that this was not the case, and that this individual has  since  had
       to be bribed out of detention and had to find safety in India as  he
       is at risk of serious harm by association with him. The COIS  Report
       July 2016 at paragraph 6.6.3 cites evidence from  the  International
       Truth and Justice Project in their January 2016 of families of those
       with LTTE links being targeted, so  this  pattern  of  behaviour  is
       consistent with some background evidence.  Having considered all  of
       the evidence I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  of  on-going
       interest to the Sri Lankan authorities in the sense  that  there  is
       evidence  of  the  military  questioning,  harassing  and  detaining
       relatives of his in Sri Lanka since his departure.

   42. Jim Cunningham MP refers to the appellant as a as a leading activist
       in his letter of support. The  appellant  has  provided  substantial
       evidence  of  his  attending  events  from  November  2012,  and  of
       committed activism from the end of 2014 to the current  time.  There
       are many photographs in  which  he  can  be  clearly  identified  at
       protest and demonstrations.

   43. The appellant has had involvement with the British Tamil Forum,  the
       Tamil Information Centre, the National Liberal Party, Nation without
       State, the Tamil  World  Historical  Society  and  the  Transitional
       Government of Tamil Eelam  (TGTE)  all  of  which  is  evidenced  by
       letters from these organisations. He has attended and helped arrange
       protests and demonstrations and the celebration of  important  Tamil
       festivals/ commemorations, but has  also  taken  things  further  by
       giving  evidence  of  crimes  against  humanity/genocide  and  being
       involved with the collection of this evidence from others.  This  is
       outlined  in  a  letter  from  the  International  Centre  for   the
       Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide stating he has given evidence
       under oath and would potentially be a key  witness  in  relation  to
       genocide in Sri Lanka, with further details given in a statement  by
       the UK Country Coordinator.  He  is  described  by  the  witness  Mr
       Yogalingam as: "one of the key  and  trusthworthy  volunteers",  and
       that he is  "in  charge  of  coordinating  the  TGTE  activities  in
       Coventry under the guidance of Mr  Ambalawanar  Ahilawanar  (Ahilan)
       who is another TGTE Member of Parliament. He  continues  to  express
       his political aspiration publicly. As his photos often appear in the
       media he is very  likely  to  be  of  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
       authorities."

   44. There is  also  evidence  that  this  activism  has  clearly  become
       available to be known in  Sri  Lanka.  The  appellant  has  provided
       evidence that photographs of him supporting  Tamil  separatism  have
       appeared on  YouTube  film  placed  on  the  internet  by  Sinhalese
       Buddhist organisations Bodu Bala Sena and Sinhale Jaya  Udesa,  with
       commentary on the Bodu Bala Sena clip referring  to  the  appellant,
       amongst others, as a national traitor. This clip was  shown  at  the
       Tribunal hearing. The appellant's picture on a  Tamil  demonstration
       with a  tiger  flag  has  also  appeared  in  the  Yarl  Thinakkural
       newspaper date 19th May 2015 with a caption that he was attending  a
       Mullivaikal Day demonstration organised by the British Tamil  Forum.
       The appellant produced  the  original  of  this  newspaper  of  that
       Tribunal hearing.

   45. It is the evidence  of  the  appellant's  wife  that  she  has  been
       presented with evidence of this diaspora activism in questioning put
       to her about the appellant, and it is the view of Mr Sokolingam that
       it would be known.  I am satisfied, on consideration of all of  this
       evidence, that the appellant has a profile as a  committed  activist
       for a separate Tamil state in the UK and that this has come  to  the
       notice of the Sri Lankan authorities.

   46. The appellant's solicitors have provided an opinion from Ms  Frances
       Harrison, who is an  independent  researcher  and  expert  from  the
       International Truth and Justice Project, Sri Lanka. I  am  satisfied
       that Ms Harrison has considerable expertise on  Sri  Lanka  She  has
       experience of living in Sri Lanka and visiting the  country  between
       2000 and 2005; she wrote a book on the Sri Lanka in  2012  regarding
       the end of the civil war in 2009; she has written a report on sexual
       violence and torture in Sri Lanka in this period; and now  runs  the
       International Truth and  Justice  Project  -  Sri  Lanka  which  has
       produced a report in January 2016 about torture and sexual  violence
       under the new government in Sir Lanka. Some material in this  report
       was gained from an interview with the appellant,  and  so  there  is
       perhaps arguably some circularity in  placing  much  weight  on  the
       report. However it is relevant that Ms Harrison's  opinion  is  that
       the appellant's history of being  a  member  of  the  LTTE  and  its
       administration for a  decade  would  mean  that  combined  with  his
       military training, his nom de guerre and  war  injuries  might  well
       mean he was seen as more than a low level member of  the  LTTE.  She
       also believes that current evidence, as set out in her report, means
       in any case that there is a real risk of detention  and  torture  to
       persons such as the appellant however his past membership is ranked.



   47. The appellant's solicitors have also provided  an  opinion  from  Dr
       Chris Smith who is  an  academic,  consultant,  policy  adviser  and
       researcher in the area of conflict, security and development  issues
       in South Asia. He is an associate fellow of Chatham House,  and  has
       advised the Foreign Office, the Metropolitan Police and British High
       Commission in Sri Lanka. His evidence forms  part  of  the  body  of
       evidence which informs the country guidance decision in GJ.  He  has
       visited Sri Lanka on  five  occasions  between  2009  and  2012.  He
       believes that it is likely the Sri Lankan authorities will have made
       a record of the adverse interest they have  in  the  appellant,  and
       that those records will be available at the  airport,  and  that  he
       will be detained at that  point  or  place  under  surveillance.  He
       believes that the appellant's activities  are  such  that  he  would
       continue to be likely to be of adverse interest to  the  Sri  Lankan
       state, and confirms that the authorities continue  to  be  concerned
       about a LTTE resurgence. Dr Smith believes that it is likely that if
       the appellant does come adverse notice of the Sri Lankan authorities
       that he will be detained and will be at risk of torture.

   48. I find  both  of  these  opinions  worthy  of  some  weight  in  the
       consideration of this case, particularly that of Dr Smith, and  that
       the information set  out  above  is  of  relevance  to  my  ultimate
       decision. Both experts confirm their duty  to  the  Court  and  have
       suitable  qualifications  to  provide  opinions,  and  set  out  the
       instructions and materials provided to them.

   49. It is now necessary to consider whether the appellant is at risk  on
       the basis of this history in accordance with GJ.  I  must  determine
       whether he would be seen as a person to be targeted  by  arrest  and
       detention because this was necessary to prevent  the  resurgence  of
       the LTTE or Tamil separatism or the revival of  the  civil  war.  If
       this is the case he  would  be  someone  at  risk,  as  set  out  at
       paragraph (7)(a) of that decision, as someone who is perceived to be
       a threat to the integrity of the Sri  Lankan  state  because  he  is
       perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in  post-conflict   Tamil
       separatism with the Diaspora and /or a renewal of hostilities in Sri
       Lanka.  The guidance is that the appellant's past history will  only
       be relevant to the extent that he is  perceived  by  the  Sri  Lanka
       state as being  a  present  risk.  In  accordance  with  GJ  if  the
       appellant were to be detained he would  be  at  real  risk  of  ill-
       treatment or harm requiring international protection.

   50. In evaluating whether the appellant is perceived in this way  it  is
       first necessary to note that the appellant has been accepted by  the
       respondent (and this Tribunal) as having been detained and  tortured
       during a substantial period after the end of the civil  war  in  May
       2009. He was detained  from July 2009 to October 2011, a period of 2
       years and 3 months during which he  was  severely  interrogated  and
       tortured, and used to attempt to identify LTTE weapons -  a  process
       which was successful on two occasions. GJ  is premised on  the  idea
       that since May 2009 the situation  had  changed  in  Sri  Lanka  and
       persons would only be persecuted for their political beliefs in line
       with the risk factors set out in that case after this  time.  It  is
       therefore a compelling argument that as the appellant suffered  such
       persecution in this  post-conflict  period  between  July  2009  and
       October 2011, this indicates at that time he was  perceived  by  the
       Sri Lankan state as someone with a significant role in post-conflict
       Tamil separatism - or perhaps more accurately someone who could play
       such a role, and whom they wished to prevent from so doing,  due  to
       his possible knowledge of ammunition dumps and his  past  commitment
       to the LTTE cause, which clearly had been long lasting and  involved
       active military service.

   51. The question arises then whether there would be any reason  why  the
       appellant would not continue to be seen in this  light  by  the  Sri
       Lanka state or if there is evidence that the attitude of  the  state
       has changed. The fact that the appellant was able to escape  through
       payment of a bribe, would not  in  accordance  with  evidence  found
       credible in GJ be of any significance: at paragraphs 276 and 146 the
       fact of release via a bribe does not indicate whether the  appellant
       is seen as a serious threat or that the  records  relating  to  that
       person would be amended. My findings about the on-going interest  in
       the appellant's wife and her  family  also  indicate  that  the  Sri
       Lankan state continue to view the appellant as someone who  has  the
       potential  to  play  a  significant  role  in  post-conflict   Tamil
       separatism in Sri Lanka, and who is demonstrating this potential  in
       his diaspora activism, which in turn I have found to be known in Sri
       Lanka through news reports and intelligence  in  the  hands  of  the
       security forces as presented to the appellant's wife.

   52. I therefore conclude that the appellant faces a serious  possibility
       of being detained on return to Sri Lanka by  the  security  services
       (either at the airport because of being on  a  stop  list  or  later
       because he is on a watch list and placed under  surveillance)  as  a
       result of his actual and imputed  political  opinions  as  currently
       expressed in his diaspora activism and reflected in his past history
       of Tamil separatist activity. This view is  reinforced  by  what  is
       said at paragraph 6.5.2 and 6.5.5  of  the  COIS  July  2016  report
       relying upon  the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada  and
       International Crisis Group reports of 2015 about arrests on  arrival
       in Sri Lanka. It is evident from  GJ  and  the  current  Country  of
       Origin Information Service Report on Sri Lanka dated July 2016,  for
       instance at paragraph 6.6.1 and 6.6.3, that being  detained  by  the
       Sri Lankan security services will mean he is at real risk of serious
       harm and that the Sirisena government elected in  January  2015  has
       not changed this risk to date.

   Decision:


   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.


   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.


   3. I re-make of the appeal by allowing the appeal on asylum  grounds  and
      in accordance with the UK's obligations under Article 3 ECHR.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I make this order to avoid a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.

Signed: Fiona Lindsley

Date:  20th July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


Annex A





                            DECISION AND REASONS



    Introduction





   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 30th  September  1981.
      He arrived in  the  UK  on  8th  May  2012  and  claimed  asylum.  The
      application was refused on 30th July 2013. His  appeal  was  heard  by
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Prior who dismissed the appeal on 4th
      October 2013, but an error of law was found in the  decision  and  the
      matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Grimes in a decision dated 19th May 2014. The matter  was  heard
      de novo by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Napthine who dismissed the
      appeal on all grounds  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  the  4th
      December 2014.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on 23rd
      April 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the First-tier judge
      had erred in law in failing to evaluate any risk on the basis  of  the
      undisputed evidence before the Tribunal.

   3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal
      had erred in law

   Submissions - Error of Law


   4. Ms Rothwell  relied  upon  the  grounds  of  appeal  in  which  it  is
      contended, in summary as follows.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
      considered the risk the appellant faced on  the  basis  of  the  facts
      accepted as true by the respondent: namely that on 29th July 2009 (two
      months after the end of the conflict in Sri Lanka) the  appellant  was
      arrested in a  hospital  having  been  identified  by  a  former  LTTE
      colleague and thus having his career with  the  LTTE  disclosed  which
      included latterly being clerk to a commander  who  was  in  charge  of
      ammunition  and  being  injured  in  battle  in  2008   and   escaping
      internment. As a result the appellant was detained for 2 years  and  3
      months during which time he was interrogated and  tortured  about  the
      location of ammunition before he escaped with a bribe brokered via the
      EPDP. These were all matters highly relevant to whether the  appellant
      is at risk of serious harm if returned to Sri Lanka but  the  decision
      discounts any risk only by reference to the  fact  he  had  low  level
      involvement and would not be of interest in the context of his escape,
      and given his sur place activities. It was contrary to the country  of
      origin evidence in GJ to find that being released via a bribe meant he
      was of no interest. It was contrary to country of origin  evidence  in
      GJ and Others (post civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
      00319 to give no significance to a  post-conflict  arrest  when  these
      were found to be intelligence led and presumed to be based on the risk
      factors set out in that decision. There was also a failure to look  at
      letters from family members which had been provided  to  the  Tribunal
      with translations from the appellant's wife  and  father-in-law  which
      dealt with on-going interest in the appellant by the Sri Lankan  state
      since his arrival in the UK. The error in considering these aspects of
      the history and evidence of on-going interest was material  as  it  is
      highly arguable that this history showing  that  the  appellant  falls
      into the risk category of being someone  who  is  perceived  to  be  a
      threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  he  is
      perceived to be significant in the potential  renewal  of  hostilities
      within Sri Lanka.

   5. In addition it was argued that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  by  not
      considering risk arising out of the appellant's accepted membership of
      the British Tamil Forum in the light of Guidance from  the  FCO  dated
      16th April 2014 and 25th July 2014 contained in the  respondent's  COI
      report dated 28th August 2014 about  questioning  and  proscribing  of
      this group; and also in the consideration of the evidence he had given
      about torture/ war crimes to ICCPG which it is proposed to pass to the
      UN given the respondent's  COI report of 28th August 2014 which  notes
      that persons have been  arrested  for  calling  for  investigation  of
      alleged government war crimes. It was also argued that the  First-tier
      Tribunal had wrongly characterised the appellant's Diaspora activities
      as inconsistent with his history when clearly this was not the case.

   6. Mr  Melvin  argued,  in  summary  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
      appreciated the appellant's entire history  and  argued  that  it  was
      immaterial  that  the  arrest  of  the  appellant  was  post-conflict,
      although he accepted  that  the  letters  from  family  had  not  been
      considered he argued that they were not ultimately  material  as  they
      were from 2012 and 2013. The findings regarding bribery  and  of  risk
      under GJ were open to the First-tier Tribunal. It was also open to the
      First-tier Tribunal to  discount  any  risk  from  membership  of  the
      British Family Forum and as a result of the evidence to the  ICCPG  as
      the appellant's involvement and evidence was not significant and would
      not come to the attention of the Sri Lankan government.  In  any  case
      any error regarding the British Tamil Form was  not  material  as  the
      organisation had been de-proscribed by the Sri Lankan government.  (Ms
      Rothwell said she was unaware of any such  development  and  I  accept
      that this was genuinely the case.)

   7. I told the parties that I found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred
      in law and would set out my reasons in writing,  which  can  be  found
      below. It was agreed that there was insufficient judicial time to  re-
      make the decision; and in any case there was no Tamil  interpreter  at
      the Tribunal and the bundles for the hearing filed  by  the  appellant
      had not reached the Tribunal file or the respondent.

   Conclusions


   8. The First-tier Tribunal does set  out  the  core  of  the  appellant's
      history including his detention and torture at paragraphs 20 and 21 of
      the decision, although there is a lack of reference to his  connection
      with knowledge about LTTE ammunition. However when the judge makes his
      findings at paragraphs 26 to 55 relating to  the  refugee  grounds  of
      appeal  he  considers  principally  risk  on  the  basis  of  Diaspora
      activities at paragraphs 28 to 42 and 46-50 and 54 of the decision.

   9. At paragraph 45, 51 to 53 of the decision there  is  consideration  of
      risk based on the appellant's  history  of  LTTE  involvement  in  Sri
      Lanka. However there is no reference either to  any  consideration  of
      risk arising from the fact the appellant has been detained and torture
      for two years and three months from July 2009 (after the ceasefire  in
      May 2009, when GJ holds that the concerns of the Sri Lankan government
      had changed and the LTTE was generally regarded as a spent force),  or
      to the evidence in letters from the  appellant's  family  of  on-going
      interest in  him.  I  find  therefore  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      therefore erred in law by failing to consider whether this lengthy and
      brutal detention after the end of war and the evidence in the  letters
      received after the appellant fled to the UK  were  indicative  of  the
      appellant being  in  the  first  risk  category  (7(a))  as  a  person
      perceived to be a threat  as  someone  who  was  perceived  through  a
      potential knowledge of  LTTE  ammunition  to  be  significant  in  the
      renewal of Tamil separatist hostilities. The approach of the  Tribunal
      erred as it was not consistent with the relevant country  guidance  or
      consistent with paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules  which  states
      that where it is accepted that an  appellant  has  been  subjected  to
      persecution or serious harm that this will be regarded  as  a  serious
      indicator of future risk unless there is are good reasons to  consider
      such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

  10. Release  through  bribery  does  not  mean  the  appellant  could  not
      potentially be a person  falling  under  such  a  category  given  the
      evidence in GJ at paragraph 146 from a witness found to be credible at
      paragraph 275, but this was given as an explanation for a lack of risk
      on the appellant's return without citing  any  alternative  source  of
      evidence by the First-tier Tribunal at 51 and 52. I find this also  to
      be an error of law for want  of  sufficient  reasoning  to  support  a
      conclusion.

  11. The First-tier Tribunal also erred by failing to consider risk on  the
      basis of the appellant's simple belonging to (as opposed  to  activism
      with) a proscribed organisation, the British Tamil Forum in the  light
      of the COIS report of 28th August 2014 and the evidence set out in the
      grounds from this report which  indicates  that  this  would  lead  to
      arrest if known  about,  and  that  there  may  be  questioning  about
      activities in the UK on or prior to return.  There was also a  failure
      to  consider  whether  in  the  light  of  this   evidence   regarding
      questioning the fact of  the  appellant  having  given  to  the  ICCPG
      evidence for potential future war crimes/ torture enquiries by the  UN
      could form the basis of risk on  return.  At  the  hearing  Mr  Melvin
      indicated that the British  Tamil  Forum  was  no  long  a  proscribed
      organisation but had no evidence to  support.  After  the  hearing  he
      supplied me with evidence dated 30th November 2015  from  the  British
      High Commission supporting this fact which I understand is on the COIS
      website. If membership of the British Tamil Forum is pursued as a risk
      factor at the remaking hearing the appellant will have to address this
      evidence.

                Decision:



   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.


   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.


   3. I adjourned the re-make of the decision.


Directions



    1. The appellant's skeleton argument is to be filed 7 day prior  to  the
       hearing date with the Tribunal and served at the  same  time  on  the
       respondent.






    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I make this order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
    of his protection claim.









Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  20th January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



