
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
AA/07613/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Bradford                                             Decision   &
Reasons Promulgated
On 23rd March 2016                                            On 13th  April
2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                                    [S D]
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimant: Miss Khan (Counsel)
For the Secretary of State: Ms  Petterson  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Kelly promulgated on the 14th  December  2015,  in
      which he allowed the Claimant's protection claim under the 1951 Refuge
      Convention, having found that the Claimant was a  genuine  convert  to
      Christianity from Islam and  that  he  will  thereby  be  at  risk  of
      persecution as a result of  his  religious  beliefs,  were  he  to  be
      returned to Iran.

   2. Permission to appeal against that decision has been granted by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge White on the 6th January 2016.

   3. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge  made  a  material  error  of  law  in  failing  to  assess  the
      credibility of the Claimant in  the  round  and  simply  assessed  the
      testimony of one witness, who was not the subject of  the  appeal,  as
      being determinative of the credibility of the Claimant.   It  is  said
      that at [17] the Judge found that the evidence of the voracity of  the
      Claimant's religious beliefs cast considerable light  on  his  general
      voracity and that the Judge based his  findings  on  the  Christianity
      aspect entirely on the testimony of the Claimant's  minister.   It  is
      said that the Judge was required to consider this testimony  alongside
      all of the other evidence available, particularly that of the Claimant
      himself and that the Judge failed to do this and that at [19]  it  was
      said that the sincerity of the beliefs of the Reverend Clarke were the
      background for the assessment of the Claimant's  credibility.   It  is
      said that the Judge failed to conduct a  holistic  assessment  of  the
      Claimant's credibility and has  placed  almost  total  weight  on  the
      witness who was not the subject of the appeal.

   4. Within the grounds of permission to appeal, Judge White found that  it
      was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred  in  law  in
      his assessment of the Claimant's credibility and as to whether or  not
      he had assessed the evidence in the round.  It  is  said  that  it  is
      arguable that the Judge was in error in assessing the  credibility  of
      the Claimant's account  of  circumstances  of  his  flight  from  Iran
      against the background of his findings regarding the acceptance of the
      evidence of the Reverend Clarke, when these were  matters  outside  of
      the witness' own knowledge.  Judge White further  found  that  it  was
      arguable the Judge had failed  to  give  sufficient  reasons  for  the
      findings that there were misunderstandings and  confusion  within  the
      interview, and as to why the credibility assessment of the  Claimant's
      account was thereby unaffected.  He further found that it was arguable
      that the Judge had failed to actively deal with all of the  issues  in
      particular the issue of the Warrant, the  lack  of  knowledge  of  the
      Christian faith and lack of supporting evidence from the Church.

   5. In her oral submissions, Ms Petterson argued that the  most  troubling
      aspect of the Judge's decision was at  [18]  and  how  the  Judge  had
      considered the credibility of the evidence of the Reverend Clarke when
      assessing the Claimant's credibility in respect of his  activities  in
      Iran.  She argued that the Judge had accepted that there had been some
      confusion at interview, but that that he  had  not  dealt  with  these
      issues properly in that the Judge had "put the cart before the horse".
       She argued that the Judge should have dealt with all of the  evidence
      in the round, including the inconsistencies.  She accepted that it was
      possible for the Claimant to be a convert even if the  Judge  had  not
      accepted that anything had happened to him in Iran.  She invited me to
      allow the appeal and remit the matter back for a re-hearing before the
      First-tier Tribunal.

   6. In her oral submissions Miss Khan relied upon the case of  Dorodian  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department 01 TH 01537 in  respect  of
      the requirement for a Christian convert to  have  a  minister  of  the
      church vouching for him, in respect of his church membership and as to
      whether or not he is a  committed  Christian.   She  relied  upon  the
      Claimant's Rule 24 reply.  Miss Khan argued that the Judge's  findings
      were sustainable on the  evidence  and  that  he  had  considered  the
      evidence in the round.  She argued that the Judge did  need  to  start
      somewhere with his assessment of credibility.  She  argued  the  Judge
      had  taken  account  of   the   Claimant's   interview   record,   the
      inconsistencies therein and considered that in light of  the  Pastor's
      evidence.  She said that at the end of the decision at [21] the  Judge
      had made positive findings regarding the confusion the Claimant had in
      interview and had gone on at [22] to make positive findings  regarding
      the Claimant being a genuine convert to Christianity.  She argued that
      there was no material error of law.  Miss Khan  argued  that  although
      the Claimant had started to express an  interest  in  Christianity  in
      Iran, it was not until he came to the UK that he actually converted to
      Christianity and attended full church services.

      My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   7. At [16] First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly made it clear that "I am bound
      to be selective in my references to the evidence when  giving  reasons
      for my decision.  I nevertheless wish to emphasise that  I  considered
      all the evidence in the round in arriving at my  conclusions".   Given
      that Judge Kelly has specifically emphasised this  point,  I  have  no
      reason to disbelieve  him,  in  determining  whether  or  not  he  did
      actually take account of all the evidence,  including  the  Claimant's
      evidence  and  the  interview,  in  respect  of  his   conversion   to
      Christianity in the UK  and  his  attendance  at  church  in  the  UK.
      Although First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly has taken  his  consideration
      of the primary facts out of chronological order,  he  fully  explained
      his reason for doing so at [17] since in his opinion the  evidence  of
      the  Claimant's  religious  devotion  since  coming  to  the  UK  cast
      considerable light on the Claimant's general voracity.

   8. The Immigration Appeal Tribunal in the case of Dorodian made it  clear
      that "no-one should be regarded as a committed Christian  who  is  not
      vouched for as such by a minister of some church established  in  this
      country; as we have said, it is Church membership,  rather  than  mere
      belief, which may lead to risk;".  I therefore find that  Judge  Kelly
      was obliged to  consider  the  evidence  of  the  Reverend  Clarke  in
      determining whether or not the Claimant was  actually  a  genuine  and
      committed Christian and to consider his  attendance  at  Church.   The
      Judge found at [18] that the Reverend Clarke's  evidence  was  that  a
      person would have to persuade him that he or she had  made  a  genuine
      commitment to Christ in order to be baptised and that having known the
      Claimant for the last six months, the Reverend Clarke had agreed  that
      he had a clear Christian faith and based his  conclusion  upon  having
      observed the Claimant during regular  attendances  at  Church  and  at
      Farsi Bible classes when they prayed together.   The  Reverend  Clarke
      had observed a change in  the  Claimant  from  a  slightly  aggressive
      individual, to one who was loving and accepting of others with whom he
      sought to share his faith, as recorded by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Kelly.  Judge Kelly noted how Reverend Clarke  having  been  convinced
      that the Claimant had made a sincere Christian commitment had baptised
      him by immersion during the morning service of the 14th June 2014  and
      how although the Claimant had heard about Jesus in Iran, he  had  only
      the courage to commit himself to Christ  and  practice  his  Christian
      faith upon coming to Britain.

   9. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  had  made  it  clear  that  he  had
      considered  all  of  the  evidence  in  the  round  in  reaching   his
      conclusions at [16] but was entitled to  specifically  rely  upon  and
      quote from the evidence of the Reverend Clarke, which  evidence  would
      have to be assessed pursuant to Dorodian, in reaching his  conclusions
      regarding  the   genuineness   of   the   Claimant's   conversion   to
      Christianity.  It is not wrong for the Judge to accept the evidence of
      that witness.  The Judge was not obliged  to  refer  to  every  single
      piece of evidence in that regard, and was  not  obliged  therefore  to
      quote from the Claimant's own evidence  regarding  his  attendance  at
      church and conversion within the UK, if, as he stated at [16]  he  had
      taken it into account.  The Judge's findings on the genuineness of the
      Claimant's attendance at Church and his conversion to Christianity and
      baptism were open to him on the evidence.

  10. Although it is argued by the Secretary of State  that  the  Judge  has
      "put the cart before the horse", in then utilising these  findings  in
      assessing  the  credibility  of  the   Claimant's   account   of   the
      circumstances of his flight from Iran, although not  in  chronological
      order, there is no requirement for the Judge to deal with all findings
      specifically in chronological order. As  Miss  Khan  has  stated,  the
      Judge had to start somewhere with his findings.  In this  regard,  the
      Secretary of State equally in refusal notices,  often  leaves  matters
      about which they are unsure to the end,  in  order  to  determine,  in
      light of the other findings, whether a Claimant should  be  given  the
      benefit of the doubt upon such findings.

  11. The Judge has considered the discrepancies and inconsistencies in  the
      Claimant's interview at [20] and the confusion which  surrounded  them
      to be such that the Judge found that the interpreter felt impelled  to
      interview him on at least four occasions and that the  interviewer  on
      more than one occasion had expressed his difficulty in following  what
      the Claimant was saying.   The  Judge  also  gave  clear  reasons  for
      accepting the Claimant's account regarding the confusion at  interview
      and confusion over the dates at  [20  and  21].   These  reasons  were
      adequate and sufficient.  It was only having considered  all  of  this
      evidence the Judge then went on at [22] to find that the Claimant  was
      a genuine convert to  Christianity  and  that  he  also  accepted  the
      account given regarding the Claimant's experiences in Iran.

  12. However, even if I am wrong in this regard, given that the  Judge  did
      accept that the Claimant was a genuine  Christian  convert  after  his
      arrival in the UK,, any error in terms of the assessment of that  part
      of  the  claim  before  his  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
      Claimant's account of his flight from Iran, is immaterial, given  that
      the Claimant will still be at  risk  upon  return  given  the  Judge's
      findings regarding his acceptance of the genuineness of the Claimant's
      conversion in the UK.  As was conceded by Ms Petterson,  even  if  the
      Judge  had  rejected  what  the  Claimant  had  said   regarding   the
      circumstances of his flight from Iran, if the Judge went  on  to  find
      that the Claimant was a genuine convert having come to  the  UK,  then
      the Claimant will still be at risk upon return.  I do not find, as was
      suggested by Judge White in granting permission to appeal that  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  has  relied  upon  any  evidence  from  the
      Reverend Clarke regarding the Claimant's flight from Iran, upon  which
      he will have no knowledge, and indeed Reverend Clarke did not seek  to
      give evidence in that regard.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  simply
      considered the question of the genuineness of the  conversion  in  the
      UK, and then went on to consider in light  of  his  findings  in  that
      regard,  the  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  in  the  Claimant's
      interview regarding his flight from Iran.  He has not relied upon  the
      Reverend Clarke giving evidence upon matters about which he will  have
      had no  knowledge.   He  has  simply  relied  upon  Reverend  Clarke's
      evidence in terms of the genuineness of the Claimant's  conversion  to
      Christianity and his attendance at church in the UK.

  13. I further find that the  Judge's  reasons  given  in  respect  of  his
      explanation for the anomalies  and  discrepancies  in  the  Claimant's
      interview, have been explained by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly  at
      both [20 and  21],  and  that  his  reasons  in  that  regard  and  in
      particular, how the interpreter himself had to  intercede  because  of
      confusion  in  the  interview,  and  also,  how  in  regards  to   the
      discrepancy regarding the date of the first meeting with  Ibrahim  and
      the prayer meeting on the 10th October 2014, the Judge again explained
      that the Claimant had been attempting to  recall  dates  in  both  the
      Persian and alternative Gregorian  calendars  which  could  have  only
      added to the overall general confusion concerning  the  dates.   Given
      the confusion in the interview itself as found by the  Judge  at  [20]
      this was a finding that was open to him.  His findings in this  regard
      are adequate and sufficiently explained.

  14. The Judge clearly dealt with the Claimant's attendance  at  Church  in
      the UK and  his  genuineness  of  his  beliefs  when  considering  the
      evidence of the Reverend Clarke and the evidence in the round at [18].
       The Judge does not need to deal with every single piece  of  evidence
      when  making  his  findings,  providing  his  findings  are   properly
      explained with adequate and sufficient reasons and  his  findings  are
      open to him on the evidence presented.  It is not  necessary  to  deal
      with every single piece of possible inconsistent evidence, when making
      findings.  It is sufficient that a Judge explains the reasons why  the
      losing party has lost and backed up those  findings  with  appropriate
      evidence.  The Judge has done exactly that.

  15. In such circumstances the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly
      does not contain any material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  does  not  contain  any
material error of law and is maintained.

Signed
Dated 26th March 2016

R McGinty
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
