
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07833/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 18 September 2015                 |On 7 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between
                            IRAJ ALIZADEH-DALLAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Medley of Broudie Jackson & Cantor
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brunnen promulgated on 10 January 2014  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a decision to  remove  him  following  a
    refusal of an application for asylum .

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 19 September 1985 and is a national of Iran.

 4. The Appellant claimed to be at risk because of his  political  opinions
    which resulted in his arrest and detention by the authorities  in  2009
    and the murder of his brother and the arrest of friends  in  2013  with
    whom he was engaged in political activities after which  he  went  into
    hiding. The Appellant also claimed to  be  at  risk  as  a  convert  to
    Christianity.

 5. On 23 June 2013 the Appellant applied for asylum.

 6. On 31  July  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) There was a contradiction between the claim that the Appellant  was
         required to report for a year after his release in  2009  or  until
         the elections 3 years later.

      b) There are inconsistencies in the chronology given  in  relation  to
         the Appellant's girlfriend.

      c) It is not credible that the Appellant would  not  immediately  warn
         his girlfriend that she was at risk of arrest  after  their  friend
         was arrested.

      d) It is not credible that his girlfriend would not tell him on  whose
         behalf they were distributing leaflets.

      e) The Appellant's claim that he undertook the leaflet distributing in
         2013 in response to the murder of his brother is inconsistent  with
         the fact that his brother was allegedly murdered in 2009.

      f) As the Appellant's account was rejected and the credibility of  his
         claim to have left Iran with the help of an agent is not accepted.

      g) The Appellant's risk on return was considered by reference to SB  (
         risk on return - illegal exit) Iran  [2009]  UKAIT  00053  and  the
         Appellant was therefore not at risk on return.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Brunnen  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

      a) There was an inconsistency between his  account  in  his  screening
         interview as to when he was arrested  in  2009  and  what  he  said
         later.

      b) There was no mention in the asylum interview or  the  supplementary
         letter from his representatives that he suffered a broken thumb  in
         detention and this was first mention in the medical  report  of  Dr
         Lord.

      c) The Appellant claimed that his brother's death  certificate  stated
         that his cause of death was unknown whereas the certificate was  in
         fact blank in relation to that.

      d) There were inconsistencies in relation to the date of his brother's
         death.

      e) There were inconsistencies as to the date and circumstances of  his
         father's death.

      f) He accepted that there may have  been  interpretation  problems  in
         relation to the period for which he reported and how  long  he  had
         known his girlfriend.

      g) He found the  Appellant's  account  of  how  he  was  recruited  to
         distribute leaflets by his girlfriend highly unlikely.

      h) The Judge found the Appellant's delay in telling his girlfriend and
         his family that their mutual friend  and  leaflet  distributer  had
         been arrested was surprising.

      i) The injuries found by Dr Lord could all have been the result  of  a
         road traffic accident.

      j) He did not accept the authorities were interested in the  Appellant
         or that he left the country illegally.

      k) He found that the  Appellant  had  made  a  sincere  conversion  to
         Christianity.

      l) As an ordinary convert the Appellant was not at risk on  return  as
         he would only be at risk of questioning or brief detention  and  it
         was speculation to suggest that he would seek to proselytise.

      m)  In relation to the argument that the Appellant would be at risk if
         he was an enforced return on a temporary travel document the  Judge
         considered a decision to grant permission for judicial review of  a
         decision by the First-tier and Upper Tribunal in a  case  where  it
         was  argued  that  the  tribunal  had  failed  to   give   adequate
         consideration to the argument that the applicant would be  at  risk
         returning without a valid Iranian passport. He found that there was
         no information as to the eventual outcome of the case  .  He  found
         that since the Appellant had not  established  that  he  left  Iran
         illegally then the records  at  the  airport  would  show  he  left
         legally and even if he left illegally he would only be subject to a
         fine.

      n) He considered the argument that the Appellant would be at  risk  on
         return solely as a failed asylum seeker on the basis that he  would
         be detained and conditions in Iran's prisons were  harsh  and  life
         threatening. He found that this would result in all  failed  asylum
         seekers being at risk of Article 3 ill treatment  and  he  did  not
         accept that the COIS should be read as having such a  far  reaching
         effect as the report was made over 2 years ago  and  there  was  no
         evidence to show that any such practice has  been  adopted  by  the
         Iranian regime in relation to failed asylum seekers.

      o) The Judge found that the Appellant faced nothing more serious  than
         a fine if found to have left illegally and to be  a  failed  asylum
         seeker.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge failed to properly
    apply the caselaw in relation to  Christian  converts,  FS  and  others
    (Iran-Christian Converts) Iran CG [2004]  UKIAT;  failed  to  recognise
    that the Appellant would be treated as a de facto illegal  exit  as  he
    would have a passport without a valid exit stamp and therefore he would
    be questioned about his activities in the United Kingdom and this would
    include his Christian conversion; the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
    conditions in detention centres as well as prisons and that these would
    breach Article 3; failed to have regard to the low level of returns  to
    Iran and therefore he was not entitled to draw  conclusions  about  the
    lack of evidence of adverse treatment of failed asylum seekers.

 9. An application for permission to appeal was  initially  refused  on  31
    January 2014and when renewed it was refused  again  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Allen on 7 March 2014.  An  application  was  made  for  Judicial
    Review and the by order  of  the  Honourable  Mr  Justice  Stewart  the
    refusal of permission dated 7 March 2014 was  quashed.  The  permission
    stated:

         "In the helpful Acknowledgement of Service, the IP makes  reference
         to a number  of  documents  and  cases  which  post  date  the  FTT
         decision. While the IP submits with  some  justification  that  the
         position  should  be  the  same,  there  is   sufficient   in   the
         interpretation of  the  2014  document  and  the  pending  case  of
         AAF(Iran) for the case to be granted permission. The  UT  can  then
         determine the case in the light of the updated guidance/caselaw."

10. The Appellant did not attend the appeal and Mr Medley explained that he
    had housing problems hence all correspondence was served  care  of  his
    solicitors. He was content to proceed in the Appellant's absence as  he
    had not anticipated him attending court.

11. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Medley  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that :

      a) The case referred to in the permission of the Administrative  Court
         was not imminently expected and Ms Johnstone agreed. They were both
         content for the matter to proceed and neither  party  requested  an
         adjournment.

      b) The OGN of 2014 referred to by the grant of permission was based on
         material that predated it.

      c) He suggested that the decision in FS was inconsistent with HJ  Iran
         as the Appellant could not be expected to reduce his risk by living
         discreetly.

      d) In applying FS the Judge had failed  to  engage  with  the  OGN  of
         October 2012 which  at  3.8.5  and  3.8.9/10  which  reflected  the
         deteriorating position of Iranian converts.

      e)  The Judge also accepted that even at the time of FS  there  was  a
         risk of detention and the OGN that he had in front of him confirmed
         that detention conditions in Iran breached Article 3.

      f) In relation to his assessment of the Appellant's risk on return  as
         someone returning without a passport  which  would  result  in  him
         being treated as someone who had left illegally because he did  not
         have a valid passport with an exit stamp.

      g) The Judge failed to properly assess his risk as someone  who  would
         be questioned about his asylum claim and the fact of his conversion
         would be disclosed. Any detention for questioning  at  the  airport
         would breach Article 3 given the Judge also had  in  front  of  him
         documents about the routine use of torture in such questioning.

12. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Johnstone submitted that :

      a) In relation to the issue  of  illegal  exit  there  was  a  country
         guidance case pending.

      b) Mr Medley appeared to suggest that the Appellant would be  at  risk
         because he would be returned without a valid  travel  document  but
         that was not the case.

      c) The Judge also made a finding at paragraph 512  that  the  database
         maintained by the authorities would show  that  the  Appellant  had
         left legally and this finding has not been challenged.

      d) Since 2011 there was no evidence that it was not possible to return
         anyone to Iran without documents and there was nothing  before  the
         Judge to that effect.

      e) There was no evidence in  the  OGN  that  the  Appellant  would  be
         questioned about his religion on arrival  at  the  airport  .  This
         amounts to a fresh submission.

      f) She accepted that the policy had now changed in respect of  Iranian
         converts but on the basis of the material before him the Judge made
         findings that were open to him.

13. In reply Mr Medley on behalf of the Appellant submitted\;

    (a)    The Judge was also required to take into account BA Iran is a CG
         case and should be taken into account.

    (b)    He suggested that 3.15.5 of the 2012 OGN should not be construed
         in the way Ms Johnstone suggests: he was not  suggesting  that  the
         Appellant would be returned without a  document  but  he  would  be
         without a valid passport with an exit visa. Even if  the  Appellant
         had a laissez passez that would lead to questions at  the  airport.
         To suggest that he might have a passport would be speculations.

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

15. The Judge in this case made findings  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    reasons for leaving Iran that have not been challenged: he did not find
    them credible.  He went on to consider from paragraph  43  onwards  the
    Appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity since he had been in the
    United Kingdom and accepted that it was genuine. The Judges  assessment
    of the Appellant's risk on return  as  a  convert  to  Christianity  is
    challenged.

16. The Judge in assessing that risk followed the guidelines set out in  FS
    a country guidance case  from  2004.  Dr  Mynott  who  represented  the
    Appellant before the first tier tribunal sought to argue that the  case
    should no longer be followed  on  the  basis  that  it  was  no  longer
    possible  to  draw  a  distinction  between   ordinary   converts   and
    proselytisers in the light of HJ Iran and because the circumstances for
    Christians  had  deteriorated  in  Iran.  The  Judge  addressed   these
    arguments in detail at paragraphs 44-47.

17. The conclusion that he drew was that  on  the  basis  of  the  material
    before him that was largely contained in the OGN of  October  2012  was
    that ordinary converts , a category in which he placed the Appellant  ,
    would be subject to a degree of disruption (paragraph 46) and that such
    disruption might include 'being questioned or  briefly  detained.'  The
    Judge had before him at page 46 of the Appellant's bundle  the  OGN  of
    October 2012 which  concluded  in  relation  to  prison  conditions  at
    3.17.12-13 that :

         "Conditions are harsh and life threatening in Iranian prisons; this
         for all categories of prisoners/detainees...

         As conditions in prison and  detention  facilities  are  harsh  and
         potentially life threatening in Iran,  they  are  likely  to  reach
         Article 3 threshold."

18. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine whether
    the period of detention that it was acknowledged was a  real  risk  for
    the Appellant as a convert to Christianity put him at  risk  on  return
    constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider to be  material
    since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome  could  have
    been different.

19. In relation to the argument that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  properly
    assess the risk on return as an enforced returnee on a temporary travel
    document I am satisfied that Mr Medleys arguments amounted to  no  more
    than an attempt by a different advocate to re argue  issues  that  were
    full addressed by the Judge at paragraphs 48-55. The  Judge  took  into
    account all of the relevant caselaw  placed  before  him  and  although
    concluding that  since  he  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had
    established that he had left the country illegally he was  entitled  to
    assume that the authorities  database  would  show  that  he  had  left
    legally the most that the Appellant would face on return even if he had
    left illegally would be a fine: but having found that the Appellant had
    not left illegally he did not in the Judges view face that risk.

20. The Judge addressed the argument that the Appellant faced a risk simply
    as a failed asylum seeker as this would potentially lead to a period of
    detention and gave cogent reasons at paragraph 53-54 for rejecting  the
    conclusion that return as a failed  asylum  seeker  inevitably  led  to
    detention. This was an conclusion based on the evidence that was before
    him that he was entitled to reach.

21. I therefore found that errors of law have been established  in  respect
    of the Appellant's risk on return of a period of detention as a convert
    to Christianity.  I am satisfied  that  the  Judges  decision  must  be
    remade in respect of that issue only. While Ms Johnstone suggested that
    such a decision could be delayed pending the outcome of the outstanding
    CG case on illegal exit given that I  have  upheld  that  part  of  the
    decisions that addresses illegal exit I see no purpose in such delay.

Re making the decision

22. The Judges decision at paragraph 43 accepts that it  is  possible  that
    the Appellant made a sincere conversion to Christianity.

23. Ms Johnstone conceded  before  me  that  the  most  recent  COIS  dated
    December 2014 Iran: Christians and Christian Converts concludes at 1.4;

         "The right of Muslims to change their religion is not recognised
         under Sharia law. The religious conversion of Muslims is illegal in
         Iran. Christians who have converted from Islam are at real risk of
         persecution in Iran, and a grant of asylum is likely to be
         appropriate."

24. There was nothing placed before  me  or  in  the  guidance  to  suggest
    therefore that the  Appellant  having  made  a  sincere  conversion  to
    Christianity would not be at risk on return to Iran.

Conclusion

25. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal with regard to the risk on return of detention as a convert to
    Christianity  such that the decision is set aside

26. I remake the appeal.

27. I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof on  him to
    show that he has a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  reason
    recognised by  the  Geneva  Convention.  Accordingly,  the  Appellant's
    removal would cause the UK to be in breach of its obligations under the
    Geneva Convention.

28. On the facts as established  in  this  appeal,  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
    treatment in breach of ECHR.

Decision

29. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

30. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

31. No anonymity direction is made


Signed                                                              Date
5.10.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
