
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07439/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Manchester Crown Court     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On : 17th March 2016                  |On : 11th April 2016                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [h w]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K J Wood of Rochdale Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to
remove him from the UK, following the refusal of his asylum claim.

The appellant is a national of China, from Fujian  Province,  born  on  [  ]
1978. He claims to have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  April  2005.  He
applied for asylum on 23 April 2014. His claim was refused  on  9  September
2014 and a decision was made on 12 September 2014 to remove him to China.

The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is at risk on return to  China
as a result of an incident which occurred during his former  employment.  He
claims to have worked for a gaming facility in Fuqing city centre  for  only
one day, as a cleaner and general helper and that during that  day  a  fight
broke out over gambling issues between Triad members and  staff.  He  poured
hot water or tea over a Triad member during the fight.  The  police  arrived
and he was arrested with two other staff  members  and  five  or  six  Triad
members and he was taken to Fuqing police station where he was detained  for
three months and beaten and verbally abused.  The  police  demanded  payment
for his release. His parents paid his bail  to  get  him  out.  He  was  not
formally charged because the police  wanted  to  continue  blackmailing  him
into paying more money to drop the charges. He was released in January  2005
and reported every two weeks. He was beaten by the Triads.  After  reporting
twice he left China with the help of an agent and he  came  to  the  UK  and
claimed asylum. The appellant also claims to be at risk  on  return  because
his partner was pregnant with their second child, which  was  in  breach  of
the one-child policy in China.


The respondent, in refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  did  not  accept  his
account of having worked in a gaming arcade and rejected his claim  to  have
been arrested and blackmailed by the police and to have been  threatened  by
Triad  members,  noting  various  inconsistencies  in  his   evidence.   The
respondent also rejected the appellant's claim to be at risk as a result  of
the one-child policy, since that was contrary to the background  information
in  relation  to  family  planning  regulations  in  Fujian  province.   The
respondent considered that the appellant would be at no risk  on  return  to
China and that his removal would not breach his human rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal came before  First-
tier Tribunal Farrelly on  10  December  2014.  The  judge  found  that  the
actions of the police in demanding money were  opportunistic  and  that  the
appellant would be at no risk on return as there would be no record of  him,
having never been formally charged. He found there to be no risk  on  return
from the police or the Triads and that there would be no risk on account  of
having a second child. The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

Permission was sought on behalf of the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal, on three grounds: that the judge had failed to make a  finding  on
whether the appellant had been arrested and whether  any  remarks  had  been
made on his file; that the judge had applied the wrong  standard  of  proof;
and that the judge's finding about enforced birth control  was  contrary  to
the expert evidence.

Permission to appeal was granted on 2  February  2015  on  all  grounds  but
primarily on the second ground.

Before me, Mr Wood relied and expanded upon all three  grounds.  Mr  McVeety
responded to the grounds and submitted that there were no errors of  law  in
the judge's decision.



Consideration and findings.

The third ground, addressed by both parties as the first  issue,  challenged
the judge's rejection of the  appellant's  claim  that  his  wife  would  be
subjected to forced sterilisation, having had two  children,  on  the  basis
that it was contrary to the opinion of the expert whose  report  was  before
him. It is asserted that his finding of fact in relation to  enforced  birth
control is irrational.

It is relevant to mention at this point that  the  expert  agreed  with  the
respondent, at [46], that the appellant  was  able  to  have  two  children,
according to the family planning regulations of Fujian Province,  his  first
child  being  a  girl.  The  matter  in  issue,  however,  was  whether  the
appellant's wife would face forced sterilisation, having had  two  children.
Mr McVeety agreed that the judge's comment that Fujian Province was  one  of
the more liberal, was  not  cross-referenced  to  any  supporting  evidence.
However he submitted that the judge's findings on forced birth control  were
consistent with the country guidance in AX (family  planning  scheme)  China
CG [2012] UKUT 97 and that the judge was entitled  to  follow  that  country
guidance. I find  myself  in  agreement  with  that  submission.  The  judge
considered the expert's views  in  some  detail  and  at  [35]  gave  cogent
reasons for placing little weight upon those views  in  relation  to  forced
sterilisation. His findings,  at  [37],  reflect  the  findings  in  AX,  in
particular at paragraphs 182 to 185. He was entitled to conclude as  he  did
and I find no errors of law in his decision in that respect.

Turning to the second ground, asserting that the  judge  applied  the  wrong
standard proof, I find that the passages of the  judge's  decision  referred
to in the grounds do not demonstrate  a  misapplication  of  the  burden  of
proof but are simply an indication of the judge's acceptance that the  basis
of  the  appellant's  claim  was  plausible.  The  findings  were   in   the
appellant's favour and make it clear that the judge proceeded on  the  basis
that he was prepared to accept the appellant's account of  the  incident  at
the gaming facility and his arrest, owing to the  plausibility  of  such  an
account. It is clear from the judge's findings elsewhere, and in  particular
at [30] and [39], that he applied the  correct  standard  of  proof  to  the
appellant's claim and again I find no error of law in his decision  in  that
respect.


Mr Wood submitted, with regard to the  first  ground  of  appeal,  that  the
judge failed to make any findings as  to  what  would  be  recorded  in  the
appellant's file, which was a separate matter to the hukou,  and  that  that
was a material error of law.  However,  whilst  the  judge's  findings  were
perhaps not expressed in the  clearest  of  terms,  what  is  plain  from  a
reading of [24] to [30] is that he  considered  the  actions  taken  by  the
police following the incident at the gaming  facility,  in  demanding  money
from the appellant, were simply the opportunistic actions of rogue  officers
who did not formally charge him since that would  have  revealed  their  own
corrupt behaviour. It is clear from his findings that  he  did  not  believe
that there would be any record of  the  incident  on  the  police  files  or
elsewhere and that accordingly there would be no interest in  him  some  ten
years later. The judge took the expert's views into account when making  his
findings, as is evident at [25]. The conclusion that he reached  as  to  the
lack of any ongoing adverse interest in the appellant, either by the  police
or the Triads, is one that took full account of all the evidence,  including
the expert report and the country guidance, and was fully and properly  open
to him on the evidence before him.

For all of these reasons I find no errors of law in the judge's decision.


DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.











                               Signed                                  Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
