
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07370/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Upper Tribunal          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st March 2016                        |On 13th April 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     HK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwncyz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Hachemi (Solicitor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
an anonymity order is made.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  court  orders
otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any form of  publication  thereof
shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original  Appellant.    This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

 1. This appeal is anonymised because it refers to an asylum  claim,  which
    the First-tier Tribunal found to  have  sensitive  material.   In  this
    matter I shall refer to the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    as "the Respondent" and to Ms HK as "the Appellant" which is  how  they
    appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Respondent appeals with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turnock) which in a decision promulgated  on
    30th July 2015 allowed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's
    decision of 19th March 2015 refusing to grant  her  asylum  and  giving
    Section 10 directions for her removal from the UK.

The Appellant's Immigration History

 3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1990 and is a female  citizen  of  India.
    She arrived in the UK in January 2011 in possession of a student  visa.
    She was accompanied by her husband who entered as her  dependant.   The
    Appellant and her husband have a son born December 2008.   He  remained
    with the Appellant's mother in India.

 4. Although the Appellant entered the UK in possession of a valid  student
    visa, that visa was curtailed by the Respondent on 2nd  April  2012  to
    expire on 1st June 2012.  This was  because  her  sponsoring  college's
    licence was revoked.  She applied for further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student on 25th May 2013 and this  was  granted  initially  until  26th
    September 2016.

 5. However on 14th September 2014  she  was  served  with  an  IS151A  for
    obtaining leave by deception.  On 3rd  October  2014  she  applied  for
    leave to remain under the domestic  violence  concession,  outside  the
    Rules.  This claim was rejected.

 6. On 24th October 2014 following refusal under the above  concession  she
    claimed asylum.  Her claim to asylum was on the basis that she was  the
    victim of historic domestic violence in  India  at  the  hands  of  her
    husband and his family.  She claimed she could  not  seek  any  support
    from her own family; her father did not want her to report the  assault
    on her to the authorities  in  India.   She  was  also  the  victim  of
    domestic violence at the hands of her husband when he was here  in  the
    UK.  She and husband had now separated but  she  feared  to  return  to
    India, because of the fear of her husband and his family  and  fear  of
    her own father.  She said she could not receive  protection  in  India;
    especially as a lone woman with a child. Additionally she  now  suffers
    from severe depression, has suicidal thoughts and as  a  single  parent
    suffering from depression, would not get the protection she needed.

 7. The Respondent rejected her claim on three counts.

       . The fear which the Appellant claimed prevented her  from  returning
         to India was of  her  husband  and  in-laws.   They  are  non-state
         actors. India provides adequate protection for victims of  domestic
         violence.

       . No good reason had been forthcoming why  the  Appellant  could  not
         internally relocate in India and

       . Her health problems were not such as to bring her within  the  high
         threshold required to meet Articles 2/3 of the ECHR.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  took  place  on  16th  July
    2015.  The judge noted and set out the Appellant's claim in [6] to [17]
    and it is reproduced below.

         "6.  The Appellant's claim  is  on  the  basis  that  if  she  were
             returned to India she would face mistreatment from her father,
             her husband or her  husband's  family  because  she  left  her
             husband in the UK and was responsible  for  his  arrest.   She
             particularly fears her  brother-in-law  who,  she  claims,  is
             dangerous.

         7.   The Appellant completed a BA degree in  Art  whilst  in  India
             although she did not work in that country.  She lived with her
             parents until she married on  20  February  2007.   After  the
             marriage she spent one and a half years living with  her  'in-
             laws' but then moved back to her parents because her 'in-laws'
             were beating her up.

         8.   The Appellant claims that her problems had  started  three  or
             four weeks after she got married.  She claims her husband  and
             his mother started to beat her for trivial matters such as  if
             they did not like the clothes she  was  wearing.   She  claims
             that every other day her husband would beat her and her mother-
             in-law would beat her every one to two  weeks.   Although  the
             Appellant claims she told her family what  was  happening  she
             was told not to report it to the police but to 'put  up'  with
             it and try to make things better, for herself.  On  the  final
             occasion, she was assaulted when she  was  pregnant,  and  her
             mother-in-law beat her so badly that her waters burst and  she
             gave birth prematurely.  The Appellant claims the doctor  told
             her to report it to the police but her father did not let  her
             and she moved back home with her parents instead.

         9.   The Appellant came to the United Kingdom on 19  January  2011.
             She says that she came because her family could not  keep  her
             any longer and she thought it would be a safe place.  She also
             thought she could carry on with her studies in the UK.

         10.  However, the Appellant claim that after being in  the  UK  for
             approximately two to three months her husband came home  drunk
             and on drugs and beat her very  badly.   She  claims  that  he
             subsequently made attempts to kill her, the first  time  being
             in September or October 2013 when he put  a  pillow  over  her
             head.

         11.  The  Appellant  claims  that  her  husband  assaulted  her  in
             September 2014, which led to his arrest and prosecution.   The
             Appellant claims that when she  notified  her  father  of  the
             arrest of her husband her father said he would kill her if she
             made a statement against her husband.

         12.  The Appellant claims that her husband was prosecuted  for  his
             assault upon her and served a  period  of  imprisonment.   The
             Appellant says that after completing his sentence her  husband
             returned to India.

         13.  The Appellant claims that  approximately  three  weeks  before
             this appeal hearing she received a call from  her  mother  who
             informed her that her husband had gone to her house  in  India
             to remove the Appellant's son.  The Appellant  says  that  she
             was told that her husband had attended with other people  from
             his family.  She says she was told that her  husband  and  his
             friends were complaining about her  and  the  'mess'  she  had
             caused for her husband in the UK and the shame she had brought
             upon them by causing him to be arrested and receive a criminal
             conviction.  The Appellant says that her mother told her  they
             threatened revenge saying that she  would  be  killed  if  she
             returned to India.  She was told that her husband declared  in
             front of everybody that he would  personally  kill  her.   Her
             mother also told her that her  husband  was  making  'terrible
             false allegations' against  her  describing  her  as  being  a
             prostitute who had multiple relationships with different  men.
             He described her as being too 'dirty' to keep in the house and
             made any other such 'insulting comments.'

         14.  The Appellant says that she was told her husband was prevented
             from  removing  her  son  because  her  mother  resisted   and
             'screamed and shouted,' and many neighbours  gathered  to  see
             what was happening.  The Appellant says that as  a  result  of
             the crowd that had assembled around the  house  and  the  fuss
             that her mother was making her husband gave up trying to  take
             her son and he left the scene with the other men.

         15.  The Appellant states that although her mother  cares  for  her
             son and takes the Appellant's side, her father disapproves  of
             the Appellant because he blames her for causing the  situation
             that arose and bringing shame on his family.  She claims  that
             her father wants her to go back to her  husband,  even  though
             that would put her in danger.  She  states  that  she  is  now
             always worried that her son is  going  to  be  abducted.   Her
             mother told her over the telephone that  neighbours  had  seen
             her husband and another man on a motorbike riding around their
             home.

         16.  The  Appellant  states  that  when  she  heard  the  news  she
             telephoned her son's school to warn them about the possibility
             that her husband might kidnap her son  from  there.   She  was
             told that they would try to keep an 'eye out' and  would  call
             the police if necessary.  Her mother asked for advice  from  a
             neighbour who is a police inspector about what should be done.
              He advised that proof should be obtained from  England  about
             her husband's bad behaviour  towards  the  Appellant  and  his
             conviction for beating her.  The Appellant has approached  the
             Citizens' Advice Bureau in  Sheffield  to  ask  them  to  help
             obtain the necessary information.  The Citizens' Advice Bureau
             have referred her to a solicitor who offered to  help  to  get
             the information from the police but  required  the  charge  of
             �180, which the Appellant states she could  not  afford.   The
             Appellant states she is going to send her mother some items of
             evidence from her asylum case, which can then be shown to  the
             police.

         17.  The Appellant also states she also approached  a  Women's  Aid
             Group called 'Roshni' who helped her prepare a letter  to  the
             British police requesting confirmation that she was  a  victim
             of domestic violence."

 9. The judge also heard evidence from the Appellant  and  noted  that  her
    husband had been prosecuted by the authorities  in  this  country.   He
    noted in [37] the issues before him and said this:

         "The issues in this case are whether the Appellant would be at risk
         of attack from her husband and her own family in the event  of  her
         return to India and if so whether there  would  be  sufficiency  of
         protection for her taking account of the  possibility  of  internal
         relocation."

10. He then set out extensively the background evidence  from  the  Country
    Information and Guidance report on India - women  fearing  gender-based
    harm/violence which is dated April  2015.   He  took  into  account  Dr
    Longshaw's report noting that the Appellant  had  been  diagnosed  with
    severe depressive disorder and then he said this at [63].

         "The country information referred to  above  makes  it  clear  that
         whilst, in general, there will be sufficiency of protection  for  a
         woman  in  India  facing  domestic  violence  each  case  must   be
         considered and determined on its  own  particular  facts.   Account
         must be taken of past ill-treatment and the likelihood and  ability
         of the husband and family (in this case) being able to  pursue  her
         and account must be taken of all the relevant factors which in  the
         Appellant's case will mean having particular regard to  her  health
         and the fact she has a child."

11. He went on further to say at [66]

         "With regard to the question of relocation account has to be  taken
         of the mental health issues which the  Appellant  faces  and  their
         impact upon her ability to be  self-sufficient  and  avoid  finding
         herself in isolation and vulnerable.  There  are  clearly  problems
         with regard to the availability of housing in India and these would
         appear to be particularly acute in the case of a mother  and  young
         child where the mother has health issues of  the  nature  of  those
         faced by the Appellant."

12. He then concludes by saying at [67]

         "I find that  if  the  Appellant  sought  to  relocate,  given  her
         particular circumstances she  would  be  vulnerable,  with  extreme
         difficulty in finding accommodation and with no one to turn to.   I
         find that in those circumstances it would be unduly harsh to expect
         her to relocate."

13. He then allowed the appeal under the Refugee Convention.

14. The Respondent  sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision.  There was one ground seeking  permission;  namely  that  the
    judge had misdirected himself in law. He allowed the appeal  under  the
    Refugee Convention when the risk identified, even by the judge himself,
    was one of domestic violence from family members. Therefore  there  was
    no identifiable Convention reason.  In addition there was  availability
    of state protection for women in India. The judge appeared to  give  no
    proper consideration to this.  The Appellant could not  be  categorised
    as a member of a particular social group.

15. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms

         "1.  The Appellant is a national of India who had claimed that  she
             was at risk of domestic violence.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             Turnock  allowed  her   asylum/humanitarian   protection/human
             rights appeal  against  removal  in  a  decision  and  reasons
             promulgated on 30 July 2015.

         2.   The Respondent's grounds of onwards appeal dated 7 August 2015
             were in time.  In summary the grounds contend that  the  judge
             misdirected himself/herself over the Refugee Convention.

         3.    The  grounds  are  arguable.   The   judge's   reasoning   is
             inadequate."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide initially whether the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision discloses  an  error  of  law  such  that  the
    decision must be set aside and be re-made.

Error of Law

16. I heard submissions from both representatives.   Mr  Diwncyz  submitted
    that the FtT had misdirected itself and furthermore the decision on the
    face of it contained inconsistencies rendering it  unsustainable.   The
    judge himself at [63] acknowledged that there was  an  availability  of
    state protection in India for women facing domestic  violence.   Whilst
    he accepted that each case must be looked  at  on  its  own  particular
    facts nevertheless there is a lack of reasoning in [64] as to  why  the
    Appellant cannot avail herself of that state  protection.  Equally,  so
    far as internal relocation is concerned, the  background  documentation
    which the judge referred to clearly showed that internal relocation  is
    available.  The judge has not set out with any clear analysis  why  the
    Appellant cannot avail herself of internal relocation.  Instead he  has
    confined his remarks to several short paragraphs simply reiterating the
    Appellant's  history  without  making  reasoned  findings  on  it.  The
    decision should be set aside.

17. Mr Hachemi unsurprisingly submitted that the decision should stand.  He
    pointed out that the judge was correct to say that each  case  must  be
    looked at on its own merits.  He submitted that  the  judge  seemed  to
    accept that the Appellant fell into the definition of particular social
    group i.e. a single woman with a child suffering violence at the  hands
    of her husband and or his family. This would bring her into the Refugee
    Convention and the decision is sustainable.

18. At the end of submissions I ascertained from the  representatives  that
    should an error of law be found, neither party had any further evidence
    to call.  Both representatives agreed that I would be in a position  to
    re-make the decision on the evidence already presented.

19. I am satisfied that the FtT's decision discloses a  material  error  of
    law such that it needs to be set aside.  I now give my reasons  briefly
    for that finding. I find force in the grounds seeking permission.   The
    facts in this appeal are essentially unchallenged.  The judge  set  out
    the Appellant's case, which is that she has suffered abuse at the hands
    of her husband (and/ or his family) and that her own  family  in  India
    appear unwilling  to  provide  her  support.   Yet,  after  extensively
    quoting from the country information and guidance background  documents
    showing there is state protection available for the victims of domestic
    abuse, there are simply no reasoned findings on whether  the  Appellant
    would be able to avail herself of that protection.  The  decision  does
    say in [66] there are problems  with  regard  to  the  availability  of
    housing in India for single women but does not say  why  the  Appellant
    could not avail herself of the working women's hostels nor why internal
    relocation is not a viable option.  That lack of reasoning is  material
    and accordingly I find the decision must be set aside and re-made.

Re-making the Decision

20. There are several strands to the Appellant's claim to asylum/Articles 2
    and 3 ECHR.

       . She cannot return to India because she fears domestic  violence  at
         the hands of her husband and his family  and  her  own  family  are
         unable or unwilling to protect her.

       . She claims internal relocation is not a viable option  because  she
         would be a single woman with a child.

       . Her severe  depression  and  suicidal  ideation  reaches  the  high
         threshold required to establish an Article 2/3 claim.

21. Taking each of these strands in turn it was submitted by Mr Hachemi  on
    behalf of  the  Appellant  that  she  falls  into  the  category  of  a
    particular social group of women fearing gender-based harm or violence.
     In furtherance of this he handed in the Upper Tribunal decision in  NA
    and VA (Protection: Article 7(2) Qualification Directive) India  [2015]
    UKUT 00432.  Mr Hachemi cited that case as authority  for  saying  each
    case  must  be  looked  at  on  its  own  merits  rather  than  on  the
    generalities claimed in the Country Information and Guidance report.

Consideration

22. It has been accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant be given  the
    benefit of the doubt as regards her claim that she  is  the  victim  of
    domestic violence at the hands of her husband (and  his  family).   She
    has also been given the benefit of the doubt as  regards  her  evidence
    that her own parents will no longer support her.  What is not  accepted
    however is her claim that there is not sufficiency of state  protection
    for her.  In this regard, she claims that the police are corrupt -  she
    cannot go to them; if she did so her husband's family would bribe  them
    to drop any charges and her own family would put pressure on her not to
    proceed.

23. I find there is no  evidence  to  show  that  the  Appellant  has  even
    actually been refused protection by the authorities in India.  From the
    evidence available, she has  never  tried  to  seek  state  protection.
    There has been no evidence put forward on her behalf to  show  that  in
    some way she would be refused help from the state, on  account  of  her
    gender as the victim of domestic assault.

24. On the contrary the 2015 April Country of  Information  Guidance  which
    was helpfully put in by Mr Hachemi, indicates that there are  statutory
    laws which provide tough penalties for domestic violence and since 2008
    a high percentage of police investigations have been successful.

25. Whilst it is  acknowledged  by  the  Respondent  that  there  are  some
    limitations in the police force, that is a far cry from saying that the
    state is unwilling or unable to offer protection such as to  bring  the
    Appellant within the Refugee Convention.

26. The Appellant has shown by her actions here in the UK that she has  the
    strength of character to take action  against  her  husband.   She  has
    reported him in the UK for violence towards her and as a result he  was
    convicted of assault.  Without ever going to the authorities in  India,
    the Appellant cannot be in a position to say that they would not  offer
    her effective protection.  She cannot therefore be said to be part of a
    particular social group.

27. So far as the second strand to the Appellant's claim is concerned,  she
    claims that relocation to another part of India, to escape her husband,
    would  not  be  reasonable  or  it  would  be  unduly  harsh   in   her
    circumstances.  The Appellant is an educated woman who holds  a  degree
    level  qualification.  She  came  to   the   UK   to   obtain   further
    qualifications.  On the face of it, she is, it would seem  someone  who
    is capable of gaining employment.  She has not  demonstrated  that  her
    husband or his family have influence and connections throughout  India,
    sufficient to pursue her. The Country of Information Guidance indicates
    that there are several organisations which provide  support  to  single
    women.  In addition it states there are  working  women's  hostels  and
    some hostels have day care centres for residents with children although
    it is stated that in general hostels for middle class working women "do
    not have accommodation for children."  However overarching this is  the
    option of a voluntary  assisted  return  programme  which  can  provide
    appropriate financial and other support.

28. The final strand  concerning  the  Appellant's  claim  relates  to  her
    health.  There is evidence that she suffers from severe depression  and
    has experienced five miscarriages.  Her severe depression is  confirmed
    by Dr Longshaw's report.  The Appellant in her statement says that help
    in India, for the mental health problems she suffers from,  is  limited
    and expensive.  She says furthermore that doctors in India  would  just
    prescribe "medication" which has "side effects."

29. The Country of  Information  Report  for  India  reports  that  medical
    treatment is available in India for mental  health  issues.   There  is
    nothing to show that the Appellant  would  be  unable  to  access  that
    medical treatment.  It may well be that the Appellant would have to pay
    for her own medication and this may be  expensive  although  the  World
    Health Organisation report of 2005 observed

         "A large mostly indigenous  pharmaceutical  industry  ensures  that
         most psychotropic drugs are available often at a fraction of  their
         cost in high income countries."

30. It may well be that the medical facilities in India are  not  as  well-
    developed as in the UK but that does not place an obligation on the  UK
    to alleviate  such  disparities  through  the  provision  of  free  and
    unlimited treatment.  It is hard to see that the medical  evidence  put
    forward on behalf of the Appellant reaches the high threshold  required
    to succeed under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

31. In summary for the above reasons I find  that  the  FtT  was  wrong  to
    conclude that  the  Appellant  falls  within  the  Refugee  Convention.
    Furthermore it was wrong to conclude that the Appellant's health issues
    were such as to bring her within the high threshold outlined in N v  UK
    [2008] ECHR 453.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  30th  July
2015 is set aside.  I re-make the decision.  The appeal  of  Ms  HK  against
the decision of the Secretary of State made on 19th March 2015  refusing  to
grant her asylum and making directions  for  her  removal  from  the  United
Kingdom is hereby dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

