
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07582/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|delivered ex tempore on 10 February  |                                     |
|2016                                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     A R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown Counsel instructed by
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order in order to  protect  the
    anonymity of the appellant who claims asylum. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or Court directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.  This direction  applies
    to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to  comply
    with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 10  April  1976.
    She appeals, with permission granted on 5 February 2015  (Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison)  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Turquet) which, in a determination  promulgated  on  12  January  2015,
    dismissed her appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  to
    remove her to Pakistan dated 15 September 2014 following the refusal on
    that date of her claim for  asylum,  for  humanitarian  protection  and
    leave to remain in the UK under Art. 8 of the European Convention.

 3. The appellant's case is that she came to the United Kingdom on 23 March
    2010 together with her husband whom she  had  married  in  Pakistan  in
    March 2003.  The substance of her claim was that during the  course  of
    her marriage she was the subject of domestic abuse both by her  husband
    and also by his family.  He returned  to  Pakistan  some  time  between
    October 2012 and December  2013,  leaving  the  appellant  in  the  UK.
    During the course of her marriage the appellant became  pregnant  on  a
    number of occasions and  she  was  forced  against  her  will  to  have
    children as it  became  clear  that  there  were  medical  reasons  why
    pregnancy was not advisable to her.  It was also part of her case  that
    she underwent a termination in the UK and that was against  the  wishes
    of her husband.

 4. In her Reasons for Refusal Letter of 15 September 2014 the Secretary of
    State did not accept the appellant's account.   The  reason  underlying
    that conclusion was that the appellant had failed to claim asylum until
    2014 and that the delay, taking into account the approach  set  out  in
    para 339L of the Immigration Rules, meant that the  appellant  was  not
    entitled to the benefit of the doubt.  In  addition  the  Secretary  of
    State considered that the appellant had failed to  establish  that  she
    would be objectively at risk on return as a single woman or on  account
    of her claimed domestic violence.

 5. In the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the Secretary of State  relied
    upon the Reasons for Refusal Letter  and  submitted  that  putting  the
    appellant's claim at its highest she could not succeed.

 6. The initial grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal drafted by the
    appellant's Counsel before the First-tier Tribunal  state  at  para  11
    that the appellant was not asked questions in cross-examination and the
    issues before the First-tier Tribunal were essentially those relied  on
    by the respondent in the refusal letter.

 7. In dismissing the appellant's appeal on  the  international  protection
    grounds the judge in  a  detailed  determination  running  to  some  68
    paragraphs took a number of points against the  appellant  leading  the
    judge to find the appellant's claim not to be credible.  In particular,
    at paras 36, 38, 39, 41 and 49 the judge observed  that  there  was  an
    absence of supporting documentation  for  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    claim.  In para 36 the judge in particular noted  that  there  were  no
    records to support the appellant's case that she had been seeing  a  GP
    and had been admitted to hospital in the past as she claimed.

 8. The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  argue  that  the  judge's
    decision was inadequately reasoned but, in  particular  before  me,  Ms
    Brown, who represented the appellant submitted that the points taken by
    the judge had in effect led to the  proceedings  being  unfair  as  the
    appellant had not had a proper opportunity to  deal  with  the  matters
    raised.

 9. In addition, with the assistance  of  Mr  Jarvis  who  represented  the
    respondent, it became clear  that  the  respondent  had  medical  notes
    submitted by the appellant's previous representatives as  part  of  her
    claim from the GP showing  her  hospitalisation  and  termination  that
    followed and that her husband was opposed to it.

10. Further,  Ms Brown  made  a  number  of  other  points  concerning  the
    adequacy of the judge's determination, in particular her  treatment  of
    the expert evidence at para 48 of the  determination  where  the  judge
    found the expert report  not  to  be  of  assistance  in  reaching  any
    findings  as  the  judge  had  not  accepted  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant.  Ms Brown submitted that the expert had at para 113  of  her
    report concluded that  the  events  set  out  in  the  account  of  the
    appellant  were  both  plausible  and  consistent  with  the   expert's
    knowledge of events and life in Pakistan.

11. On behalf of the respondent Mr Jarvis submitted that the medical  notes
    did not take the matter much further although he accepted that they had
    not been put before the judge.  He submitted that the burden  was  upon
    the appellant as was the accepted approach as well as by virtue of para
    339L and Art.4(5) of the  Qualification  Directive.   It  was  for  the
    appellant to provide all the relevant documents that she wished to rely
    on and the judge could not be  criticised  for  observing  consistently
    with the case of TK  (Burundi)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 40 that their absence  was  relevant  to  an
    assessment of the appellant's credibility.  He submitted  that  it  was
    not for the Presenting Officer to go through each and every  point  and
    the Presenting Officer in this case had, he said, entirely properly put
    the respondent's case on the basis of the appellant's  claim  taken  at
    its highest.

12. It is not necessary for me to deal with every point raised by Ms  Brown
    because I have concluded that there are  a  number  of  errors  in  the
    judge's determination and approach to the evidence which result in  her
    adverse credibility finding being flawed.

13. First, whilst I accept that it was for the appellant to prove her  case
    before the First-tier Tribunal those proceedings  must  necessarily  be
    objectively fair.  The stance taken by the respondent before the First-
    tier Tribunal was certainly no more than was set  out  in  the  refusal
    letter.  I accept that the respondent did not concede  the  appellant's
    account was credible.  Nevertheless in the absence of cross-examination
    or new points being raised by  the  judge  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing, the appellant was not aware that the judge would  subsequently
    rely on the absence of documents which in the judge's view  would  have
    assisted to substantiate the appellant's claim including evidence  from
    relatives, those who had dealt with her  in  the  UK  and  the  medical
    evidence to which I have referred.  The judge was entitled in principle
    to take each point that she did but, as a matter of fairness, given the
    way that the case was presented the judge  was  required  to  give  the
    appellant the opportunity to deal with the matters raised.

14. Secondly, there was evidence not considered by the Judge.   In  respect
    of the delay there was evidence in the  appellant's  witness  statement
    (para 10) that the reason she delayed  in  claiming  asylum  after  her
    husband left the UK was because she was in fear of him because of  what
    she was told he  and  his  family  would  do  to  her.   Likewise,  the
    respondent had medical notes consistent with  the  appellant's  account
    that she had been treated in the UK and  had  undergone  a  termination
    against the wishes of her husband.

15. As a result, in addition to the judge failing to give the appellant  an
    opportunity to deal with the absence of supporting evidence  the  judge
    also failed to deal with the supporting evidence that  was  before  her
    or, in the case of a medical notes, should have been before the  judge.
    I am not suggesting that there was any sinister reason as to  why  that
    evidence was not produced but it simply was not perhaps  by  oversight.
    The judge was as a result  not  able  to  look  at  it  and,  in  fact,
    commented upon the absence of supporting medical evidence.

16. Taking together these matters, it seems to me  that  the  appellant  in
    presenting her case to the judge was not given a  fair  opportunity  to
    deal with matters that the judge considered relevant and  important  in
    reaching her adverse credibility finding.  I do not say that the  judge
    was bound to reach a different view but rather that the  assessment  of
    the evidence and the process leading to the judge's  findings  required
    the judge to give the  appellant  the  opportunity  to  deal  with  the
    matters  which  were  for  the  first  time  raised  in   the   judge's
    determination and consider the evidence available (or which should have
    been made available by the respondent).  These errors fatally undermine
    the Judge's adverse findings.

17. Mr Jarvis accepted that if the judge's credibility  finding  could  not
    stand then her finding in relation to risk on return likewise could not
    stand.  I agree.  It is clear that the linkage between the two findings
    results in both falling if the credibility finding cannot stand.

18. It is the case that the judge gave a number of detailed reasons for not
    accepting the appellant's credibility but I cannot  be  satisfied  that
    the errors that I have identified were not material to her finding.

Decision

19. For these reasons the First-tier tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal involved the making of a material error  of  law.   The  judge's
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

20. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required in  re-making  the
    decision, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  re-
    hearing de novo before a Judge other than Judge Turquet.  None  of  the
    Judge's findings are preserved.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
