
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07659/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  10 June 2015                     |On 22 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             THANANCHAYAN ALFRED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jegarajah , Counsel, instructed by Solidum
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, HOPO.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  Judge
         Grimshaw made following a hearing on 4 November 2014 at Bradford.

      2. The appellant makes a number of criticisms of the determination  in
         his grounds. At the hearing Ms Jegarajah focussed  her  submissions
         on 2 main points, both of which have merit,  i.e.  that  the  judge
         failed to consider relevant evidence when reaching her  conclusions
         both in relation to the appellant's activities in Sri Lanka and  in
         the UK.

      3. The judge accepted that the appellant had historic employment  with
         an arts organisation, CP Arts, but not that it had caused  him  the
         difficulties claimed. In reaching that conclusion she did not  take
         into account the totality of the appellant's case as set out in his
         screening interview, statement and substantive  interview  nor  the
         background information on the context  in  which  the  organisation
         operated in Sri Lanka.

      4. Second, she rejected the appellant's evidence  of  his  involvement
         with the British Tamils Forum, criticising one of the letters which
         the organisation produced. She did not however refer to  two  other
         letters, nor significantly to his identity card which shows that he
         is a volunteer collecting evidence for the UNHCR in relation to Sri
         Lanka.

      5. In failing to take into account relevant evidence, the judge  erred
         in law.

      6. Accordingly the decision of Judge Grimshaw is set aside. It  should
         be remade by a judge other than Judge Grimshaw at Taylor House with
         all issues at large.



Signed        Date




                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
