
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07980/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                     J S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Peterson, Counsel, instructed by A & P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Durance sitting in Manchester on  9  October
    2015) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to recognise him as a refugee  as  otherwise  requiring
    international or human rights protection.  The First-tier Tribunal made
    an anonymity  direction,  and  I  consider  that  the  claimant  should
    continue to be accorded anonymity for these proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 18 November 2015 Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker granted
    the appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "It was open to the judge  to  have  regard  to  the  attitude  the
         Authorities might have had towards the appellant.  That he did  not
         assert the Authorities had any interest in him  after  his  release
         did not necessarily mean that it was not open to the judge,  having
         regard to the totality of the evidence, to find the grant of a  bus
         licence in the circumstances of the case to be a pointer in  making
         credibility findings.  However  if,  as  is  submitted,  the  judge
         materially  mis-recorded  what  the  appellant   said   about   his
         involvement with the LTTE after 2009 and wrongly characterised  the
         appellant as having told lies then the whole of  the  decision  may
         need to be revisited.  In those circumstances permission is granted
         on all grounds."

Relevant Background

 3. On 2 June 2014 the appellant attended a substantive  asylum  interview.
    He said he had been forced to join the LTTE in December 2006.   He  had
    no involvement with the LTTE prior to this date (Q&A 22).  He confirmed
    that he had been forcibly recruited: he had begged them not to send him
    to fight the army.  He was assigned a non-combatant  role,  helping  to
    bury the dead and also to provide food to the fighting  areas.   During
    "the last battle" he was arrested on 28 January 2009 and  detained  for
    nearly two months, during which time he was severely tortured.  He  was
    then handed over to the police, and the  police  put  him  in  an  army
    hospital.  He then joined his family members who were in a refugee camp
    at Verapuram.  While in detention, he told his  interrogators  that  he
    had been forcibly recruited to the LTTE.  He was asked whether  he  had
    helped the LTTE after his capture by the Sri Lankan Army in  2009.   He
    answered no (Q &A 55).

 4. The appellant claimed that he had been detained again in 2014.  He  was
    asked why.  He answered that they suspected the LTTE were reforming  in
    his local area, and they suspected him of helping the LTTE to reform in
    the area (Q&A 56).

 5. The appellant said that he had been arrested on 1 March 2014 at  a  bus
    stop.  He was detained at Kilinochchi Army Camp until  mid-April  2014.
    On the day of his arrest, he was taken to the camp where he was  beaten
    up to the point where he lost consciousness.  When  he  awoke,  he  was
    shown photographs of three individuals, and he  was  asked  whether  he
    knew these "new LTTE leaders"?  He told  the  Home  Office  interviewer
    that he recognised two of them, but he had never met them.   After  the
    end of the war, he had not seen any LTTE members, and he did  not  know
    what the two people that he recognised were, "doing now".

 6. He was asked how he had managed to leave detention in  2014.   He  said
    they had taken about ten to fifteen people to a place  in  the  jungle,
    and put them in a camp and divided them into groups and sent them  into
    the jungle to search for LTTE members in the jungle.   The  interviewer
    questioned why the authorities would  tell  a  former  LTTE  member  to
    search for members of an organisation they had previously  worked  for.
    The appellant answered that the Government was arresting  every  public
    person and asking them to help in searching in the jungle to find  LTTE
    members.  On the first day, the search was  fruitless.   They  did  not
    find anybody.  On the second day, they heard some shooting.  They  were
    later told that the new LTTE leaders had been shot by the army  in  the
    jungle.  That night, the appellant and another person managed to escape
    by crawling away into the jungle past a sentry point where the  soldier
    on duty was "in a sleeping position".

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Both parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Durance.   The
    appellant gave oral evidence, and adopted as part of  his  evidence-in-
    chief a witness statement in which he responded to various points  made
    against him in the refusal letter.  At pages 6 and 7 he said as follows
    with reference to paragraph 12 of the refusal letter:

         "I did not know what and what  I  must  tell  and  must  not  tell.
         Because of the bad experience I had in Sri Lanka  due  to  my  LTTE
         involvement I denied any LTTE connection other than 2006 membership
         at my interview as I feared of being sent back to Sri Lanka.

         In my substantive interview  I  said  I  was  forced  to  join  the
         movement in December 2006.  In fact, I was helping  the  LTTE  from
         1990 in many ways.  I helped them in  organising  blood  donation,
         helping financially,  storage  facility  at  home,  collecting  and
         supplying dry food during battle time, etc.  The local  people  and
         many LTTE members know my involvement with the LTTE.

         I also helped former LTTE members during 2010 and 2014  by  finding
         jobs, accommodation, financial help, etc.  I did not  disclose  any
         of these in my interviews as I thought  it  was  wrong  for  me  to
         accept my LTTE involvement and that is why I said no involvement at
         all (my emphasis).  I did not even disclose  my  first  brother-in-
         law's long time membership and send brother-in-law's membership.

         I had close relationship with the LTTE as I was  the  president  of
         Mallavi Area Chamber  of  Commerce  and  therefore  organising  and
         attending meetings  with  LTTE's  political  leader  Thamilchelvan,
         finance head  Thamilenthi,  Tamil  Eelam  Economy  and  Development
         Organisation (TEEDOR) Karikalan."

 8. In his subsequent decision, Judge Durance summarised  his  findings  at
    paragraph [35], before going on to explain  how  he  had  reached  such
    findings.  He found that the appellant was a low ranking  supporter  of
    the LTTE between 2006 and 2009, and in 2009 he was briefly detained and
    ill-treated.  The expert report from Dr Martin was supportive  of  that
    ill-treatment.  Upon his release from detention, the appellant was able
    to set up a private enterprise called JPSK  Travel.   This  was  a  bus
    service operating between Jaffna and Kilinochchi.   The  appellant  was
    not arrested  or  detained  in  2014.   The  account  provided  by  the
    appellant in respect of his post-2009  activities  was  discrepant  and
    incredible, and accordingly the appellant was not at  risk  on  return.
    At paragraph [36], the judge reiterated that  he  found  on  the  lower
    standard of proof that the appellant was not credible in respect of his
    account of events in 2014.   His  account  was  internally  discrepant,
    inconsistent and incredible.  Moreover his account of extant  risk  was
    contradicted by the documents he had produced in support.

 9. The judge expanded on  this  finding  at  considerable  length  and  in
    considerable detail in paragraphs [37] to [52].  At paragraph [37],  he
    observed that the appellant confirmed  to  the  Presenting  Officer  in
    cross-examination that he had lied  on  various  occasions  during  the
    asylum interview.  At paragraph [42], the judge held that  the  reasons
    advanced by the appellant as to why false information was given to  the
    respondent at the asylum interview lacked coherence.  It was clear from
    the interview that the appellant  indicated  he  was  engaged  in  LTTE
    activities.  As such it  was  entirely  unclear  why  he  would  answer
    questions selectively at the interview.  The answers that  he  gave  at
    questions 22, 55 and  64  were  clear  and  unequivocal.   The  further
    evidence now produced directly  contradicted  these  answers,  and  the
    appellant confirmed that he did in fact lie at the interview.

10. The judge held at paragraph [45]:

         "I find that in the most recent evidence given by the appellant  to
         the effect that he participated in LTTE activities  from  1990-2006
         and then 2010-2014 is an alteration to his  evidence  in  order  to
         attempt to bolster his role, status and standing  within  the  LTTE
         ... In that respect I find that the appellant lacks credibility."

11. The judge went on in paragraph [46] to say  that  this  conclusion  was
    supported by the lack of credibility "elsewhere in his evidence".

12. At paragraph [51], the judge addressed a submission from Ms Walker  for
    the appellant that his evidence was consistent with a BBC  report  that
    she had appended to her skeleton argument.  The judge said  this  might
    have been a more persuasive argument if the  appellant  had  not  given
    such discrepant accounts.

13. At paragraph [52] the judge said that the only scar which the appellant
    attributed to the events of 2014 was scar eight.  The expert  indicated
    there were other possibilities for the cause of such scarring, and,  in
    the light of the adverse credibility findings that he had  reached,  he
    found that the other possibilities were the cause of scar eight.  In so
    doing, he placed reliance on KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka
    [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC), the head note of which he had earlier set out in
    full at paragraph [11] of his decision.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Peterson developed the grounds of appeal which had been settled
    by Ms Amanda Walker of Counsel.

15. With reference to ground 5, she  produced  a  copy  of  a  Home  Office
    guidance document on Tamil separatism dated 28 August 2014.  Annexed to
    this guidance is a letter dated 16 April 2014  from  the  British  High
    Commission in Colombo.  They reported that on 11  April  2014  the  Sri
    Lankan Military announced that they had shot and killed three  men  who
    were trying to revive the LTTE.  The brigadier identified the three men
    by reference to their actual names,  as  well  as  their  alleged  LTTE
    names.  There had been differing reports as  to  whether  the  killings
    happened in Padaviya, just outside the island's northern  province,  or
    in Nedunkerni, in the northern Vavuniya district.  An  intense  manhunt
    for these suspects had taken place since  the  alleged  shooting  of  a
    police officer on 13 March 2014.  A security operation in the north and
    east had seen a significant increase in  those  detained  in  question.
    Numerous house to house searches had  been  carried  out  and  60  plus
    arrests had been effected under the Prevention of Terrorism  Act  1979.
    The arrests included  those  of  family  members  or  suspected  family
    members of the wanted individuals.  Following the killings of the three
    men, the Government of Sri Lanka was seeking assistance  from  Interpol
    in locating two men suspected of financing and reorganising  the  LTTE.
    The two men, who were named, were thought to  be  currently  living  in
    Norway and France.

16. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Nath submitted the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was sound, and that the error of law  challenge
    was in reality no more than an expression of disagreement with findings
    that were reasonably open to the judge.

Discussion

17. Ground 1 is that the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  the  appellant's
    ability to obtain a permit to run a bus service after his release  from
    an IDP Camp in October 2009 was relevant to the question of whether his
    asylum claim was credible.  Although Judge Zucker granted permission to
    appeal on all grounds raised, he clearly indicated in his  reasons  for
    granting permission that he did not see any merit  in  this  particular
    ground, and I am of the same view.  The fact  that  the  appellant  was
    able to operate a bus  service  in  and  around  Jaffna  following  his
    release was more consistent with the appellant  not  being  of  ongoing
    adverse interest to the Authorities than the contrary proposition.   It
    was open to the judge to find that the appellant's ability  to  operate
    such a bus service was indicative of him having a low risk  profile  in
    2014 such as to make it less likely that he would be singled out by the
    Authorities as a potential suspect in a conspiracy to reform the  LTTE.
    Clearly the judge would have been wrong to have treated the appellant's
    ability  to  run  a  bus  service  between  2010  and  2014  as   being
    determinative of his risk profile.  But this was  not  what  the  judge
    did.  It was simply one matter which he took into account  alongside  a
    number of other matters.

18. Ground 2 is that the judge erred in recording that  the  appellant  was
    seeking to suggest he had remained involved with the LTTE from 2009  to
    2014, as opposed to simply providing assistance to former LTTE members.
    While the appellant had withheld details relating to the full extent of
    his LTTE involvement prior to 2006, he was not seeking  to  suggest  he
    had any involvement with the LTTE after the end of the  civil  conflict
    in 2009.

19. Ms Walker sought to support ground 2 by selective  quotation  from  the
    appellant's witness statement and from a  passage  in  the  appellant's
    cross-examination.  I say "selectively" advisedly.  Ms  Walker  ignored
    the fundamental discrepancy between the position  which  the  appellant
    took in his substantive asylum interview and the position which he took
    in the passage from the witness statement which I have quoted above.

20. It is clear from the quoted passage that the appellant was  taking  the
    position  that  he  had  hitherto  suppressed  the  truth   about   his
    involvement with the LTTE before 2006 and after 2009.  There is thus no
    merit whatsoever in the suggestion that the judge mis-recorded what the
    appellant said about his involvement with  the  LTTE  after  2009,  and
    wrongly characterised the appellant as having told lies.   On  his  own
    case, the appellant lied in his asylum interview about his  involvement
    with the LTTE before 2006, and his  involvement  with  the  LTTE  after
    2009.

21. I accept that later in his witness statement the  appellant  sought  to
    qualify his earlier "admission" of suppressing  the  truth  as  to  his
    activities after 2009 by saying that he did not  have  any  involvement
    with the LTTE after 2009 as the movement  no  longer  existed.  In  the
    passage from his cross-examination which is quoted  by  Ms  Walker  the
    appellant drew the same distinction.

22. But this does not change the fact that at pages 6 and 7 of his  witness
    statement the appellant  characterised  his  non-disclosure  of,  among
    other things, helping and providing  funding  to  former  LTTE  members
    between 2010 and 2014  as  falsely  denying  an  LTTE  involvement  and
    connection after 2009.

23. The ostensible purpose of  this  crucial  passage  in  the  appellant's
    witness statement was to bolster his role, status and standing with the
    LTTE so as to lend credence to the claim that he  was  singled  out  in
    2014 as a likely co-conspirator in a conspiracy  to  reform  the  LTTE.
    The "disclosure" of the appellant's involvement with  the  LTTE  before
    2006, and association with former LTTE members after  2009  is  clearly
    relevant to his risk profile in 2014, and the appellant would not  have
    brought it  up  in  his  witness  statement  if  he  and/or  his  legal
    representatives did not think it was relevant to his risk profile.

24. The clear thrust of the asylum interview was  that  the  appellant  had
    nothing to do with the LTTE after 2009, including associating with  and
    providing support to other former members of the LTTE.

25. So it was open to the judge to characterise  the  appellant  as  having
    told lies about his involvement with the LTTE,  both  before  2006  and
    after 2009, particularly when the  appellant  himself  in  his  witness
    statement  claimed  to  have  suppressed  "the  truth"  when  answering
    questions in the asylum interview.  The judge was not bound  to  accept
    the appellant's alternative case, which was that he  had  not  in  fact
    suppressed the truth in respect of his activities after 2009.

26. At paragraph [43] the judge addressed another  excuse  offered  by  the
    appellant as to why he had allegedly suppressed the truth in his asylum
    interview, which was that he had not received adequate legal advice  by
    the time he attended the interview.  The judge said this did not  stand
    up to scrutiny because when the appellant was examined by Dr Martin  on
    21 September 2015, he was still maintaining that he had joined the LTTE
    in 2006.

27. Ground 3 is that it was unreasonable for the judge  to  find  that  the
    appellant was maintaining his lie about his involvement with  the  LTTE
    prior to 2006 during the course of his assessment by Dr  Martin  on  21
    September 2015.

28. I  accept  that  the  judge's  observation  is  not  a  strong  adverse
    credibility point, as Dr Martin states at the outset of his report that
    the history which he gives in the report is restricted to those aspects
    that he considers relevant to  the  physical  findings.   However,  the
    appellant's legal representatives had instructed Dr Martin  to  examine
    the appellant with a  view  to  preparing  a  scarring  report.   These
    representatives had been on the record since at least the middle of May
    2015, the appellant having been  represented  by  a  different  set  of
    representatives at the time of the asylum interview.  So there had been
    plenty  of  time  for  the  appellant's  new  representatives  to  take
    instructions from their client, and to  give  him  appropriate  advice,
    before they gave instructions to Dr Martin.  Nonetheless, neither  they
    nor the appellant sought to correct the record as to when the appellant
    had allegedly begun assisting the LTTE.  So it was reasonable  for  the
    judge to reject the excuse of inadequate advice  by  reference  to  the
    fact that the record  had  not  been  corrected  by  the  time  of  the
    appellant's examination by Dr Martin.

29. Ground 4 is that the judge materially erred in  finding  in  paragraphs
    [47] to [49] that the appellant's account of  the  2014  detention  and
    escape was simply incredible.  This ground was not specifically pursued
    by Ms Peterson, and was also not singled out by Judge Zucker as  having
    prima facie merit.

30. Ground 4 is developed at considerable length in the grounds of  appeal,
    and in essence it is argued that  the  judge  has  not  given  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's account of his detention and  his
    escape from detention.

31. Insofar as ground 4 is directed at the adequacy of the judge's  reasons
    for disbelieving the appellant's account of his arrest and detention in
    2014, there is an inherent flaw in  the  premise,  which  is  that  the
    judge's reasons are confined to paragraphs [47] to [49].   The  judge's
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's account  of  being  arrested  and
    detained in 2014 range much more widely.

32. Paragraphs [47] to [49] are in fact solely focused on a discrete aspect
    of the appellant's account, which is his alleged escape from detention.
     The judge has given adequate reasons for finding that this account  is
    inconsistent, incoherent and lacking in credibility.

33. Ground 5 is that the judge materially erred by failing to give adequate
    consideration to the objective evidence, in particular the letter  from
    the British  High  Commission  dated  16  April  2014  annexed  to  the
    respondent's guidance on Tamil separatism.

34. It is not clear that the  judge  was  in  possession  of  the  guidance
    referred to in ground 5, as there was no copy in my file, and there was
    also no copy in Mr Nath's file.  Moreover, there  is  no  reference  to
    this guidance in the judge's decision.

35. There is reference at paragraph [51] to a BBC report that Ms Walker had
    appended to her skeleton argument,  and  the  British  High  Commission
    letter indicates that the BBC has  carried  a  report  of  the  matters
    canvassed in the letter. Assuming that the BBC report conveys the  same
    information as that contained in the British High Commission letter,  I
    am not persuaded that the judge erred in not  treating  the  report  as
    lending credence to the appellant's account of either his detention  or
    his escape from detention.  As I explored with  Ms  Peterson  in  oral
    argument, the report is inconsistent with the  appellant's  account  in
    two material respects.  Firstly, the  appellant  claims  to  have  been
    detained on 1 March 2014, whereas the intense manhunt for three alleged
    LTTE leaders only began after the alleged shooting of a police  officer
    on 13 March 2014.  Secondly, it is not suggested that  those  who  were
    arrested under the Prevention of Terrorism Act 1979 were sent out  into
    the jungle to search for the three suspects.

36. Grounds 6 and 7 both relate to the judge's  findings  on  the  scarring
    report insofar as the scarring report was relied on by the appellant as
    providing  supporting  evidence  for  his  alleged  ill-treatment   and
    detention in 2014 as against his accepted ill-treatment  and  detention
    in 2009.  Ms Peterson did not seek to argue either of the two  grounds,
    rightly recognising that  the  scarring  report  was  of  very  limited
    evidential value with respect to the alleged  detention  in  2014.   At
    page 8 of his report, Dr Martin said as follows:

         "Determining the age of the scars by just visual inspection is  not
         a precise science and often it is just possible  to  say  that  the
         injuries are mature or immature, enough to give a very  approximate
         range of time when the injuries could have been caused.  The  scars
         are matured and this is consistent with injuries that occurred more
         than a year ago."

37. In short,  Dr  Martin  did  not  profess  to  be  able  to  distinguish
    chronologically between the scars attributed by the  appellant  to  the
    2009 detention as against the scarring attributed to him  to  detention
    in 2014.  So the judge did  not  err  in  not  attributing  significant
    probative value to the scarring report as  supporting  the  appellant's
    account of being detained in 2014.

38. Ground 8 relates to a procedural matter which is discussed by the judge
    at paragraphs [67] and [68] of his decision.   Ms  Walker  relied  upon
    photographs at page [73] of the appellant's bundle as support  for  the
    fact the appellant was photographed with the head of the LTTE political
    wing at a wedding (no date given).  Ms Walker was asked  whether  there
    was any material before the Tribunal which indicated that the person in
    question was in  fact  the  head  of  the  LTTE  political  wing.   She
    indicated that she did not have any  such  information  but  that  such
    information was in the public domain. She suggested she might send  the
    information to the Tribunal after the conclusion of the  hearing.   The
    judge indicated to Ms Walker this was not satisfactory as  it  deprived
    Mr Richardson, who was appearing on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,
    of the opportunity to make representations on the point.

39. The judge said the burden of proof rested on the appellant, and he  had
    not discharged the burden of proving that he was  standing  next  to  a
    high ranking member of the LTTE in the photograph.  But if he was wrong
    about this, the photograph simply  showed  the  appellant  attending  a
    wedding where there was a notable guest.  He held  that  this  was  not
    sufficient evidence of itself to place the appellant  within  the  risk
    categories of GJ and Others.

40. It is argued in ground 8 that it was unreasonable of the judge  not  to
    allow the appellant to submit  further  objective  evidence  after  the
    hearing to confirm the physical appearance of the asserted LTTE leader.



41. There is no merit in this submission. It was a reasonable  exercise  of
    case management powers, and it was in accordance  with  the  overriding
    objective, for the judge to refuse to admit further objective  evidence
    on this issue after the hearing.

42. Furthermore, the judge dealt with the matter in the  alternative.   The
    judge reasonably concluded that, even if it was true that the appellant
    had been privately photographed at a wedding standing next  to  a  LTTE
    leader, this did not in itself increase his  individual  risk  profile.
    The photograph relied upon was a  private  wedding  photograph,  not  a
    photograph that had been carried in the local or national press.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

