
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07435/2015
                                                               AA/07437/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th February 2016                  |On 19th April 2016                   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                          mr u w (first appellant)
                         mr a r l (second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms J Fisher, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first Appellant was  born
    on [ ] 1991.   The  second  Appellant  was  born  on  [  ]  1988.   The
    Appellants applied for asylum on the basis that they claimed to have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution on the basis of their membership of  a
    particular social group due to their sexuality.  The Appellants met  in
    the UK in August 2013.  The  Appellants'  application  for  asylum  was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a Notice  of  Refusal  dated  21st
    April 2015.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Lawrence sitting at Harmondsworth on 21st September 2015.
     In a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  1st  October  2015  the
    Appellants'  appeals  were  dismissed  on  all  grounds.   However   an
    anonymity direction was made and that remains in place.

 3. The Appellants lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  14th
    October 2015.  That application was refused by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Grimmett on 9th November 2015.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were
    lodged on 27th November 2015.

 4. On 4th January 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  She found that it was arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's assessment of whether  or  not  the  Appellants  are  gay  were
    significantly tainted by his  own  preconceptions  of  how  a  gay  man
    behaves.  She considered the use  of  the  words  "incredible",  but  a
    failure to form other homosexual relationships "does not  make  sense",
    that a failure to keep initial love messages "was  not  credible",  and
    indicated an arguable failure to adequately engage  with  the  evidence
    before him.  Further she  considered  that  the  implication  that  the
    Appellant should have given evidence of  their  intimacy  was  arguably
    unacceptable.

 5. On 20th January 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Secretary of State opposes  the  Appellants'
    appeal and the Rule 24 states that the judge gave adequate reasons  for
    his findings as set out at paragraphs 14  to  28  and  that  there  was
    nothing perverse or irrational about the decision.  It notes  that  the
    judge found that there was insufficient evidence both  documentary  and
    oral to show that the Appellants were in a relationship.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellants are represented by Ms Fisher.   Ms
    Fisher is extremely familiar with this matter.  She appeared before the
    First-tier Tribunal and the author of the grounds and  renewed  Grounds
    of  Appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Staunton.

 7. There is one preliminary issue that I needed  to  address.   The  first
    Appellant Mr UW appears in  person.   The  second  Appellant  does  not
    appear.  I am advised by Ms Fisher that she  has  no  instruction  from
    him.  I am further advised that the  Appellants  are  no  longer  in  a
    relationship and that they do not  know  where  Mr  L  is.   Ms  Fisher
    acknowledges that it could not be construed  that  Mr  L  is  therefore
    dependent upon Mr W but that as he was  at  the  time  of  decision  he
    remains as at the date of this hearing conjoined to the appeal.



Submissions/Discussions

 8. Ms Fisher relies on the Grounds of Appeal  submitting  that  there  are
    inaccurate and speculative comments made by the Immigration  Judge  and
    that if an analysis is made to break down the  determination  regarding
    the findings on credibility then the findings made at paragraphs 19  to
    27 could not be considered to be reasoned.  She submits that there  are
    a number of factual errors which are set out  at  some  length  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal, for example where the  parties  met,  but  that  the
    judge has applied the wrong level of weight to his  assessment  of  the
    evidence and has given far  too  much  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellants chose not to tell their family.

 9.  She  points  out  that  the  judge  thereafter  fails  to   give   any
    consideration as to how he has rejected the evidence of  witnesses  and
    has  made  no  clear  findings  on  witness  evidence.   She   strongly
    criticises his analysis  and  suggestion  that  effectively  scenes  of
    public affection have been staged as set out at paragraph 24  and  that
    the standard of proof required is a low one  and  that  the  judge  has
    actually ignored the evidence of witnesses.  Consequently  she  submits
    that the finding on witness evidence is inadequate and must  constitute
    a material error of law particularly as it goes to  the  issue  of  the
    Appellants' credibility.

10. As  for  the  second  Ground  of  Appeal  she  submits  that  there  is
    considerable and extensive use of terms within the decision which it is
    inappropriate for a judge  to  use  and  that  his  assessment  of  the
    behaviour of homosexual couples is a subjective one and  not  one  that
    can be applied and looked at against the evidence in  the  round.   For
    example she points out that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  criticised  the
    Appellants for not having other relationships and his assessment of the
    evidence at paragraphs 15 and 16 appeared to be nothing  more  than  an
    attempt to justify what is a bald assertion and pure speculation as  to
    how someone gay ought to behave.  She submits that there appears to  be
    little empathy or understanding of  how  someone  might  struggle  with
    their sexuality and even in a society such as the  UK  may  still  have
    difficulties in with this sexuality.

11. Furthermore she submits  that  the  comments  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge seemed to be that unless one is promiscuous and has  had
    many relationships they cannot be homosexual.  She queries whether  the
    same criticism would be levelled at a heterosexual couple and that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge seems to be asserting that now that they  are
    in a liberal society the  Appellant  and  his  partner  should  be  out
    partying, dancing and drinking and entertaining into a number of casual
    same sex relationships and therefore in failing to  do  so  means  that
    they are not gay.  She submits that these and other examples set out in
    the Grounds of Appeal show a complete failure by the  judge  to  engage
    with the evidence and to make prejudged and  inappropriate  assessments
    as to how the Appellants should behave and that therefore the  decision
    is unsafe and should be set aside.

12. In response Mr Staunton relies on the Rule  24  response.   As  to  the
    intention that there has been a lack of anxious scrutiny based  on  the
    fact that there is an error as to where the parties met he submits that
    is merely a simple mistake and one that I should not consider  even  if
    it is an error to be a material error.  He submits that  at  paragraphs
    22 to 27 reasons have been given as  to  why  the  Appellants  are  not
    credible and that to find the decision perverse is a  high  hurdle  and
    that the grounds he submit do not reach that level.  He points out that
    the judge has made lengthy findings.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

15. I start by reminding myself that I am not re-hearing this matter, I  am
    merely determining whether there is a material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It is the contention of  Mr
    Staunton on behalf of the Secretary of State that the judge  has  given
    adequate reasons.  However there is a real  conflict  in  the  evidence
    particularly at paragraphs 15 and 16 of the decision which however they
    are looked at are extremely difficult to reconcile.  Findings made by a
    judge must make sense and that lack of sense shows in this  decision  a
    lack of anxious scrutiny.

16. It is always necessary for a  judge  to  adopt  a  proper  approach  to
    credibility and that requires an assessment of  the  evidence  and  the
    general claim.  In asylum claims relevant factors will consist  of  the
    internal consistency of the claim, the inherent plausibility of it  and
    the consistency  of  the  claim  with  external  factors  of  the  sort
    typically found in country guidance.  The Appellants have set out their
    evidence in an attempt to  show  their  claim  is  consistent.   Whilst
    acknowledging that there are some errors in  the  parties'  version  of
    events these do not, I am satisfied justify what can only be  described
    between paragraphs 19 and 27 as speculative assumptions as made by  the
    judge and that the weight that he  has  given  to  certain  amounts  of
    evidence may well have been given too much.  What  is  however  perhaps
    more important is the fact that there is witness evidence and that  the
    judge's findings with regard to that witness evidence is inadequate.

17. Consequently when looked at in the round all these  factors  show  that
    there are material errors of law  which  may  well  have  affected  the
    outcome of the judge's analysis and the decision is consequently unsafe
    and is therefore set aside.

18. The correct approach is therefore to remit the matter back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for re-hearing.  However it has to be borne in mind  that
    there has been a substantial change in the parties'  relationship.   In
    such circumstances whilst remitting the matter back to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal I determine that the appeal should be split and  be  heard  as
    two separate appeals, this being something with which both Mr  Staunton
    on behalf of the Secretary of State and Ms Fisher concur.

Notice of Decision

(1)  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


(2)  None of the findings of fact are to stand and the appeals are  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.



(3)  The appeals are to be  separated  and  to  be  heard  as  two  separate
    appeals.  The appeals be listed at either Taylor House or Hatton  Cross
    on the first available date 28  days  hence  to  be  heard  before  any
    Immigration Judge other than  Immigration  Judge  Lawrence.   Estimated
    length of hearing 3 hours for each appeal.



(4)  That there be leave to either  party  to  lodge  an  up-to-date  bundle
    including witness statements upon which they intend to  rely  at  least
    seven days pre-hearing.



(5)  That Milestone Solicitors do advise the Tribunal within seven  days  of
    receipt of this error of law as to whether their  instructions  are  to
    act for Mr W alone or for both Appellants.



(6)  Urdu interpreters required for the appeals.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

