
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07088/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 2nd November 2016                |On: 25th November 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Jackson and Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran.  This appeal concerns his  ongoing
    claim for international protection.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This is an asylum claim.  Having had regard to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate
    to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant claimed asylum in  December  2012.  He  claimed  to  have
    entered the United Kingdom illegally  some  weeks  prior  to  this.  He
    stated that he was at risk of persecution in Iran for  reasons  of  his
    imputed political opinion. His account was that the  security  services
    were looking for him on suspicion of involvement with  PJAK,  a  banned
    Kurdish opposition group. The basis of the state's suspicion  was  that
    the Appellant had unwittingly become a courier for  this  organisation.
    The Appellant claimed to have left Iran  illegally.  He  told  officers
    that he was 15 years old.

 4. Upon making his claim the Appellant was immediately referred to  Oxford
    County Council in order that his age be assessed. Social  workers  from
    Oxford CC very quickly determined that he was over 18 and informed  the
    Respondent of their conclusions.

 5. The Respondent found the Appellant to be an  adult  and  rejected  this
    claim for want of credibility. On the 12th July 2013 the Appellant  was
    served with a notice informing him of a decision to remove him from the
    United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 6. The Appellant appealed and the matter came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Heynes, sitting at Manchester. Judge Heynes rejected  the  entire
    account as a fabrication.  He noted that the Appellant had  produced  a
    birth certificate supportive of his claimed date of birth in  1998  but
    that this document had been analysed by a specialist  examiner  at  the
    National Document Fraud Unit who had given numerous reasons why it  was
    found not to be genuine. He further noted that before him Oxford CC had
    produced a detailed and Merton compliant  report  which  supported  the
    conclusions they had  earlier  communicated  to  the  Respondent.   The
    account itself was inconsistent and "unlikely". Judge Heynes  concluded
    that there was no risk to the Appellant upon return to Iran,  including
    as a failed asylum seeker, and the appeal was dismissed.



    Error of Law

 7. The Appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal. The  matter  came  before
    me, sitting as a Deputy, on the 20th May 2014. The  Appellant  advanced
    three grounds.

 8. First, he submitted that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  flawed  for
    procedural irregularity. At the date that she had  taken  her  decision
    she had not been  in  possession  of  the  full  Merton  compliant  age
    assessment. This rendered her decision to conduct interviews  with  the
    Appellant unlawful for breach of her own published policy.  I  rejected
    this ground. It could not sensibly be suggested that  the  decision  to
    interview exposed the Appellant to any prejudice at all, since  it  had
    been established, in a  Merton  compliant  assessment  which  pre-dated
    those interviews, that he was in fact an adult.

 9. Second, it was said that the document verification report revealed that
    he had relied on a forged document, and that this fact would expose him
    to a risk of prosecution upon  return  to  Iran.  Mr  Medley-Daly,  who
    appeared  on  the  Appellant's  behalf,  submitted  that  applying  the
    principles in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2010] UKSC 31, the Appellant could not be expected  to
    lie about the details of his asylum claim upon  arrival  in  Iran,  and
    that his admission about the document was reasonably likely to lead  to
    serious harm and imprisonment.  I rejected this ground.  There  was  no
    way that the Iranian authorities could  know  that  the  Appellant  had
    relied on a forged birth certificate, and absolutely no  evidence  that
    an individual would face prosecution in  these  circumstances  even  if
    they did. There was no evidence to suggest that an Iranian border guard
    would ask "did you submit any forged documents?" and even if he did,  I
    was not satisfied that this was a matter which engaged  HJ.  That  case
    underlined the fundamental principle of refugee law than an  individual
    cannot be expected to conceal matters fundamental to his identity  such
    as his political opinion, ethnicity, religion, nationality,  or  as  in
    the case of HJ himself, his sexual orientation.  It  is  not  authority
    for the proposition that a person cannot be expected to conceal his own
    criminality.

10. Finally, it was submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in
    failing to engage with a  large  bundle  of  evidence  and  submissions
    relating to the question of illegal exit. In broad summary the argument
    ran that  the  Appellant  had  left  Iran  without  permission  or  the
    necessary documentation, that as a result he would face prosecution  or
    at least interrogation upon his return, and that this would expose  him
    to a real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment. At the time of  the  hearing
    before me the Court of Appeal had already given leave to  appeal  in  a
    number of cases raising this argument.  The determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal in this case had not dealt with these arguments  at  all.
    In view of the volume of material that the Appellant's  representatives
    had presented I found this to be an error of law.   It  was  a  central
    plank of the Appellant's case and it required findings to be made.

11. The decision of Judge Heynes was therefore preserved  in  its  entirety
    save in respect of ground (iii). The decision was flawed for a lack  of
    reasoning and findings on that point and this would need to be  remade.
    With the consent of  the  parties  the  re-making  was  stayed  pending
    resolution of the argument in the Court of Appeal.   This resulted in a
    long delay. The lead cases in the Court of  Appeal  had  in  turn  been
    stayed pending the opinion of the Upper Tribunal, which  had  indicated
    that a 'country guidance' case would be convened.  In  the  event  that
    country guidance was not listed until 2016 and  the  decision  was  not
    available until June: SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed  asylum  seeker)
    [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC).    Following promulgation of SSH this matter was
    eventually re-listed before me.


    The Re-Making

12. The parties were in agreement that the decision in SSH and HR must form
    the basis of my decision.  The  findings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  are
    summarised in the headnote as follows:


         (a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran,  who  does
         not possess a passport, will be returnable  on  a  laissez  passer,
         which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on proof  of  identity
         and nationality.


         (b) An Iranian male in respect of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has
         previously been manifested by the Iranian State  does  not  face  a
         real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights  on  return
         to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or  being  a
         failed  asylum  seeker.  No  such  risk  exists  at  the  time   of
         questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
         exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have  been  established.  In
         particular, there is not a real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
         imprisonment.


    The Tribunal thereby  rejected  the  proposition  that  questioning  on
    arrival for either illegal exit  and/or  having  claimed  asylum  would
    necessarily entail detention and ill-treatment.


13. The factual matrix pertaining to the Appellant is this. He  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2012 and has not left the country since.  He  was
    found  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  have  been  a  "transparently
    untruthful  witness"  who  was  of  no  interest  whatsoever   to   the
    authorities in Iran for any of the reasons he advanced.  Before me  the
    Appellant  claimed  to  have   attended   a   number   of   pro-Kurdish
    demonstrations  in  Manchester.      There   are   good   grounds   for
    circumspection  about  this  evidence.   Aside   from   Judge   Heynes'
    assessment of his credibility there is the fact that the Appellant  was
    unable to explain who had organised these protests, when they had been,
    how many there had been and what specific issues they had  been  about.
    I am however mindful that when the Appellant was interviewed by  Oxford
    CC social workers one of the observations that they made  was  that  he
    was politically aware. His knowledge of politics was one of the reasons
    that they concluded that he was unlikely to be a child. I am  therefore
    satisfied, to the lower standard  of  proof,  that  the  Appellant  has
    attended a number of protests in Manchester, in Rusholme and Piccadilly
    Gardens. I  accept  his  evidence  that  these  were  general  protests
    concerning the rights of Kurds in Iran, and that he took no active part
    in them aside from his attendance. He did not  for  instance  make  any
    speeches. On his evidence, he went simply to express  his  support  for
    the Kurdish people: "I didn't go as a political person".  The last such
    attendance was approximately 5-6 months ago.


14. On the basis of these facts, and applying the guidance in SSH and HR, I
    find as follows.  In order to affect the Appellant's return to Iran the
    Secretary of State will have to obtain on his behalf  a  laissez-passer
    style document  from  the  Iranian  embassy  in  London.   The  country
    guidance indicates that arrival with such a document may  highlight  to
    the authorities that the holder left Iran illegally and  a  fine  would
    result. He would likely be subject to some questioning.   The  Tribunal
    heard evidence that the questioning could take anything from 10 minutes
    [at 21], to 2-3 hours [13], to 3-5 hours [14] to several days [22].  It
    was prepared to accept Dr Kakhki's evidence that  there  is  a  special
    court near the airport which deals with penalties for illegal exit  and
    other immigration offences. The Tribunal was not at all satisfied  that
    there was, in general, a real risk of persecution at  this  stage.  The
    panel endorsed Dr Kakhki's evidence that a returnee  simpliciter  would
    not face a real risk of harm:


         "If they co-operated and accepted  that  they  left  illegally  and
         claimed asylum abroad then  there  would  be  no  reason  for  ill-
         treatment, and questioning would be for a fairly brief period. That
         seems to us to sum up the position well, and as  a  consequence  we
         conclude that a person with no history other than that of  being  a
         failed asylum seeker who had exited  illegally  and  who  could  be
         expected to tell the truth when questioned would not  face  a  real
         risk of ill-treatment during  the  period  of  questioning  at  the
         airport".


15. It is implicit in this that the questioning would cover whether or  not
    the individual and claimed asylum. This was indeed the evidence  of  Dr
    Kakhki,  recorded  at  paragraph  35  of  Appendix  1.   The   Tribunal
    specifically considered, and rejected, the proposition that the act  of
    claiming asylum would in itself expose the individual to prosecution  -
    with the attendant risk of harm - for propaganda against the state.  At
    30:


         "We can understand the sensitivity that the Iranian authorities may
         have towards perceived slights against their own state in the  form
         of untruthful allegations about  the  conduct  of  the  state,  but
         equally one can expect  a  degree  of  reality  on  their  part  in
         relation to people who in the interests of advancing their economic
         circumstances would make up a story in  order  to  secure  economic
         betterment in a wealthier country".


16. Ms Petterson emphasised these findings in her submissions. The  Iranian
    authorities are no doubt aware  that  their  citizens  use  the  asylum
    system in Europe for the purpose of economic  migration  and  generally
    speaking they are not going to pursue questioning of an individual  for
    that reason alone.


17. The question is whether there is any risk to the Appellant  because  of
    the two  factors  identified  by  Mr  Brown  in  his  submissions:  the
    Appellant's Kurdish ethnicity and his attendance  at  the  protests  in
    Manchester. It does not seem to me that the Appellant's  ethnic  origin
    can add any great substance to his claimed risk. Both SSH and  HR  were
    Kurdish and whilst the Upper Tribunal  accepted  that  it  could  be  a
    relevant factor if  taken  with  other  matters,   there  was  no  risk
    pertaining on the basis of Kurdish ethnicity alone, or taken  with  the
    'illegal exit' point.   The country guidance in respect  of  sur  place
    activity remains BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).  The headnote to that decision reads:


         1. Given the large numbers of those who demonstrate  here  and  the
         publicity which demonstrators receive,  for  example  on  Facebook,
         combined with the inability of the Iranian  Government  to  monitor
         all returnees  who  have  been  involved  in  demonstrations  here,
         regard must be had to the level of involvement  of  the  individual
         here as well as any political activity which the  individual  might
         have been involved in Iran before  seeking asylum in Britain.


         2. (a) Iranians returning to  Iran  are  screened  on  arrival.   A
         returnee who meets the profile of an activist may be detained while
         searches of documentation are made.  Students,  particularly  those
         who have known political profiles are likely to  be  questioned  as
         well as those who have exited illegally.

         (b) There is not a real risk of  persecution  for  those  who  have
         exited Iran illegally or are merely  returning  from  Britain.  The
         conclusions of the Tribunal in the  country  guidance  case  of  SB
         (risk on return -illegal exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053  are
         followed and endorsed.


         (c)  There  is  no  evidence  of  the  use  of  facial  recognition
         technology at the Imam Khomeini International  airport,  but  there
         are a number of officials who may be able to recognize  up  to  200
         faces at any one time. The  procedures  used  by  security  at  the
         airport are haphazard. It is therefore possible that those whom the
         regime might wish to question would not come to  the  attention  of
         the regime on arrival. If,  however,  information  is  known  about
         their  activities  abroad,  they  might  well  be  picked  up   for
         questioning and/or transferred to a special court near the  airport
         in Tehran after they have returned home.


         3. It is important to consider the level of  political  involvement
         before considering the likelihood of the individual coming  to  the
         attention of the authorities and  the  priority  that  the  Iranian
         regime would give to tracing him.  It  is  only  after  considering
         those factors that the issue of whether or not there is a real risk
         of his facing persecution on return can be assessed.


         4. The  following  are  relevant  factors  to  be  considered  when
         assessing risk on return having regard to sur place activities:

         (i) Nature of sur place activity

     .            Theme of demonstrations - what do the  demonstrators  want
         (e.g. reform of the regime through to its violent  overthrow);  how
         will they be characterised by the regime?

     .            Role in demonstrations and political  profile  -  can  the
         person be described as a leader;  mobiliser  (e.g.  addressing  the
         crowd), organiser (e.g. leading the chanting); or simply  a  member
         of the crowd; if the latter is he active or passive (e.g.  does  he
         carry a banner); what is his motive, and is this  relevant  to  the
         profile he will have in the eyes of the regime?

     .            Extent of participation - has the person attended  one  or
         two demonstrations or is he a regular participant?

     .            Publicity attracted - has a demonstration attracted  media
         coverage in the United Kingdom or the home country; nature of  that
         publicity (quality of images; outlets where stories appear etc)?

         (ii) Identification risk

     .            Surveillance of demonstrators - assuming the  regime  aims
         to identify demonstrators against it how does it  do  so,  through,
         filming them, having agents who  mingle  in  the  crowd,  reviewing
         images/recordings of demonstrations etc?

     .            Regime's capacity  to  identify  individuals  -  does  the
         regime have advanced technology (e.g. for facial recognition); does
         it allocate human resources to fit names to faces in the crowd?

         (iii) Factors triggering inquiry/action on return

     .            Profile - is the person known as a committed  opponent  or
         someone with a significant political profile; does he fall within a
         category which the regime regards as especially objectionable?

     .            Immigration history - how did the person leave the country
         (illegally; type of visa); where has the person been  when  abroad;
         is the timing and method of return more likely to lead  to  inquiry
         and/or being detained for more than a short period and  ill-treated
         (overstayer; forced return)?

         (iv) Consequences of identification

     .            Is there differentiation between  demonstrators  depending
         on the level of their political profile adverse to the regime?

         (v) Identification risk on return

     .            Matching  identification  to  person  -  if  a  person  is
         identified is that information systematically stored and used;  are
         border posts geared to the task?

18. I have considered the facts as found in the light of that guidance, and
    that in SSH and HR.  This appellant has  attended  a  number  of  small
    demonstrations in Manchester. These have taken place  in  Rusholme  and
    Piccadilly Gardens. There is no evidence that they attracted any  media
    coverage. Unlike the larger demonstrations outside the Iranian  embassy
    in London (as discussed in BA) there is no  evidence  that  such  small
    events are filmed or otherwise monitored by the Iranian state.  He  was
    on his own admission not  an  active  participant.  It  appears  to  me
    unlikely that the Iranian authorities would already know  that  he  had
    attended such protests.  The  only  issue  remaining  therefore  is  Mr
    Brown's second  point:  is  there  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant will be asked whether he took part in  any  activity  in  the
    United Kingdom,  whether a positive answer would lead to a real risk of
    harm, and whether, applying the principles in HJ, he could be  expected
    to lie in order to avoid such harm.


19. As I note above it was  the  accepted  evidence  in  SSH  and  HR  that
    returnees are asked about their asylum claims in  the  United  Kingdom.
    In BA (and indeed in AB  and  Others  (internet  activity  -  state  of
    evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC)) the Tribunal has further accepted
    that the Iranian authorities are interested in pursuing those  Iranians
    who exhibit their animosity towards the regime whist abroad.  In  light
    of that evidence I consider that there is a real risk that as  part  of
    the on-arrival questioning the Appellant  could  be  asked  whether  he
    protested against the government whilst living in the United Kingdom. I
    have accepted that the Appellant has attended those protests,  not  out
    of any support for a particular party, but because he believes that the
    Kurdish people in Iran are entitled to self-determination and to  enjoy
    basic human rights.   As uncontroversial a proposition that might be to
    many ears in the United Kingdom, that is  a  significant  statement  of
    intent as far  as  the  Iranian  security  forces  are  concerned.  The
    Appellant's belief in Kurdish rights is  a  political  belief  that  he
    holds. It is one  that  engages  the  Refugee  Convention  and  the  HJ
    principle.   He cannot accordingly be expected to lie if asked  whether
    he attended such protests, and if he did to explain why. I am unable to
    conclude on the evidence  that  the  Iranian  security  services  would
    simply ignore this information and allow him to go on his way. This  is
    certainly a borderline case, but applying the lower standard of proof I
    find that there must be a  real  risk  of  harm  to  the  Appellant  on
    arrival.  He is reasonably likely to be asked about sur place activity,
    according to HJ he should not be expected to deny it,  and if  he  does
    not he will be in the position of being a young man held in the custody
    of the Iranian security forces, declaring his opposition to the Iranian
    government and his support for the cause of Kurdish separatism.   There
    is a real risk of ill-treatment in those circumstances.



    Decisions

20. There is an order for anonymity.


21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
    is set aside to the limited extent identified above.


22. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:


    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   24th
                                November 2016
