
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07956/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    TSNP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who born on 23 January 1979.

 3. The appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom on 17  February  2010
    with entry clearance as a Tier 4 Student valid until 30 September 2011.
     On 29 July 2010 the appellant returned to Sri  Lanka,  using  her  own
    passport, as her father was unwell.

 4. On 8 August 2010, the appellant returned to the United Kingdom.   On  5
    November 2010, the appellant's husband joined her in the UK as a Tier 4
    dependant with entry clearance valid until 30 September 2011.

 5. The appellant applied for an extension of her leave on 1 July 2011  but
    that was refused on 14 October 2011 on the basis that she had submitted
    false documentation and previously sought  to  obtain  leave  to  enter
    through deception.  Her subsequent appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Sethi) was dismissed on 14 December 2011 on the basis  that  she
    had,  as   the   respondent   alleged,   previously   submitted   false
    documentation and used deception.  The appellant, thereafter,  remained
    in the UK without leave.

 6. On 1 June  2013,  the  appellant's  husband  claimed  asylum  with  the
    appellant as his dependant.  However, following the appellant's  arrest
    on 24 May 2013, after she was discovered working illegally, on 14  June
    2013 the appellant claimed asylum in her own right with her husband  as
    her dependant.

 7. Looking at the chronology submitted by the appellant (at pages 1 - 4 of
    the FTT's bundle),  the  appellant  was  initially  placed  within  the
    Detained Fast Track procedure  ("DFT").   A  screening  interview  took
    place on 5 June 2013.   On  17  June  2013  the  asylum  claim  of  the
    appellant's husband was refused.  Thereafter on 19 and  25  June  2013,
    the appellant had  full  asylum  interviews.   On  26  June  2013,  the
    appellant was referred to and accepted by the Helen  Bamber  Foundation
    ("HBF") for assessment and a Medico-Legal report.  As a result of this,
    the appellant was taken out of the DFT and both  she  and  her  husband
    were released from detention.

 8.  On  3  October  2013  the  appellant  attended  the  HBF  for  initial
    assessment.  But, at that stage, no report was produced by the HBF.

 9. On 21 September 2014, the Secretary of State rejected  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Arts 3 and 8 of the
    ECHR.  At this point, the report  from  the  HBF  had  still  not  been
    provided.

10. On 9 October 2014, the appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal was initially listed for hearing on 13 January 2015 but  was
    adjourned to await the report from the HBF.

11. On 23 March 2015, the appellant was seen  by  the  Consultant  Clinical
    Psychologist, Dr Katy Robjant at the HBF. Her full report was  provided
    dated 5 June 2015.

12. On 17 June 2015, the appellant's appeal was  heard  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge L Murray).







The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

13. At the hearing before Judge Murray, the respondent was not  represented
    but the appellant was represented by Counsel (not  Ms  Benfield).   The
    appellant relied upon the report from Dr Robjant (at pages 32 -  42  of
    the bundle).

14. Judge Murray accepted that the appellant  was  a  "vulnerable  witness"
    within the Joint Presidential Guidance Note 2  of  2010  on  vulnerable
    adults.  The appellant gave oral evidence before the judge but, in  the
    absence of a Presenting Officer, was not subject to  cross-examination.



15. Judge Murray dismissed the appellant's appeal on all  grounds.   First,
    she accepted the appellant's account that she had  been  raped  in  Sri
    Lanka by a  friend  of  her  husband's.   Secondly,  she  rejected  the
    appellant's account that she had been ill-treated  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities because of her political opinion  due  to  her  involvement
    with the Democratic National Alliance  Party  ("DNAP").   Thirdly,  the
    judge rejected the appellant's evidence that she had  been  ill-treated
    by  her  family  because  of  her  marriage  which,  she  claimed,  was
    "culturally disapproved".  Finally, the judge found, despite  accepting
    that the appellant suffered from mental health problems, that the  risk
    to her mental health, included the risk of suicide if she  returned  to
    Sri Lanka had not been established so as to breach Arts 3 or 8  of  the
    ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

16. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 24
    September 2015, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Simpson)  granted  the
    appellant permission.

17. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Challenge

18. The appellant's grounds upon which permission was  sought  and  granted
    set out  in  form  only  two  grounds.   First,  there  was  procedural
    impropriety  and  fairness.   Secondly,  the  judge's   reasoning   was
    inadequate and she failed properly to consider the material evidence.

19. The first ground appears to be based upon an argument by analogy to the
    case law that has led to the suspension of the DFT procedure  and  that
    this tainted the respondent's decision as the appellant was interviewed
    whilst part of that process and before her subsequent release.

20. The second ground contains  a  myriad  of  challenges  to  the  judge's
    factual finding and her approach to the evidence,  in  particular  that
    she failed properly to take into account the Medico-Legal  report  from
    the HBF in assessing credibility and also  that  the  appellant  was  a
    vulnerable adult.  It is also argued that the judge was wrong  to  take
    into account the judge's finding  in  the  appellant's  earlier  appeal
    where he had found that she had used deception  in  seeking  to  obtain
    leave.  The judge, it is said, failed properly to apply the approach in
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.

21. The 25 paragraphs pleaded under "ground 2" also include a challenge  to
    the judge's finding that the appellant could not succeed under  Arts  3
    and 8 based upon the impact upon her mental health, in  particular  the
    risk of suicide if she were returned to Sri Lanka.

22. In her oral submissions, Ms Benfield sought to focus the challenges  to
    the judge's  decision  and,  to  no  little  extent,  to  significantly
    reformulate the challenge under ground 1.  In respect of  that  ground,
    Ms Benfield no longer placed any reliance upon an argument  based  upon
    the court's views about the DFT procedure.  Instead, she submitted that
    the judge had erred in law by failing to apply  the  API  "Medico-Legal
    reports from the Helen Bamber Foundation  and  the  Medical  Foundation
    Medico-Legal Reports Service" (July  2015).   She  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State had failed to apply this  policy  in  proceeding  to
    make a substantive asylum decision in respect of the appellant  without
    waiting for the report from the HBF.

23. In respect of ground 2, Ms Benfield maintained that the judge's adverse
    credibility finding was flawed in that the judge  had  failed  to  take
    into account the vulnerability of the appellant and the HBF report.  In
    addition to that principal  submission,  Ms  Benfield  also  sought  to
    challenge the judge's  adverse  credibility  finding  on  a  number  of
    discrete grounds - to which I  shall  return  below.  She  also  placed
    continuing reliance upon the Devaseelan point.  She also challenged the
    Judge's decision that the impact upon the appellant's mental health  on
    return to Sri Lanka would not breach Arts 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

Discussion

24. I deal first with ground 1 as formulated by Ms Benfield.

    1. The Policy Argument

25. Ms Benfield drew my  attention  to  the  API  (Version  4,  July  2015)
    relating to Medico-Legal reports from, for example,  the  Helen  Bamber
    Foundation.  She placed relied upon  two  passages  in  this  document.
    First, she relied upon the paragraph  at  2.4  of  the  document  which
    stated that:
         "Where the caseworker is informed in  writing  by  the  applicant's
         legal representative that the case has been  accepted  for  a  pre-
         assessment appointment, they should normally suspend a  substantive
         decision if they are not minded to granted any leave ...".

26. Further, at 3.3 of the document Ms Benfield placed  reliance  upon  the
    following:
         "It is important that  reports  prepared  by  the  Foundations  are
         understood fully and  given  proper  weight  in  the  consideration
         process".

27. Ms Benfield submitted that the respondent  had  failed  to  apply  this
    policy and had therefore acted unlawfully.   When  the  respondent  was
    informed that a report from the  HBF  was  sought,  the  appellant  was
    withdrawn from the DFT procedure.  However, the respondent went  on  to
    make a decision on the appellant's asylum claim on  21  September  2014
    before a report had been  provided  by  the  HBF.   That,  Ms  Benfield
    submitted, was contrary to the passage at 2.4 that the procedure should
    normally be suspended and, contrary to the requirements at 3.3, led the
    respondent to reach a decision without considering the report from  the
    HBF.  Ms Benfield submitted that this failure prejudiced the  appellant
    because the judge, in the absence of a Presenting Officer, did not have
    the respondent's reasons for reaching an adverse  credibility  decision
    in the light of the report.

28. There is no doubt that a decision maker may act unlawfully  by  failing
    to take into account a relevant published policy (see, R (Lumba) v SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 12).  Equally, it is clear that the First-tier Tribunal has
    jurisdiction  to  determine  that  a  decision  is  "otherwise  not  in
    accordance  with  the  law"  under  s.84(1)(e)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the basis of a failure  to  apply  a
    relevant published policy (see, for example e.g. SSHD v Abdi [1994] Imm
    AR 402 and AG (Kosovo) [2007] UKAIT 00082).

29. I am, however, unable to accept Ms  Benfield's  submission  that  Judge
    Murray erred in law in failing to  conclude  that  the  respondent  had
    acted unlawfully by failing to apply the API relied on by Ms  Benfield.



30. First, the API relied upon was submitted by Ms Benfield  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the day of the hearing.  I note that it is dated July 2015.
     It is stated to be "Version 4.0".  I was not provided with the  policy
    which was in  force  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's  decision  in
    September 2014 or, indeed, at the time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    hearing in June 2015.  Clearly a version of this policy was  likely  to
    be in force in June 2015 but the relevant date must be the date of  the
    respondent's  decision  in  September  2014.   Any  argument  that  the
    Secretary of State acted unlawfully by failing to  take  account  of  a
    relevant policy must be by reference to the policy in force at the date
    of that decision.  Without more, I cannot assume that the terms of  any
    policy in force in September 2014 were necessarily in the same term  as
    the "Version 4.0" placed before me.  However, in light of the reasons I
    am about to give, I am content to assume the  policy  is  in  the  same
    terms.

31. Secondly, looking at the terms of the policy, the passage  relied  upon
    at 2.4 does not impose an obligation or duty  upon  the  respondent  to
    suspend the decision making process until a  report  from  the  HBF  is
    provided.  It  merely  states  that  the  respondent  "should  normally
    'suspend' the substantive decision" (my  emphasis).   This  undoubtedly
    confers a discretion upon the Secretary of State to suspend the  making
    of the substantive decision albeit that "normally" that discretion will
    be exercised so as to suspend the process.  Ms Benfield  did  not  make
    any submissions to me that  the  Secretary  of  State,  if  she  had  a
    discretion, had acted  unlawfully  on  public  law  principles  in  not
    suspending the process.  Ms Benfield's submission was baldly  that  the
    policy had not been applied because the process  had  to  be  suspended
    because of the terms of the policy.

32. In this case, the appellant was referred to the HBF and  taken  out  of
    the DFT process on 26 June 2013.  It was almost  fifteen  months  later
    that the  respondent  took  the  substantive  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant asylum on 21 September 2014.  In the absence of any  concrete
    submissions that it  was  irrational  or  otherwise  unlawful  for  the
    respondent, having waited fifteen  months  for  a  report,  to  make  a
    decision I am simply unable to conclude that having initially suspended
    the procedure it was irrational or otherwise  unlawful  fifteen  months
    later despite the absence of a report for  the  respondent  to  make  a
    substantive decision.

33. On that basis, I am unable to conclude that the respondent breached the
    policy set out in the API and, even if Judge Murray erred by failing to
    consider it, that failure could not have affected her decision.

34. Thirdly in any event, even if the policy applied it is clear to me that
    Judge Murray was not referred to it at the hearing.  Ms  Benfield,  who
    was of course not Counsel at the hearing, was unable to say whether the
    policy had been provided to the judge.  However,  having  examined  the
    Tribunal file carefully, there is no copy of any  such  policy  in  the
    Tribunal file.  None is included in the Appellant's 138 page bundle  or
    a further bundle of 147 pages.  Indeed, it is clear to me that  Counsel
    for the appellant at the hearing placed no reliance upon the policy now
    relied upon by Ms Benfield on behalf of the appellant.  No  mention  of
    it is made in the  22  page  and  52  paragraph  skeleton  argument  of
    Counsel.  That skeleton  is  wholly  directed  to  the  merits  of  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian and  human  rights  grounds.
    Likewise, the  record  of  Counsel's  submission  at  para  23  of  the
    determination (reflected in the judge's Record  of  Proceedings)  again
    focuses upon the  merits  of  the  appellant's  appeal.   There  is  no
    reference to reliance upon the policy or that the  judge  should  allow
    the appeal not on its merits but because the respondent's decision  was
    not in accordance with the law.

35. The only reference to the respondent reaching a  decision  without  the
    report is that: "the respondent rushed in making  the  decision.   They
    knew that a Helen Bamber report was awaited."  That submission made  by
    Counsel (also recorded in the Record of Proceedings) is not in any  way
    linked to the ground upon which Ms Benfield  now  relies  to  establish
    that the judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider  whether  the
    respondent had failed to apply her policy.

36. Ms Benfield pointed out that the "grounds of appeal" (at pages 5  -  11
    of the second bundle before the FTT) did raise  the  issue  now  relied
    upon in ground 1 before me.  In particular, at para 2 it  is  contended
    that the respondent's decision was "wrong, unfair and unreasonable" and
    "otherwise not in accordance with the law".  I should set out  in  full
    para 2 of the grounds of appeal which are in the following terms:
         "The Respondent's decision is wrong, unfair and unreasonable and it
         is not in accordance with the Immigration Rules or otherwise not in
         accordance with the law.  The Appellant also will  argue  that  the
         Respondent failed to apply proper discretion or policy in  deciding
         to make a decision and refuse the Appellant's asylum claim when  an
         assessment and report were being  awaited  from  the  Helen  Bamber
         Foundation (HBF).  This failure  makes  this  decision  flawed  and
         unreliable as the Respondent has failed to properly and  adequately
         look at the  Appellant's  circumstances  as  revealed  in  the  HBF
         medical report."

37. Whilst I accept that there is a passing reference  to  a  "policy"  the
    content of that policy is not referred to and, at best,  the  focus  of
    this paragraph is on the contention that it was not a  proper  exercise
    of discretion to reach a substantive decision in the absence of the HBF
    report.  That was, of course,  as  I  have  already  indicated  not  an
    argument pursued by Ms Benfield before me.

38. Likewise, at para 1 of the "grounds of appeal"  reference  is  made  to
    "the published Home Office Asylum Policy Instruction  on  Discretionary
    Leave" but that is not a reference to the policy which Ms Benfield  now
    relies upon.  Rather, as para 1 of the grounds themselves makes  clear,
    it is to the "discretionary leave" policy as to whether  an  individual
    should be granted humanitarian protection or limited leave rather  than
    the process for making an  asylum  decision  where  the  HBF  has  been
    approached for a report.

39. It is also worth noting that the drafter of the "grounds of permission"
    to the Upper Tribunal in "ground 1" although, again  referring  to  the
    "respondent's own policy", fails to identify any relevant policy or its
    terms.  Indeed the focus of paras 3 - 7 of the "grounds for permission"
    under the heading "Ground 1 - Procedural Impropriety and Unfairness" is
    directed to an argument that the respondent's decision was unlawful  by
    analogy to the higher court decisions in respect of the legality of the
    DFT process.  That, of course, was a ground not pursued by Ms  Benfield
    before me.  It is difficult to see, on reading the terms of paras 3 - 7
    of the grounds  of  permission,  that  the  drafter  had  in  mind  the
    submission now made by Ms Benfield under this ground.  The shift in the
    argument is, in effect, to an entirely different point to  that  raised
    in the grounds.

40. In my judgment, it cannot be said that Judge Murray  erred  in  law  in
    failing to consider whether the respondent had acted not in  accordance
    with the law by failing to apply the policy now relied on when: (1) she
    was not provided with a copy of that policy; and (2)  Counsel  for  the
    appellant at the hearing did not pursue or reply upon this as  a  basis
    of challenge to the respondent's decision.

41. Finally, I do not accept Ms Benfield's submission  that  the  appellant
    has been prejudiced even if the policy should have been  applied.   Her
    contention that the prejudice flows from the fact that  the  judge  did
    not have the  benefit  of  the  respondent's  view,  in  assessing  the
    appellant's credibility, of the impact  of  the  HBF  report  is,  with
    respect, wholly unsustainable.  The judge had the report  and,  subject
    to what is argued under ground 2, took that report into  account.   The
    fact that she did not know what view the Secretary of State would  take
    including any reasons for rejecting reliance upon the report  does  not
    create any prejudice to the appellant.  It comes close to implying that
    the judge's role was simply to decide whether the  respondent'  reasons
    were defensible.  That was not her  role  in  deciding  on  the  merits
    whether  the  appellant  had  established  her  claim   including   her
    credibility.  Providing the judge  properly  approached  the  issue  of
    credibility (including taking into account  the  HBF  report)  she  was
    entitled to reach findings even though the respondent in  reaching  her
    decision in September 2014 had not taken into account the report.   The
    position would be no different if the appellant had produced,  for  the
    first time, an expert report at a hearing  on  any  issue.   A  judge's
    obligation is to take  into  account  all  relevant  evidence  and  any
    submissions made by the parties.  It is simply not the  legal  position
    that a judge can only consider evidence  that  was  considered  by  the
    respondent.  The only  prejudice  suggested  by  Ms  Benfield  was  the
    absence of the respondent's view on the HBF report.

42. For these reasons, I reject ground 1.

    2. Ground 2: Credibility

43. Ms Benfield's principal argument under ground 2 was that the judge  had
    failed properly to assess the appellant's credibility having regard  to
    her acceptance that the appellant was a vulnerable  adult  and  in  the
    light of the HBF report.  That report noted that the appellant:
         "... has  concentration  problems  that  were  evident  during  the
         assessment session and  she  frequently  lost  the  thread  of  the
         conversation and had to be reminded about what we were  discussing"
         (para 34 of the report).

44. Ms Benfield submitted that the judge had,  in  effect,  determined  the
    appellant's credibility without adopting a holistic assessment contrary
    to the approach mandated by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  cases  such  as
    Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367.   Ms  Benfield  submitted  that  in
    effect the judge had made a credibility finding and had then looked  at
    the medical evidence to see if her view should shift.

45. Likewise, in identifying inconsistencies in the appellant's account and
    rely on them the judge had failed to take into account the  appellant's
    vulnerability.  Ms Benfield, in particular, drew my attention  to  para
    34 of the judge's determination referring to inconsistent parts of  the
    appellant's evidence given in interview  and  subsequently  as  to  the
    number of men who had raped her.  The judge had  failed  to  take  into
    account the expert's view that the appellant suffered from PTSD  caused
    by her experience as described of being multiply raped.

46. It is clear from cases such as Mibanga and SA (Somalia) v  SSHD  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1302 that a judge in assessing the credibility of an appellant
    or her account should take into  account  supportive  medical  evidence
    either as to her mental state or corroborative of what  the  individual
    claimed occurred.  It would be wrong for a judge to reach a finding  in
    respect of an appellant's evidence and its credibility in  the  absence
    of considering the expert or other evidence relied upon and relevant to
    the individual's credibility or which support of her account.

47. In Mibanga, the judge had fallen into error by reaching a conclusion on
    the credibility of the appellant without considering at all the medical
    evidence concerning the causation of the individual's injuries.  In SA,
    the Court of Appeal identified  the  "the  force  of  the  decision  in
    Mibanga" at [32] as follows:
         "...  where  there  is  medical  evidence   corroborative   of   an
         appellant's account  of  torture  or  mistreatment,  it  should  be
         considered as part of the whole package of evidence  going  to  the
         question of credibility and not simply treated as  an  'add-on'  or
         separate exercise for subsequent assessment only after  a  decision
         on credibility has been reached on the basis of the content of  the
         appellant's evidence or his performance as a witness."

48. In this case, it is clear to me that the judge did not fall foul of the
    prohibited approach set out in Mibanga and SA.

49. As Ms Benfield candidly acknowledged, the judge  specifically  directed
    herself  to  adopt  a  holistic  approach  taking  into   account   the
    vulnerability of the appellant and  the  HBF  report  relevant  to  the
    assessment of her evidence and account.

50. Consequently at para 25, the judge said this:
         "25. The assessment  of  credibility  is  a  holistic  exercise  of
             judgment which requires  the  Tribunal  to  consider  all  the
             relevant evidence in reaching a conclusion.  An assessment  of
             credibility can only be properly made against  the  background
             evidence.  An individual's account must also  be  assessed  on
             the basis of its cultural and societal context."

51. Then at para 32 the judge again brought home the point as follows:-
         "32. It is clear from the case of M (DRC) 2003 UKIAT 00054 that  it
             is wrong to make adverse findings  of  credibility  first  and
             then dismiss an expert's report.  In Ex parte Virjon B  [2002]
             EWHC 1469, it was held to be an error  of law to  use  adverse
             credibility findings as a basis for rejecting medical evidence
             without first considering the medical evidence itself.  I have
             therefore considered  the  medical  evidence  as  part  of  my
             credibility assessment.  I have  also  taken  account  of  the
             Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  2  of  2010  on  vulnerable
             adults.  In relation  to  the  question  of  fitness  to  give
             evidence, Dr Robjant concludes that  the  Appellant  may  have
             difficulty answering questions  in  cross-examination  if  she
             perceived  the  process  of  recounting  her  history  to   be
             adversarial and  may  have  already  done  so  in  her  asylum
             interview.  I have taken this into account  in  assessing  the
             answers given in interview."

52. Of course, it is not sufficient  for  the  judge  correctly  to  direct
    herself if, in fact, she then did not apply that approach.  However,  a
    careful and fair reading of the judge's determination and  her  reasons
    for her findings at paras 33 - 55 demonstrates clearly that she did not
    fail to consider the appellant's vulnerability or the expert report  in
    assessing the appellant's credibility for her claim.

53. So, at paras 35 - 37 the  judge  explicitly  dealt  with  the  expert's
    report particularly as regard the appellant's mental  health  including
    that her PTSD was consistent with her claim:
         "35. I have considered conclusions the expert's report in  relation
             to her claim to have been raped  by  a  police  officer.   The
             Appellant was interviewed by Dr Robjant on 23 March 2015.  The
             conclusions were based on the history provided directly by the
             Appellant.  Dr Robjant does not appear to have regard  to  the
             Appellant's GP records as she states in her  report  that  she
             does not  rely  on  material  from  any  other  source  unless
             specifically stated.  Although she states  that  paragraph  41
             that the  Appellant  is  currently  receiving  anti-depressant
             medication and has been referred to a psychiatrist by  her  GP
             there is no evidence before me  that  she  was  receiving  any
             medical treatment or had been diagnosed with depression  prior
             to her asylum claim.
         36.  At paragraph 39, Dr Robjant  concludes  that  the  Appellant's
             PTSD was caused by the  experiences  she  describes  of  being
             multiply raped.  She states that this is her  opinion  because
             her symptoms are directly related to the  experience  of  rape
             (for example she had intrusive memories of  these  events  and
             avoids have intimate relations with  her  husband  because  it
             reminds her of the rape, even  though  she  wants  to  have  a
             baby).  She concludes that her depression is caused in part by
             her sense of worthlessness since the rapes and her guilt about
             being able to tell her husband about the rapes.
         37.  The report is highly probative of the Appellant's  account  to
             have been raped.  However, it is the Appellant's case that she
             was raped on a  number  of  occasions  by  both  her  friend's
             husband Janaka and by the police."

54. At para 38, the judge cited background evidence concerning the approach
    of the Sri Lankan state to the victims of sexual violence.

55. At paras 39 - 47 the judge set out a number of  reasons  for  rejecting
    the appellant's account that she had been politically involved  in  Sri
    Lanka with the DNP party and, as a result, was at risk on return:
         "39. In this context, and in view  of  the  fact  that  it  is  the
             Appellant's account that the rape was perpetrated by a  police
             officer, I accept that the Appellant would have been  unlikely
             to report it.  I have also taken account of  the  case  of  PS
             (Sri Lanka) v SSHD 2008 EWCA Civ 1213 which was a  case  where
             the appellant had been repeatedly raped by soldiers. Sedley LJ
             held that whole point was that, unlike ordinary criminals, the
             soldiers were in a position to  repeat  their  crime  with  no
             apparent prospect of detection or  punishment  and  found  the
             Appellant to be to risk on return.  I have also considered the
             case of PP (Sri Lanka) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1828 where  it  was  held  that  in
             finding that a female Tamil asylum seeker, who had been  raped
             whilst detained the Sri Lankan authorities, would  not  be  at
             risk if returned to Sri Lanka,  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  not
             given sufficient consideration to the issue of  whether  women
             in certain circumstances should be treated as falling within a
             particular risk category.
         40.  It is the Appellant's case that she fears that  she  would  be
             kidnapped as a result of her involvement with  the  DNA  party
             because this is what happened to  her  friend.   However,  the
             Appellant has provided no supporting evidence in  relation  to
             the kidnap or the  existence  of  her  friend.   There  is  no
             supporting evidence to show that her friend's mother  reported
             her disappearance.  She has also provided no evidence  of  the
             many emails she said she sent to her friend  from  the  UK  in
             relation to the activities of the Sri Lankan authorities  that
             she was able to ascertain whilst being in the UK.  I find this
             surprising in view of fact they were sent from the UK.
         41.  Further, the Appellant asserts that she was raped  in  January
             2010 and that the risk  to  her  arose  at  this  point.   She
             asserts in her witness statement at paragraph 42 'knowing  the
             behaviour of Sri Lanka's military intelligence..   I  knew  it
             was dangerous to stay on'.  She states  that  she  acquired  a
             student visa and 'discretely' left Sri Lanka.   She  does  not
             assert that she used an agent to exit.
         42.  Notwithstanding the fact  that  is  her  case  that  her  fear
             existed when she arrived in the UK she did not claim asylum on
             arrival.  She  also  had  an  appeal  in  2011  when  she  was
             represented by a solicitor in relation to her  application  to
             extend her student leave.  It is the Appellant's case, as  set
             out in interview, that she did not know she could claim asylum
             until after her arrest for working illegally in the  UK.   She
             states at paragraph 56 of her witness statement that after her
             appeal in 2011 was refused, her solicitor told her that  there
             was nothing more he could do.  She then  states  that  because
             she could not return to  a  country  where  her  life  was  in
             danger, her husband and she remained in the UK illegally.
         43.  I do not find it credible that the Appellant's  solicitor  who
             represented her in 2011 would not have explained the  contents
             of the 'one-stop' notice and impressed upon the Appellant  the
             importance of advancing all claims she had to  remain  in  the
             UK.  Further, the Appellant is an educated individual and I do
             not accept that if she were in fear of returning to Sri  Lanka
             that she would not have voiced this  fear  to  her  solicitor.
             Not only did the Appellant fail to mention  any  fear  at  her
             appeal in 2011 she also only made protection based claim after
             she was arrested for working illegally.  Whilst I accept  that
             it may well be difficult to tell her husband that she had been
             raped, she could nevertheless have approached her solicitor in
             her husband's absence and explained  why  she  was  unable  to
             return to Sri Lanka.
         44.  However, what I find most difficult to accept in  the  context
             of her claim to be in fear of  the  authorities  is  that  she
             returned voluntarily to Sri Lanka 29 July 2010 some  6  months
             after the alleged rape because  her  father  was  unwell.   At
             paragraph 47 she states in relation to this visit that she was
             informed that her father was seriously ill.  She  then  states
             that she was very attached to her father  and  was  devastated
             and could not eat or sleep properly when she heard he was ill.
              This does not lie entirely comfortably with her  evidence  in
             interview at question 10 that 'I am scared of  my  dad  he  is
             very strict  ...  he  is  like  Hitler  he  is  very  strict'.
             However,  even  accepting  that  the  Appellant  has  a  close
             relationship with her father I do not believe she  would  have
             returned if he believed she would be at  risk  of  persecution
             for her political beliefs by the authorities.   The  Appellant
             states at paragraph 48  of  her  witness  statement  that  she
             entered 'discreetly' with the  help  of  a  relative.   It  is
             unclear that she means by this but there is no suggestion that
             she used an agent to enter or exit.  It is clear also that she
             saw her family and friends.
         45.  It is the Appellant's case as set out at paragraphs 28  to  37
             of her witness  statement  that  she  was  involved  with  the
             Democratic National Alliance Party and in exposing  war-crimes
             committed during the last stages of the war.  She states  that
             she was very much involved  in  the  grass  root  business  of
             business of the party including distribution of party leaflets
             and propaganda materials as well as mobilizing  party  members
             for meetings.
         46.  I have considered the Appellant's claim in the context of  the
             risk categories as set out in GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:
             returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  The Tribunal
             held that the current categories of persons at  real  risk  of
             persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in
             detention or otherwise, are: (a) Individuals who are,  or  are
             perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as  a
             single state because they are, or  are  perceived  to  have  a
             significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism
             within the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri
             Lanka.  (b) Journalists whether in print or  other  media)  or
             human rights activists, who, in either case,  have  criticised
             the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its  human  rights
             record, or who are associated with  publications  critical  of
             the Sri Lankan government.  (c)  Individuals  who  have  given
             evidence to the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation  Commission
             implicating the Sri Lankan security forces,  armed  forces  or
             the Sri Lankan authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among those
             who  may  have  witnessed  war  crimes  during  the   conflict
             particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only those  who
             have already identified themselves  by  giving  such  evidence
             would be known to the Sri  Lankan  authorities  and  therefore
             only they are at real risk of adverse attention or persecution
             on return as potential or actual war crimes witnesses.  (d)  A
             person whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.
         47.  It is not the Appellant's case that there is an  extant  court
             order or  warrant  out  but  it  is  her  case  that  she  has
             criticised the Sri Lankan government's human rights record and
             been detained, raped and released with threats as a result.  I
             do not accept that the Appellant would have  returned  to  Sri
             Lanka  openly  and  been  able  to   visit   her   family   in
             circumstances where she had been previously  detained  on  the
             basis of human rights activities and brutally raped and feared
             that this would be repeated.  I do not  accept  that  she  was
             politically involved in Sri Lanka  or  raped  by  one  or  two
             police officers."

56. Clearly, in reaching this conclusion the judge, having directed herself
    as to the correct approach, had in mind what she had said in paras 35 -
    37 concerning the expert report and her view stated at para 21 that the
    appellant was a vulnerable witness.  Bearing that in  mind,  I  see  no
    basis upon which it can be said that the  judge  was  not  entitled  to
    reach the finding that she did on this aspect of the appellant's claim.

57. Further, at para 48, the judge dealt with the appellant's claim  to  be
    at risk from her family and the local community  as  a  result  of  her
    "culturally unacceptable marriage" as follows:
         "48. The Appellant also claims that if she returned  to  Sri  Lanka
             she would be mistreated by her  family  and  local  community.
             She  claims  that  her  brothers  beat  her  because  of   her
             relationship with [DG] who she subsequently married  when  she
             returned to  Sri  Lanka  in  2010.   The  Respondent  produced
             evidence cited in  the  RFRL  that  the  relationship  is  not
             prohibited  by  law.   The  Appellant  has  not  produced  any
             evidence to show that  a  marriage  to  her  brother's  wife's
             nephew would be culturally unacceptable.  I do  not  find  the
             Appellant's evidence that he would be at risk  of  persecution
             by her brothers as a result of her marriage  to  be  credible.
             The reason  that  the  appellant  provided  for  her  fear  in
             interview was 'in our country they don't accept marriages like
             this because in theory I am auntie to my husband and they will
             not accept this marriage'.  No  support  for  this  contention
             that the marriage would be culturally disapproved or has  been
             provided.  I do not accept that her brother has threatened  to
             kill her.  The Appellant was able to return to her  family  in
             July 2010.  I do not consider that she would have done  so  if
             she were in fear.  Further, she has been found  to  have  used
             deception in  a  previous  application  for  entry  clearance.
             Further,  she  failed  to  claim  asylum  despite  having  the
             opportunity to do so and having previously been represented by
             solicitors in a 'one-stop' appeal.   There  is  no  supporting
             medical  evidence  in  relation  to  any  ill-treatment.   The
             Appellant's husband also came to the UK in 2010 and he made no
             claim for asylum at this point or in the  appeal  in  2011  in
             relation to the refusal to vary leave.   I  do  not  find  the
             Appellant's account to be in fear of her  brothers  and  local
             community as a result of her relationship to be credible."

58. Again, nothing in this reasoning demonstrates that the judge failed  to
    take  into  account  the   medical   evidence   and   the   appellant's
    vulnerability.  There was  no  evidence  that  her  marriage  would  be
    "culturally disapproved" such that her brother would threaten  to  kill
    her or that she would be at risk otherwise because of that marriage.

59. Then, at paras  49  -  51,  the  judge  dealt  with  the  part  of  the
    appellant's claim based upon future risk as a result of being raped  by
    her friend's husband in 2009.  As the judge made clear in para 49,  the
    appellant's Counsel did not specifically rely upon this aspect  of  her
    claim but nevertheless the judge dealt with it as follows:-
         "49. Mr Simmonds does not rely in  his  skeleton  argument  on  the
             Appellant's claim to have been raped by a friend's husband  as
             a  basis  of  her  claim  to  be  in  need  of   international
             protection.  However, since  she  clearly  advances  it  is  a
             reason for not being able to return both in her interview  and
             her witness statement I have considered it.
         50.  The Appellant gave a detailed account in interview in relation
             to how her friend's husband drugged her drink and she awoke to
             find herself naked.  Her account of to his subsequent  attempt
             to blackmail her with the naked pictures of herself  has  also
             been  consistent  as  between  her   interview   and   witness
             statements.   Although  she  has  provided  no  proof  of  the
             numerous emails she said that he sent her through Facebook  it
             is understandable that  she  may  have  deleted  them  in  the
             circumstances.  The expert concludes that  the  likelihood  is
             that she has been raped.  She has given a detailed, consistent
             and credible account of why she did not tell the police or her
             family.  I accept on the lower standard of proof that she  was
             raped by her friends' husband Janaka.
         51.  However, I do not consider that she would be at risk from  him
             on return.  Firstly, in view of the fact  that  the  incidents
             happened in 2009, had he wanted to show the photographs to the
             Appellant's family or anyone  else  he  could  have  done  so.
             Further, on the Appellant's evidence, the rapes took place  on
             the second and third occasions when she went,  alone,  to  see
             him to obtain the pictures.  In view of the fact that  he  did
             not return them to her and she was abused again I consider  it
             unlikely that she would be likely to arrange to see him on her
             own again.  I also consider that it is unlikely that Janaka as
             a married man and father would want to reveal the fact that he
             has in his possession photographs of the Appellant  naked.   I
             also find that if the Appellant had believed that she  was  at
             risk on return from Janaka she would not have returned to  Sri
             Lanka for 10 days in July  2010.   Whilst  I  accept  for  the
             reasons stated in the Respondent's OGN, that  effective  state
             protection is unlikely to be  available  to  the  majority  of
             women fearing sexual and gender based violence, the  Appellant
             would be returning to Sri Lanka with her husband and would  be
             unlikely to put herself in a situation  where  she  was  alone
             with Janaka  The Appellant has not asserted in  her  interview
             or in her witness statement that he has threaten to  rape  her
             if she returns to Sri Lanka and she  has  not  argued  in  her
             skeleton argument that she is at risk on return from him."

60. Here, consistent with the expert evidence, the judge accepted that  the
    appellant had established on the lower standard of proof that  she  had
    in the past been raped by her husband's friend.  However,  in  para  51
    the judge gave a number of reasons why she did not accept the appellant
    would be at risk in the future as a result.

61. Ms Benfield submitted that the judge had failed to  take  into  account
    the appellant's vulnerability  in  her  reasons  in  para  51  and  had
    speculated on what might  occur  if  the  appellant  returned.   Again,
    reading the judge's determination as a whole  there  is  no  reason  to
    believe  that  she  did  not  have  well  in   mind   the   appellant's
    circumstances and I see no basis upon which it can  be  said  that  the
    inferences she draws in para 51 were not reasonably open to her on  the
    evidence.

    3. Ground 2: Mental Health Issues

62. Finally, at paras 52 - 55, the judge dealt with the  appellant's  claim
    that her return would breach Art 3 of the ECHR because  of  her  mental
    health and its deterioration if she returned.  The judge said this
         "52. The Appellant also argues that if she returns to Sri Lanka she
             would be at risk of committing suicide  and  that  this  would
             amount to a breach of Article 2, 3 and Article 8 ECHR.  In J v
             SSHD 2005 EWCA Civ 629 the Court of Appeal set out the test in
             Article 3 cases regarding suicide as follows: firstly the  ill
             treatment must be of a minimum level of severity;  secondly  a
             causal link must be shown between the act or threatened act of
              removal and the inhuman treatment relied on;  thirdly,  in  a
             foreign case  the Article 3  threshold  will  be  particularly
             high; fourthly in principle it was possible for an  Article  3
             case to succeed on the basis of a risk of  suicide and fifthly
             in a foreign case of suicide risk  it  would  be  relevant  to
             consider whether the fear of ill treatment  in  the  receiving
             state was  objectively well founded; if not, that  would  tend
             to weigh against there being a real  risk  of  there  being  a
             breach;  and  sixthly  it  would  also  be  of    considerable
             relevance  to  consider  whether  the  removing   and/or   the
             receiving state had effective mechanisms to reduce  the  risk;
             if here were, this would also weigh against there being a real
             risk of a breach.  In relation to the risk of suicide  in  Sri
             Lanka the Tribunal was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
             evidence that there would be family support  on  return,  that
             the claimant would have access to medical treatment, and  that
             his fears of persecution were not objectively justified.  In Y
             and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD (2009) EWCA  Civ  362  the  Court  of
             Appeal said that even where there was  no  objective  risk  on
             return, a finding that an  appellant  had  been  tortured  and
             raped  in  captivity  had  to  be  related  to  credible   and
             uncontradicted expert evidence that the likely effect  of  the
             psychological trauma, if return was enforced, was suicide.
         53.  According to the expert's  report  at  paragraph  47,  if  the
             Appellant were removed from the UK and returned to  Sri  Lanka
             her mental health will deteriorate.  She  states  that  it  is
             important that the therapy she is offered as a result  of  the
             referral the psychiatrist  is  not  interrupted.   Dr  Robjant
             states that she is very fearful about being  arrested  by  the
             authorities on return and of being killed by her  brother  and
             would be unlikely to access services in  Sri  Lanka.   If  her
             medical health deteriorated as  a  result  then  the  risk  of
             suicide would also increase.  She states at paragraph 43  that
             she is currently a moderate risk of  suicide  because  of  the
             frequency and intensity of suicidal ideation.
         54.  I have not been referred to any evidence in  relation  to  the
             medical facilities available for mental health in  Sri  Lanka.
             In RA (Sri Lanka) v SSHD 2008  EWCA  Civ  1210  the  Court  of
             Appeal considered a case where  the  appellant  suffered  from
             severe depression and history of suicide.  The Court of Appeal
             concluded that the First-tier Tribunal were not  in  error  in
             relying on the ability of the claimant's mother and sister  to
             provide support entitled to conclude that the  government  was
             committed to achieving high standards in mental  health  care.
             The claimant would be able to obtain  hospital  admission  and
             necessary  treatment,  particularly  as   he   had   financial
             resources to use in the private sector.  With  regard  to  the
             Article 3 threshold, in in N v UK Application 26565/05 and IAS
             1.7.08, the Grand Chamber upheld the decision of  the  HL  and
             held that in medical cases Article  3  only  applied  in  very
             exceptional circumstances.
         55.  I have not found the Appellant's claim to be in fear of arrest
             by the authorities or at killed by her brother to be credible.
              In the circumstances, do not accept Dr  Robjant's  conclusion
             that she would not access services  because  she  fears  being
             found.  She has been assessed as a moderate  risk  of  suicide
             and in the circumstances I do not find that the high threshold
             required for Article 3 has been made.  It has not been  argued
             on her behalf that medical treatment is not available  in  Sri
             Lanka or that she would not be able to access it.  In view  of
             my findings I do not consider that her risk of  suicide  would
             increase if she were returned  to  Sri  Lanka.   She  has  not
             demonstrated that she is at  risk  of  inhuman  and  degrading
             treatment on return."

63. Ms Benfield submitted that the judge's analysis again  failed  to  take
    into account what was said by Dr Robjant in the HBF  report.   Clearly,
    that submission is unsustainable.  The judge expressly  refers  to  the
    report and its contents at para 53.  She correctly directs  herself  in
    accordance with the Court of Appeal's decisions in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA
    Civ 629 and Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362 at  para  52
    of her determination.  Ms Benfield did not seek to take issue with  the
    judge's self-direction.  The expert's view was, of course,  based  upon
    the appellant's fear from the Sri Lankan authorities or her  family  if
    she returned.  Objectively, the judge had determined that  those  risks
    did not arise.  In addition, there was no  evidence  before  the  judge
    that medical treatment for the appellant's mental health would  not  be
    available in Sri Lanka.  In her submissions, Ms  Benfield  referred  to
    the evidence in the Upper Tribunal's decision in GJ and  Others  [2013]
    UKUT 00319 (IAC) at [453] - [456].  However, she was unable to  confirm
    that the judge had even been referred to this evidence.   No  reference
    is made to it in the skeleton argument of Counsel for the appellant  at
    the hearing at paras 38 - 48 when dealing with  the  appellant's  claim
    based upon her mental health.

64. In my judgment, the judge was entitled to find that the  appellant  had
    not established that medical treatment for  her  health  would  not  be
    available.  The judge was  entitled  to  take  into  account  that  her
    objective fear was not well-founded and also that she would return with
    support from her family, in particular her husband would return to  Sri
    Lanka with her.  In those circumstances, I am unable to  conclude  that
    the judge's finding that the appellant had not established a breach  of
    Art 3 based upon a real risk of suicide  was  irrational  or  otherwise
    unsustainable in law.

65. Ms Benfield made no  separate  argument  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    dismissal of the claim under Art 8 and her reasons in  paras  56  -  57
    including based upon her mental health problem.  I see  no  basis  upon
    which her finding that no breach of Art 8 has been established could be
    said to be unsound.

    4. Ground 2: Other Points

66. In addition, drawing on some of the paragraphs pleaded under ground  2,
    Ms Benfield raised a number of other points.

67. First, she submitted that the judge had paid "too much weight"  to  the
    earlier decision of  Judge  Sethi  in  which  he  had  found  that  the
    appellant had used deception in seeking to gain entry to  the  UK.   At
    para 29, the judge summarised the guidelines set out in Devaseelan  and
    then at para 30 concluded as follows:-
         "30. The Appellant and her husband  made  an  application  to  vary
             their  leave  in  October  2011  which  was  refused  and  the
             Appellant gave evidence in her appeal on 1 December 2011.  She
             was served a one-stop  notice  in  relation  to  that  appeal.
             Judge Sethi found, at paragraph 25 of his determination,  that
             the Appellant had knowingly submitted false documents and  had
             knowingly used deception in an attempt to gain  leave  to  the
             UK.  He also doubted her general credibility.  Whilst the same
             issues are not raised in this appeal, it is of relevance to my
             assessment of the Appellant's credibility that  she  has  been
             found to use deception previously."

68. Ms Benfield frankly  accepted  that  the  judge  had  made  no  further
    reference to Judge  Sethi's  finding  and,  when  I  raised  the  point
    directly with  her,  she  accepted  that  the  appellant's  history  of
    deception  was  a  relevant  factor  in   assessing   the   appellant's
    credibility in this appeal.   That,  in  my  judgment,  is  undoubtedly
    correct.  But, it is only a relevant factor.  There is simply no  basis
    to sustain the submission that the judge placed "too  much  weight"  on
    Judge Sethi's finding of the appellant's previous use of deception.  It
    was a relevant factor and in paras 31  -  57,  without  making  further
    reference to that, the judge in a series of reasons, found against  the
    appellant including that her claim was (apart from  accepting  she  had
    previously been raped by a friend of her husband) not credible.

69. For these reasons, I reject Ms Benfield's submission wrongly placed too
    much weight upon the previous judge's finding of deception  and,  as  a
    consequence, failed to consider the "new" evidence in  accordance  with
    the approach in Devaseelan.

70. Secondly, Ms Benfield drew my attention to para 34 of the determination
    which is in the following terms:
         "34. I have found the Appellant's evidence in relation to both  her
             political activities and he rape inconsistent in a  number  of
             material respects.  In answer to question 31 of the  interview
             the Appellant said that she was raped by 'a man'.   In  answer
             to question 142 of her subsequent interview she said that  she
             was raped by two men.  In answer to question 144 she said that
             only  one  man  raped  her.   The   Respondent   raised   this
             inconsistency at paragraph 44 of the RFRL.  The Appellant does
             not specifically address this  inconsistency  in  her  witness
             statement.  She states at paragraph 38 that she was  raped  by
             one man but  does  note  explain  why  she  gave  inconsistent
             evidence in her interview."

71. Ms Benfield submitted that  the  judge  had  given  no  example  of  an
    "inconsistency" relevant to the appellant's "political  activities"  as
    she claimed in the first sentence of that paragraph.

72. As Mr Richards submitted, in  fact  Judge  Murray  does  not  make  any
    credibility finding in para 34 but, it has to be accepted,  does  point
    out inconsistencies in relation to the appellant's evidence  concerning
    her claim to have been multiply raped.  It is not entirely clear why in
    the first sentence at para 34 the judge refers  to  inconsistencies  in
    relation to the appellant's evidence about her "political  activities".
    It is certainly the case that she identified none in  para  34  itself.
    In truth, the point is an entirely inconsequential one and not material
    to the judge's extensive reasoning,  particularly  at  para  39  onward
    rejecting the appellant's account and the risk to her  based  upon  her
    political opinion.  There is, in my judgment, nothing in this point.

73. Finally, Ms Benfield did not seek to make any other explicit challenges
    to the judge's reasoning based upon the grounds upon  which  permission
    was sought.  I would  simply  say,  therefore,  that  having  read  and
    considered them in carefully, nothing in these grounds  persuades  that
    the judge's decision was flawed  in  law.   The  judge's  reasons  were
    entirely  sustainable  having  taken  into  account  all  the  evidence
    including the expert report from the HBF and the background evidence to
    which she was referred.

74. Although not relied upon in Ms Benfield's  submissions,  I  reject  the
    contention in paras 19 - 20 that the judge was  not  entitled  to  take
    into account that, in assessing the claimed attitude of the appellant's
    family to her marriage, there was no evidence  that  her  marriage  was
    "culturally unacceptable".  The customary law referred to in the ground
    was not in evidence before the judge.

75. Further, contrary to what is contended in para 21 of  the  grounds,  in
    para 48 of her determination  the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account that the appellant had safely returned to her  family  in  July
    2010.  The point made by the judge was that  she  was  able  to  do  so
    despite  the  fact  that  her  family  already   disapproved   of   her
    relationship with her soon to be husband.   In  assessing  whether  the
    appellant's brother had threatened to kill her, the judge was  entitled
    to  take  into  account  that  despite  their  disapproval   of   their
    relationship, she safely returned to Sri Lanka prior  to  her  marriage
    and before her brother, as she claimed, threatened her because  of  the
    family's disapproval of the relationship.

76. Finally, even if the judge was wrong to state that  it  was  surprising
    that the appellant could not provide evidence of e-mails upon which she
    relied when they had been sent from the UK given  that  they  had  been
    deleted,  this  was  only  one  of  a  number  of  reasons   (otherwise
    sustainable) given by the judge for her adverse credibility finding and
    was not, in my judgment, material to that overall finding  against  the
    appellant.

77. For these reasons, I reject Ms Benfield's submissions based on ground 2
    that the judge's adverse findings were flawed in law.

Decision

78. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds  and
    under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law.

79. The First-tier Tribunal's decision, therefore stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

