
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07887/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Birmingham              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 February 2016                       |On 14 March 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Stephen Vokes, Counsel, instructed by TRP Sols.
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 8 August 2014 refusing to grant  him  leave
    to remain and to remove him to Iran.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1988. He claims that he  was
    born in Tehran and is from a Muslim family. He met a girl in school who
    was Zoroastrian and fell in love. His uncle threatened her  family  and
    they moved away. The appellant began to question the Islamic faith.  He
    then went to university where he investigated the Islamic faith and had
    friends who were critical of Islam. He met and married his wife, M, who
    is a non-practising Muslim. He was involved in producing  a  play  that
    involved indirect criticism of Islam and was thrown out of  university.
    He still worked in a print shop and was asked  by  P  to  produce  pro-
    Islamic literature. He refused and sent  an  e-mail  to  P  criticising
    Islam. His house was raided  and  the  authorities  found  anti-Islamic
    literature on his computer. He did not return to his apartment and  his
    uncle arranged his exit from Iran.

 4. The respondent accepted identity and nationality  but  did  not  accept
    that the account given was credible. Interfaith marriages  are  opposed
    by the Zoroastrian faith and there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's account of later events. He  was  of  no  interest  to  the
    authorities and had not abandoned Islam.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Bennett House on 12 March 2015. The  judge  found  that  the
    relationship with the Zoroastrian girl was  not  credible  because  her
    family would not have accepted the appellant. The university  play  was
    not credible because the university would not  have  stopped  the  play
    from being performed at an earlier stage if  it  were  even  implicitly
    critical of Islam. It was not credible that the university  only  asked
    the appellant to leave and that his wife was allowed to remain  in  the
    university and the appellant was allowed to work.  The  judge  accepted
    that the e-mail to P was sent to a private  Yahoo  e-mail  address  and
    found that it was not credible that the university could monitor  Yahoo
    accounts in the manner described by the appellant. It was not  credible
    that he would send an inflammatory e-mail to P  having  not  previously
    discussed his anti-Islamic views with P. It was not credible  that  the
    appellant would not warn his wife after the raid. It was  not  credible
    that the appellant had asked M to print evidence for his appeal but had
    not asked her about her safety.  The  evidence  about  service  of  the
    summons was inconsistent. The CD was not  reliable  evidence  that  the
    appellant produced anti-Islamic material in Iran.

 6. The judge found  that  the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  due  to  his
    activities in the UK. Even if he had  anti-Islamic  statements  on  his
    Facebook account, the account had privacy settings and was not  broadly
    available without access being provided. The authorities would have  to
    go to some lengths to access the material and  there  was  no  credible
    case that they had the means, manpower  or  incentive  to  go  to  such
    lengths for a person  with  no  established  profile.  Given  that  the
    appellant was not high profile and was at best a person  who  had  left
    illegally, the judge did not accept as credible that his Facebook  page
    or e-mails would be monitored. His uncle worked for the government.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 20 May 2015 on  the  basis
    that  the  findings  were  unreliable  because  the  evidence  was  not
    considered properly. The appellant's Facebook account was  not  private
    and the judge should have considered whether anti-Islamic  pages  would
    place him at risk. The judge  failed  to  consider  objective  evidence
    about the risks of posts on  own  Facebook  accounts.  The  appellant's
    account was substantiated by documentary evidence.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Finch  on  6
    July 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had erred in
    law by failing to consider AB and others (internet activity - state  of
    evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC).

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 30 July  2015,  the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis  that  the  determination  was
    adequately reasoned and sustained throughout. The last  entry  to  non-
    friends on the Facebook account was August 2014. It was  possible  that
    the appellant had adjusted his privacy settings so that his posts  were
    only visible to friends but his basic profile was visible to  all.  The
    Iranian authorities would not know if  the  appellant  had  made  anti-
    Islamic statements. The case law was  not  raised  on  the  appellant's
    behalf and there was nothing that would have led the judge to  reach  a
    different conclusion.

10. The appellant submitted further evidence in relation  to  his  Facebook
    account on 11 February 2016 and applied for  permission  to  admit  the
    evidence under rule 15(2A).

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

12. Mr Vokes submitted that the key paragraphs of the decision  are  44-45.
    The  finding  that  the  privacy  settings  would  prevent  access   is
    undermined by the fact that the solicitors were able  to  research  the
    page. It was not always the case that the account had privacy settings.
    No reasons were given for the findings. On return the  appellant  would
    be asked about his internet activity and for his password. AB  was  not
    cited to the Tribunal because it had not been  promulgated  as  at  the
    date of hearing. It was not the  judge's  fault  but  the  correct  law
    should be applied now. AB was the law as at the date of hearing.  There
    is a real risk on return and the other adverse credibility findings did
    not matter. The appellant had been out of Iran for more than two  years
    now. The other grounds of appeal did not contain germane points  to  be
    argued. There should be a further hearing on the Facebook point only.

13. Ms Petterson submitted that the judge did  not  fall  into  error.  The
    appellant had privacy settings as  at  the  date  of  hearing  and  the
    material was only available to  friends.  The  fact  that  the  privacy
    settings were turned on a few weeks earlier did not matter.  The  judge
    looked at the most recent material. AB is not a country guidance  case.
    There was no  reason  why  the  authorities  would  be  monitoring  the
    appellant now and if they did, such monitoring would be on the basis of
    an account with privacy settings.

14. Mr Vokes submitted in reply that it does not  matter  if  the  internet
    activity was opportunistic. The issue was the content of  the  internet
    activity. The pinch point was  return  at  the  airport.  The  Facebook
    activities have continued until today. Even if  it  was  accepted  that
    there was no previous attention  from  the  authorities  the  appellant
    could still succeed under AB regardless of the privacy settings.

15. In AB, the Upper Tribunal concluded at paragraph 467 that the mere fact
    of being in the UK for a prolonged period does not lead to persecution.
    However, it may lead to scrutiny and there is clear evidence that  some
    people are asked about their internet  activity  and  particularly  for
    their Facebook password. The act of returning someone creates a  "pinch
    point" so that a  person  is  brought  into  direct  contact  with  the
    authorities  in  Iran  who  have  both  the  time  and  inclination  to
    interrogate them. It is likely that they  will  be  asked  about  their
    internet activity and likely if they have  any  internet  activity  for
    that to be exposed and if it is less than flattering of the  government
    to lead to at least a real risk of persecution.

16. At paragraph 470, the main concern is the  pinch  point  of  return.  A
    person who was returning to Iran after a  reasonably  short  period  of
    time on an ordinary passport having left Iran  illegally  would  almost
    certainly not attract any particular attention at all and for the small
    number of people who would be returning on an ordinary passport  having
    left lawfully we do not think that there would be any risk to  them  at
    all. However, as might more frequently be the case,  where  a  person's
    leave to remain had lapsed and who might be  travelling  on  a  special
    passport, there would be enhanced interest. The more  active  they  had
    been  the  more  likely  the  authorities'  interest  could   lead   to
    persecution.

17. I accept that if the appellant were  asked  to  disclose  his  Facebook
    password then the issue of privacy settings would be immaterial. I find
    that the guidance in AB is highly relevant to the facts  of  this  case
    given the length of stay in the UK and the extent  of  the  appellant's
    Facebook activity. The failure to consider AB was a material  error  of
    law although the judge was not at fault because the authority  was  not
    cited to her. Mr Vokes accepted that the adverse  credibility  findings
    at paragraphs 20-43 of the decision should stand and that the  Facebook
    activity is the only live issue.

18. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of a material error of law and its  decision
    cannot stand.





Decision

19. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the error of law  is  limited
    to the  issue  of  Facebook  activity  and  preserve  the  findings  at
    paragraphs 20-43 of the decision.

20. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.




Signed   [pic]                      Date 2 March 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


