

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/07552/2010

                                      AA/07554/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House and Bradford         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26th October, 22nd November and        |  On 20th February 2018          |
|14th December 2017                        |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     SM
                                     MH
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Elliot-Kelly instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants  in
this determination identified as SM  and  MH.  This  direction  applies  to,
amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

        History


   1. SM is a Pakistani national; MH is her dependant son born in the UK  on
      17 October 2010. SM arrived in the UK in April 2006 on a visit visa to
      visit her husband, Mr Mehmood[1], to  whom  she  claims  to  be  still
      married. She has two other children, one born 21st July 2013  and  the
      youngest born 21st January 2015. The two  youngest  children  are  not
      parties to this appeal but the outcome of the appeal of SM and MH will
      directly impact upon the two younger children. The father of all three
      children is,  as  subsequently  accepted  by  the  respondent,  Shahid
      Akhtar[2]. SM did not leave the UK on the expiry of  her  visit  visa.
      She claimed asylum on 22 April 2010, that application being refused by
      the respondent for reasons set out in a letter dated 10 May 2010.


   2. Her appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal judge Cruthers on  5th
      July 2010. In his decision, he  accepted  the  factual  basis  of  her
      asylum claim, namely:

        *    In Pakistan SM had never lived away  from  her  home  city  of
        Lahore;
        *    SM has no relatives or contacts in other parts of Pakistan;
        *    Her marriage to Mr Mehmood was a love marriage and opposed  by
             both families; they lived together  in  the  Gulberg  area  of
             Lahore;
        *    her husband's family have considerably  more  money  than  her
        family;
        *    following her marriage her parents broke off all  contact  but
             she later reconciled with her mother although her  mother  did
             not tell her father or siblings of their resumed contact;
        *    property disputes led to Mr Mehmood spending  time  away  from
             Lahore in Oman; she joined him in Oman in November 2003;
        *    Mr Mehmood came to the UK and she spent 1 month  visiting  him
             in September/October 2004; she then returned  to  Pakistan  to
             see her mother;
        *    In April 2006, she returned to the UK to visit her husband who
             remained in the UK;
        *    Mr Mehmood was drinking, seeing other women, was  abusive  and
             assaulted her; he threw her out of the home in November 2007;
        *    In November/December 2007 she was informed by her mother  that
             Mr Mehmood was back in Pakistan;
        *    SM formed a relationship with Mr  Akhtar  with  whom  she  had
             three children. Her relationship was uneven in that  sometimes
             he supported her and other times he did not; Mr Mehmood  knows
             of the birth of the first child, MH.
        *    She continued to have contact with her  mother  about  once  a
             month and her mother generally told her of some incident  with
             Mr Mehmood or his family where SM is described as a  woman  of
             bad character who has relations with other men.
        *    SM was at real risk of serious harm if she returns to her home
             area in Lahore.


   3. Judge  Cruthers  dismissed  the  appeal  because  she  could  relocate
      elsewhere in Pakistan.


   4. SM's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from that decision was dismissed  on
      28th March 2011 by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Alis.  On  4th  April
      2011, the Court of Appeal granted permission to appeal and the  appeal
      was remitted to the Upper Tribunal, by consent, for a fresh hearing on
      the basis that the question of ostracism of the appellant  as  a  lone
      mother with an illegitimate child had not been considered.


   5. The respondent withdrew the 2010 decision and made a  further  refusal
      decision dated 31st March 2014.


   6. The Upper Tribunal heard the appeal against that decision on 21st  May
      2015 and dismissed it in a decision promulgated on 2nd February  2016.
      Permission to appeal that decision was granted,  by  consent,  by  the
      Court of Appeal on 29th October 2016. The issues to be determined are:

   1) Whether the appellants are at real risk of persecution and/or  serious
      harm in Pakistan given the risk of persecution and/or disproportionate
      punishment for  fornication  and  adultery  (applying  the  principles
      established in KM (Zimbabwe) [2013] 1AC 152 and HJ (Iran) [2011] 1  AC
      956;
   2) Whether the appellants are at real risk of persecution and/or  serious
      harm as a result of ostracism in  Pakistan  (applying  the  principles
      established in KM (Zimbabwe) and HJ (Iran).


   7. The schedule of agreed facts to the Court of Appeal are as set out  in
      [2] above save that it was not agreed that she would be at  real  risk
      of serious harm if returned to Lahore. In  additional  it  was  agreed
      that SM lives in [              ] with her 3 children;  she  does  not
      live with Mr Akhtar but he is involved with the children's  lives  and
      visits them; SM and the three children are Pakistani citizens and none
      have any leave to remain in the UK.


   8.  This appeal first came before me on  26th  October  2017.  Directions
      made by McCloskey J in September 2017, which  included  that  an  Urdu
      interpreter be booked, were not notified either to the parties  or  to
      the Tribunal administration. I adjourned  the  hearing  and  made  the
      following directions:
                  1. An Urdu interpreter was required;
                  2. There be an anonymity order for the principal appellant
                  and the child;
                  3. That the respondent would not be filing and serving
                  expert evidence.
                  4. The resumed hearing is listed before me at 2.00pm on
                  Wednesday 22nd November 2017 at Field House;
                  5. The respondent is to file and serve a skeleton argument
                  by 4pm on 16th November 2017;
   9. I received skeleton  arguments  from  both  representatives.  On  22nd
      November 2017, the appellant became unwell whilst giving her evidence,
      suffering from breathlessness during cross  examination.  I  adjourned
      the hearing until 14th December 2017. The appellant again said she was
      feeling unwell and that she had had flu/a cold a few days earlier  but
      that she wanted to proceed with the hearing. There was no request  for
      an adjournment of the hearing by either representative; the  appellant
      gave oral evidence for a very short time and I heard oral  submissions
      from both representatives. I reserved my decision.






        Evidence

  10. The agreed schedule of facts was the  starting  point.  SM's  evidence
      before me, in summary, was that:
   a)  She was unaware that she could obtain a Shariah divorce in the UK;
   b) that her understanding was that whether she could obtain a divorce  or
      not, her husband would be informed and he would be informed where  she
      was living;
   c) she has never lived with Mr Akhtar save for a period since  about  May
      2008 when they lived together at [         ]; since then she does  not
      know where he lives; she has never asked him where he lives and he has
      never told her;
   d) she contacts Mr Akhtar by phone;
   e) he takes the children to school occasionally; at  weekends,  he  takes
      them to the park; he comes round if she  asks  him  if  she's  feeling
      unwell;
   f) she last had contact with her mother when her youngest child was born.


  11. According to the report by the social worker, Ms Christine Brown,  she
      met Mr Akhtar. She did not record his address in her report  or  where
      he worked but recorded his occupation as a chef, that he  was  one  of
      seven siblings and that he sends  (unquantified)  money  back  to  his
      family in Pakistan.


  12. There is no current evidence from Mr Akhtar either  oral  or  written.
      The respondent has no record of him being  in  the  UK  and  has  been
      unable to find any trace of him on the  limited  information  provided
      about him. He has not attended any of the Tribunal hearings.


  13. The respondent relied upon a document:  Muslim  Marriage  and  Divorce
      document by the Muslim Women's Network UK.

  14. I had a report by Dr Livia  Holden  dated  31st  March  2017  on  SM's
      ability to divorce her  husband,  dishonour,  ostracism  and  "honour"
      killing, adultery, risk on return both with Mr Akhtar and  alone  with
      her three children. There was no challenge by  the  respondent  to  Dr
      Holden's expertise or to the content or conclusions in her report.


        Findings and discussion

  15. There is some reference in the papers to the appellant's husband being
      a British Citizen of Pakistani origin  and  to  previous  visit  visas
      being issued to the appellant. It is not clear how  accurate  this  is
      but nothing turns on this in this appeal. The agreed schedule of facts
      stands. The personal factual issues that arise  from  the  appellant's
      evidence and need to be determined are the nature of her  relationship
      with Mr Akhtar, the issue of  divorce,  the  impact  on  her  and  the
      children if they are returned to Pakistan and  her  contact  with  her
      family.


  16. Dealing first with her family the starting point  in  considering  the
      recent evidence is the acceptance by the First-tier Tribunal that  she
      became estranged from her family after her marriage and that  although
      she  had  resumed  contact  with  her  mother  that  contact  was  not
      transmitted to her father or siblings. She now says  she  has  had  no
      contact with her mother since January 2015. Whether that is true,  the
      fact remains that she has no contact  with  her  family  in  terms  of
      support, whether protection from her husband or  economic  assistance,
      available if she returns to Pakistan. I doubt that she has no  contact
      with her mother and find that she has not told the truth  about  this.
      Nevertheless, such contact as she has, given the  agreed  schedule  of
      facts,  is  insufficient  to  amount  to  anything   approaching   the
      assistance or support she would require if  she  returns  to  Pakistan
      with her three children.


  17. I do not believe SM does not know where Mr  Akhtar  lives.  She  lived
      with him when she was first estranged from her husband.  She  has  his
      phone number. She has three children with  him  and  has  been  in  an
      emotional relationship with him since about 2008.  He  lives  a  short
      distance away from her by bus because he can get to  her  home  within
      about half an hour of her phoning him. It is simply not credible  that
      she has never asked him where he lives.  Although  Ms  Brown  has  not
      recorded his address in her report, there is  no  suggestion  that  he
      refused to give it to her. It would be incredible  for  a  responsible
      social worker not to ask such a question  when  considering  the  best
      interests of children, even if she has some (undisclosed)  reason  for
      not recording it in her report. Given it is accepted that he sees  the
      children and they spend time alone with him, it would be irresponsible
      not to know where he lives.

  18. SM has not sought legal advice on a Sharia divorce. According  to  the
      Muslim Marriage and Divorce document by the Muslim Women's Network  UK
      relied upon by the respondent, there is an obligatory  waiting  period
      of 3 months (iddah) during which  time  the  husband  is  required  to
      support  the  wife  financially  after  the  institution  of   divorce
      proceedings. The different types of  divorce  are  briefly  explained.
      Where the wife is divorcing the husband, it states that the  religious
      body will write to the husband setting out the reasons  why  the  wife
      wants a divorce; usually the wife's address is included  and  that  if
      she wants this to be confidential she must give  instructions  for  it
      not to be disclosed. If there is no response from the husband a second
      and  sometimes  a  third  reminder  is  sent.  Sometimes  there  is  a
      reconciliation meeting set up. The document  includes  examples  where
      the Sharia Council does not operate in accordance with  the  processes
      as set out in the document but it is not clear to what extent that  is
      commonplace. Nor is it said how often a request  to  keep  an  address
      confidential  is  respected.  Dr  Holden  says  it  is  rare,  in  her
      experience, for a woman's address to be  kept  confidential.  Although
      the respondent made much of SM's failure to seek legal  advice  and/or
      find out whether she was in fact already divorced or make  an  attempt
      to divorce her husband, I am satisfied that this has little to do with
      her current situation. She has three children with a man to  whom  she
      is not married and with whom she says she does not live, who is in the
      UK illegally and who, she says, will not return to Pakistan  with  her
      if she and the children are removed. He has not attended  any  of  the
      hearings. This is surprising if he did care for the  children  because
      the outcome of the hearing could be their removal  from  the  UK.  His
      lack of involvement, for  no  given  reason,  does  not  indicate  any
      concern for SM and/or the children.


  19. In the absence of any evidence to the contrary and particularly in the
      absence of any evidence from Mr Akhtar I have no  alternative  but  to
      find that on removal SM would be returning to Pakistan as a lone woman
      with three children, of whom her husband is not the father.  I  cannot
      find, as submitted by Mr Walker, that she could either  have  divorced
      her husband in the past or been divorced by him and been free to marry
      Mr Akhtar. Whilst theoretically that is possible the evidence is  that
      she is not living with Mr Akhtar, his whereabouts are undisclosed  and
      they do not intend to marry whether she is free to do so or not. It is
      irrelevant whether she is or is not married  to  her  husband  in  the
      context of whether she would be returning with  Mr  Akhtar.  It  would
      only be relevant to the protection needs  of  SM,  given  Dr  Holden's
      report and my comments below, if SM and her husband had divorced prior
      to the birth of the first child and she had been married to Mr  Akhtar
      at the time of the birth of the first child. There was no evidence and
      no submission to that effect and  thus  the  position  is  as  I  have
      outlined.

  20. Mr Walker submitted that SM's argument that she would be returning  to
      Pakistan as a lone woman  with  three  children  was  not  sustainable
      because she could have taken into her own hands  the  obtaining  of  a
      divorce and then marriage to Mr Akhtar, is not sustainable. Mr  Walker
      submitted that she had failed to explain  adequately  why  they  don't
      marry. The evidence is that she does not live with Mr Akhtar  and  the
      agreed facts are that the relationship is "uneven" and they  have  not
      lived together other than for a short period of time  in  2008.  There
      was no evidence of any intention to marry, even if she were  divorced.
      If Mr Akhtar cannot be found, he cannot be removed with  her  and  the
      children. I must take a decision based on the situation as it is now -
      she is living alone with the three children and he is not to be  found
      and there is no intention that they will marry at some  stage  in  the
      future. Although Mr Walker is correct that there has been  a  lack  of
      explanation why they do not marry, to a large extent that  is  because
      SM has not been forthcoming about  him  and  he  has  failed  to  give
      evidence. There is no suggestion that her  removal  would  be  delayed
      pending him being found and any such suggestion would not in any event
      prevent my having to take a decision as the evidence currently is.  As
      Mr Walker submitted, there is a possibility that her whole account  of
      her lack of knowledge of Mr Akhtar's whereabouts is a fabrication  and
      that if she succeeds in her application he may seek  leave  to  remain
      based on her and the children's status. I agree  that  is  a  possible
      scenario but I have no doubt at all that evidence that comes to  light
      at that time would  be  considered  by  the  respondent.  But  on  the
      evidence before me, now, I can make no  other  finding  but  that  she
      would be returning to Pakistan as a lone woman  with  three  children.
      She would not be returning to live with her husband or her  family  or
      his family or Mr Akhtar's family.

  21. It is uncontroversial that  lone  Pakistani  women  with  children  or
      divorced women are a particular social group for the purposes  of  the
      Refugee Convention.


  22. Mr Walker did not challenge Dr Holden's report. I have read the report
      and have some concerns that it is, in some respects, very general  and
      draws general conclusions based on very old reports; for example,  the
      murder of a woman in her lawyer's office at a  reconciliation  meeting
      (2009), the figures for "honour" killings and reference  to  incidents
      in the Tribal areas. There is considerable reference to  the  violence
      suffered by  women  who  have  married  for  love  and  the  resultant
      dishonour yet SM has not provided evidence on this; her claim is based
      upon dishonour because of the breakdown of her marriage and the  birth
      of three children for whom her husband is not the father. Considerable
      elements of the report refer to the  possibility  of  SM  obtaining  a
      divorce, with the consequences of her husband  either  having  already
      obtained a divorce  or  obtaining  one  when  she  returns  home,  the
      consequences of her and Mr Akhtar marrying in Pakistan.  According  to
      Dr Holden children born during the currency of a marriage, even if the
      couple are not together, are deemed prima facie, to be the children of
      the husband. If  her  husband  has  divorced  her  already,  then  the
      children will clearly have been born out of wedlock. If they  are  not
      divorced it will be clear that she has committed adultery irrespective
      of them being deemed to be her husband's children; he has not  (it  is
      said) been in the UK. The agreed statement of facts records  that  her
      husband knows of the birth of the first child and has been calling her
      a woman of bad character. The birth of the two younger  children  will
      inevitably come to light if she returns to Pakistan.


  23. According to Dr Holden, SM will be considered "a disobedient woman, of
      low moral standards, being a  proven  adulteress  and  the  mother  of
      illegitimate children". Although she records that  'dishonour'  arises
      out of refusal to follow parental wishes, in this appellant's case  it
      is because of  the  birth  of  the  three  children.  SM's  claim  for
      protection  does  not  arise  from  her  having  contracted  a  "love"
      marriage.


  24. The finding by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers that SM is  at  risk
      of being persecuted in her home area of Lahore does not form  part  of
      the  Statement  of  Agreed  facts  before   the   Court   of   Appeal.
      Nevertheless, on return to Pakistan  SM  will  have  to  register  the
      children. According to Dr Holden, and this  was  not  challenged,  the
      mere fact of registration will bring the existence of the children and
      thus the whole issue of her adultery to the attention of not only  the
      authorities but also her  family.  SM  is,  according  to  Dr  Holden,
      committing a serious crime for which she is likely to be  charged  and
      convicted. It cannot reasonably be said that she could 'live under the
      radar' given that the children must be registered; her husband's  name
      would be noted; he is not the father of the children and  she  is  not
      with the father of the children. Even  if  she  were  with  Mr  Akhtar
      (whether married or not) MH  was  born  during  the  currency  of  her
      marriage to Mr Mehmood and he is not  the  father.  She  may  in  fact
      (although there is no evidence to that effect)  be  divorced  from  Mr
      Mehmood but that does not place her in any better position.

  25. Despite some misgivings on my part over the generality of Dr  Holden's
      report and that a considerable part of the  evidence  upon  which  she
      relies is quite old,  her  conclusions  were  not  challenged  by  the
      respondent, save as referred to below.  I  was  not  directed  to  any
      evidence to contradict or challenge her report. It  was  part  of  the
      agreed statement of facts that SM's husband had made  threats  in  the
      past and continued to do so. On the basis of the  evidence  before  me
      and in the light of the agreed statement of  facts,  I  find,  as  did
      judge Cruthers, that SM would be at real risk of being  persecuted  if
      returned to her home area, namely Lahore.

  26. The issue is whether it would be unduly harsh for SM and the  children
      to internally relocate. The unchallenged evidence of Dr Holden is that
      the only realistic options for relocation are either to  Islamabad  or
      Lahore where there are facilities available, although SM's ability  to
      access such facilities is severely  compromised.  In  SM's  case  that
      means the  only  realistic  option  is  Islamabad.  According  to  the
      unchallenged evidence of Dr Holden,  some  70  -  80%  of  women  face
      violence. The successful relocation of women depends upon the city and
      province; wealthier women with jobs/income in urban  areas  would  not
      have much difficulty. SM does not fall within at category. Although Mr
      Walker submitted that there were shelters available for  single  women
      with children, Dr Holden relied upon a 2012 study  which  referred  to
      the  lack  of  protection  available  in  shelters,  the  poor  living
      conditions and that children over the age of 10 were not  always  able
      to remain living there resulting in women having to give up custody of
      their children. Dr Holden reiterated throughout her  report  that  the
      availability of security both financial  and  personal  depended  upon
      being able to access financial support, a  protected  life  style  for
      example living in a gated community and support from family members.


  27. The children will have to be  registered  to  enable  them  to  obtain
      services including future employment. SM would be unlikely  to  obtain
      employment and even housing without  such  registration.  Registration
      would by its very nature expose the fact, after very little follow up,
      that she has three children outside  her  marriage.  She  would  thus,
      according to Dr Holden  be  exposed  to  violence,  possible  criminal
      charges  and  certainly  to   ostracism   and   significant   societal
      disapproval. Such results would make it seriously difficult for SM  to
      find  adequate  accommodation,  employment  and  schooling   for   her
      children.

  28. There was no evidence  that  Mr  Akhtar  would  provide  SM  with  any
      financial support. There was no evidence that he did so now,  although
      there was evidence that he sent money back to his family in  Pakistan.
      I cannot take a decision on the basis that he would  provide  for  her
      financially, particularly given that he appears to care so little  for
      SM and the children that he has not come before the Tribunal  to  give
      evidence.

  29. Mr Walker did not challenge Dr Holden's report on the availability  of
      protection from the police or other authorities for SM in the  context
      of her returning with three illegitimate children  without  a  husband
      and possibly not divorced from her first husband. That she  is  liable
      to criminal charges is not is dispute. That there  have  been  various
      killings due to breaches of so-called  "honour"  is  not  in  dispute,
      although the extent of such extreme violence now was  not  clear  from
      the report. But the extent of entrenched  violence  and  the  lack  of
      willingness  as  well  as  ability  of  the  authorities  to   provide
      sufficiency of protection does not appear to be in doubt and  was  not
      challenged by Mr Walker.

  30. On the basis of the evidence before me I find that  relocation  of  SM
      would be unduly harsh and that there  is  a  lack  of  sufficiency  of
      protection.

  31. This appeal was remitted by the Court of Appeal for  consideration  of
      whether SM and MH were at real risk of persecution and or serious harm
      looking specifically  at  the  issues  of  fornication,  adultery  and
      ostracism looking at HJ and HT [2010] UKSC 31. HJ looked  specifically
      at the ability of a social group being able to live freely and openly.



  32. It can be seen from the above that, fundamentally, SM and MH (and  the
      two younger children) will not be able to keep their  whereabouts  and
      their identity secret because of the requirement to  register.  It  is
      not simply a case of attempting to "live under the  radar"  but  is  a
      case that it  is  impossible  to  do  so  because  registration  is  a
      requirement. Without  registration,  education,  and  employment,  all
      other facets of ordinary life would be  prevented  or  made  extremely
      difficult. Issues of access to accommodation and employment flow  from
      registration. Presentation of identity documents of themselves and the
      seeking  of  accommodation  and  employment   will   result   in   the
      identification of SM as a single woman with three children by a man to
      whom she is not and was not married. That the  children  are  not  the
      children of SM's husband, will become apparent  on  registration.  Her
      husband has had an interest in SM, as described  by  SM's  mother  and
      accepted in  the  agreed  statement  of  facts.  The  availability  of
      accommodation, employment and protection will be seriously compromised
      by SM's lack of financial and economic support  as  well  as  lack  of
      support from her family. The risk of criminal charges  is  present  in
      addition to violence from her ex-husband. According to Dr Holden  SM's
      ability to 'hide' her status as a lone woman would  not  be  possible;
      her lack of economic independence, the lack of any male figures in her
      family unit would all result in her being vulnerable to  exploitation,
      to  a  lack  of  accommodation,  to  a  lack  of  employment  and   to
      identification as a woman with three children of whom her husband  was
      not the father. Even though HJ (Iran) refer to  the  ability  to  live
      openly and although it was submitted on behalf of SM and MH that  they
      should not be required to hide  their  circumstances,  that  does  not
      arise in this case.  The  fact  of  the  requirement  of  registration
      removes any element of choice, even if choice were available.

  33. In these circumstances, I find that SM (and the children) are at  real
      risk of being  persecuted  for  a  Convention  reason  if  removed  to
      Pakistan.

  34. I allow the appeal of the decision  on  the  international  protection
      claim. There is no requirement for me to make findings  under  Article
      8, the appeals having been allowed on refugee grounds.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing  it  on  international
    protection grounds.
[pic]                                   Date 19th February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] I have not anonymised him. It is claimed he is not in the UK and
although he has some contact with SM's mother it is claimed there is no
contact between him and SM. There is no need for him to be anonymised in
those circumstances.
[2] I have not anonymised him - it is claimed that his whereabouts are
unknown and the respondent has been unable to trace him. There is no need
for him to be anonymised in those circumstances.

