
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07284/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 November 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MUHAMMAD KHAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Jafar (Albus Law Solicitors)


                         FINAL DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal of 26 August  2015  allowing  the  appeal  of
       Muhammad Khan, a citizen of Pakistan born 2 April 1974,  against  the
       decision to make removal directions against him under Schedule  2  of
       the 1971 Act.

    2.  The  Appellant's  case  as  put  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   was
       essentially two-fold, both on asylum and private life  grounds.   His
       asylum claim was based on his fears at the hands of his uncle  Sajjan
       Khan whose plans for  his  own  son's  marriage  to  the  Appellant's
       sister, and for the Appellant's marriage to his own daughter, led  to
       the Appellant's departure  from  Pakistan  in  September  1999  after
       sustained  pressure  and  threats.  Fighting  between  the   families
       continued for three or four  years  and  his  uncle  became  a  Marza
       Ahmadi, whereas the rest  of  the  family  were  Sunni  Muslims.  The
       Appellant's sister was murdered at  his  uncle's  instigation  on  23
       October 2008 following her marriage to someone other than his son. He
       no longer knew the whereabouts  of  Sajjan  Khan  who  had  left  the
       family's village in  2008.  On  15  December  2012  his  uncle's  men
       murdered the  Appellant's  brother  Zaid  Khan,  and  threatened  his
       parents with serious harm if they failed  to  secure  his  return  to
       Pakistan. Since then his uncle's men have returned  to  threaten  and
       intimidate the family,  and  in  March  2014  they  beat  his  father
       severely, leading to his death. The  Appellant's  other  brother  has
       since told him that his uncle is now quite  powerful  with  links  to
       large political parties, and was involved with the  robbery  of  mill
       workers on their return home from work.

    3. Having noted that the Secretary of State's  own  country  information
       report for 2014 corroborated the Appellant's  account  of  the  Watta
       Satta practice by which  brides  were  exchanged  between  clans  and
       tribes, defiance of the expectations  of  which  might  well  end  to
       honour killings, the First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  account  of
       historical facts in so far as the original dispute between  parts  of
       the family had arisen. Given the First Information  Reports  relating
       to his sister's shooting, her death in the circumstances claimed  was
       also credible, as was the Appellant's departure from  Pakistan  given
       the threats  he  would  then  have  faced.  However,  the  First-tier
       Tribunal did not accept  that  his  uncle  Sajjan  had  maintained  a
       subsequent animus against him for so many years, absent corroborative
       evidence of the brother's or father's deaths.

    4. As to the Appellant's private and family life claim, the judge  noted
       that a subject access  request  had  produced  information  that  the
       Appellant had informed the Secretary of State that he wished to  make
       an application  on  human  rights  grounds,  in  a  note  stamped  16
       September 2005, but no  subsequent  action  was  taken  by  the  Home
       Office.

    5. As to his claim under the Rules, he had not established that he would
       face very significant obstacles to integration in  Pakistan.  Outside
       the Rules, he noted that the Appellant had established  ties  in  the
       United Kingdom over the time he had been here, and that he lived with
       and cared for an elderly woman aged 85 (the mother  of  a  friend  of
       his) who suffers from kidney problems and her disabled son, in return
       for board and lodgings, from  whom  his  expulsion  from  the  United
       Kingdom would separate him. In oral evidence he said that he had been
       caring for these two individuals for a significant period,  and  that
       they had both suffered during the month over which he was detained.

    6. The First-tier Tribunal found that this material  it  had  been  left
       unconsidered by the exceptional  circumstances  consideration  within
       the refusal letter, and consequently allowed the appeal  because  the
       decision was not in accordance with the law.

    7. Grounds of appeal challenged this disposition of the appeal, because

           (a)    There  had  been  inadequate  evidence  to  justify   the
                conclusion that the Appellant had  made  an  application  in
                2005 that had gone undetermined;

           (b)   The statement in the refusal letter  that  there  were  no
                exceptional  circumstances  had  represented   an   adequate
                consideration of the case for leave to  remain  outside  the
                Immigration Rules.

    8. Judge Lambert granted permission to appeal on behalf  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal on 16 September 2015 noting  that  there  was  arguable
       confusion in the analysis  of  the  Appellant's  private  life  claim
       outside the Rules, which had been considered by the judge for himself
       before deciding that the Secretary of State's own  consideration  had
       been inadequate.

  Findings and reasons: error of law hearing

    9. On a statutory appeal, the  most  usual  ground  relevant  to  issues
       arising under the Human Rights Convention is section 84(1)(g) of  the
       Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  which  requires  an
       investigation into whether

           "... removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
           consequence of the immigration decision would breach the  United
           Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or  would  be
           unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  as  being
           incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights."

   10. Once seized of jurisdiction, the Tribunal must allow an appeal in  so
       far as it thinks that the relevant immigration decision is  one  that
       was not in accordance with the law (including immigration rules): see
       section 86(3)(a). However, it is clear that save in cases where there
       has been a serious breakdown in the procedure by  which  a  case  has
       been considered, or where unfairness or breach of statutory  duty  is
       present, this power is to be exercised very sparingly.  As  noted  by
       the President in Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 42 (IAC),
       the Tribunal in T (S.55 BCIA 2009 - Entry Clearance)  Jamaica  [2011]
       UKUT  00483  (IAC)  promulgated  an  instructive  reminder   of   the
       distinction between the function of appellate tribunals and  judicial
       review proceedings:

           "[24] We would add further that the function of  judges  in  the
           Immigration and Asylum Chambers of both the First-Tier and Upper
           Tribunals is  to  decide  appeals,  rather  than  supervise  the
           exercise of public law functions by a  general  judicial  review
           jurisdiction.  When judges determine  appeals  they  can  decide
           what the material facts  are  and  proceed  from  those  factual
           findings to reach conclusions on the statutory grounds  set  out
           in Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
           2002".

   11. This approach  is  consistent  with  that  generally  appropriate  in
       appeals which turn on the compatibility of  an  immigration  decision
       with obligations under international Conventions: thus in  an  asylum
       appeal, the judge must  consider  whether  the  immigration  decision
       breaches the relevant international obligations, and so unless  there
       is a serious procedural irregularity which  requires  a  case  to  be
       reconsidered by the Secretary of State, an asylum  appeal  should  be
       determined  on  its  merits:  see  AH  (Paragraph  340  of  HC   395,
       Cooperation) (Algeria) [2000] UKIAT 00008.

   12. In this appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State  had  arguably  overlooked
       aspects of the Appellant's connections with the United Kingdom in  so
       far as he referenced the care he provided for persons resident  here.
       It seemed  to  me  that  that  is  the  kind  of  relatively  routine
       inadequacy in a refusal letter which it is the purpose of the  appeal
       system to substantively resolve. The Appellant had every  opportunity
       to put the entirety of his case before the First-tier  Tribunal,  and
       there is no reason to think that he had not availed himself  of  that
       facility. The situation is very different to that which  might  ensue
       from, for example, the scenario where  the  Secretary  of  State  has
       failed to adequately discharge her duties in relation  to  a  minor's
       best  interests  having  regard  to  section  55  of   the   Borders,
       Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009,  where,  as  discussed  in  MK
       (section 55 - Tribunal options) [2015] UKUT  223  (IAC),  it  may  be
       thought more appropriate to secure a child's welfare by requiring the
       Home Office to look at a case again, quite possibly making their  own
       enquiries  into  the  whole  picture  to  ensure  that  all  relevant
       information is taken into account.

   13. I accordingly found that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       contained a material error of law and that  the  appeal  fell  to  be
       lawfully determined by the Upper Tribunal at a continued hearing.

   14. At the continuation hearing the Appellant gave evidence. He said that
       the elderly people for whom he cared had no relatives of her  own  to
       care for them. One had just two brothers, of whom one  was  disabled;
       they lived around twenty minutes away from her by car.  When  he  was
       not there they did not eat, they worried,  and  did  not  take  their
       medicine. They were all British citizens.

   15. Cross examined, he said that there was medical evidence available  by
       way of a doctor's report on the people he cared for, but he  had  not
       brought it to court as his solicitor had not told him to do so.  They
       would be willing to provide witness statements to support  his  case.
       He denied that he had only  claimed  asylum  after  he  was  detected
       working illegally: he had simply been present  at  a  shop  which  he
       regularly visited when the immigration service came across him.

   16. For the Respondent it  was  submitted  that  there  was  no  reliable
       evidence about the support that he claimed to  provide,  either  from
       the care-receivers themselves or from  a  medical  source.  In  those
       circumstances this case could be dealt with under the  Rules  without
       reference to considerations outside them as there were no  compelling
       circumstances such as to justify a second stage  enquiry.   Even  the
       closest relatives caring for their own family members  would  receive
       no more than six months' permission to remain under the  Home  Office
       guidance on Carers: there was no basis for a person  to  stay  for  a
       longer  period  to  provide  care  for  persons  to  whom  they  were
       unrelated. No evidence had been provided as to  the  non-availability
       of alternative care.

   17. For the Appellant it was submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
       accepted the fact of the care  provided  by  the  Appellant,  and  no
       challenge to those findings of  fact  had  been  made.  It  would  be
       disproportionate to the private life of all involved to remove him in
       those circumstances.

Findings and reasons

   18. At the outset of the hearing Mr Jafar sought an  adjournment  because
       the Appellant's solicitors had not seen  fit  to  provide  a  witness
       statement from him to assist with the sole  issue  as  to  which  the
       First-tier Tribunal had previously allowed the appeal, in relation to
       the care he provided  to  two  disabled  individuals.  There  was  no
       explanation for their failure  to  do  so,  which  is  of  particular
       concern given that Mr Jafar informed me that he had  himself  advised
       of the necessary steps following the hearing addressing error of law.
       It is self-evident that a case of this nature needs  to  be  properly
       prepared. However, the matter has now been ongoing for a  significant
       period and the Appellant himself must  have  been  aware  of  how  to
       progress his case having been well represented  and  advised  by  his
       counsel, whatever the failings of his  solicitors,  and  additionally
       having been fully aware of the matters that originally concerned  the
       First-tier Tribunal, having had notice of its decision  since  August
       2015. I did not accept that it was in the interests of justice to let
       the matter be prolonged any further.

   19. The Appellant's claim  under  the  Rules  falls  to  be  assessed  by
       reference to Rule 276ADE:

           "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on
           the grounds of private life

           276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
           remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
           date of application, the applicant: ...

           vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK
           for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
           but there would be very significant obstacles to the applicant's
           integration into the country to which he would have to go if
           required to leave the UK."

   20. Very little evidence has been put forward of  any  obstacles  to  the
       Appellant's ability to integrate back in the country. He has lived in
       the United Kingdom for no more than eleven years, taking his claim at
       its highest, and thus spent almost thirty years  in  his  country  of
       origin before travelling here. His family have  been  involved  in  a
       feud, on the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  leading  to  the
       tragic death of his sister. Clearly the existence of that  feud  will
       make it difficult for him to rely on any  assistance  in  the  future
       from his uncle Sajjan's side of the family. However, this  in  itself
       does not mean that he lacks other extended family members  who  might
       assist him in the future. Besides, he is an adult who has  been  able
       to sustain himself for many years in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully,
       without the advantages of being able to assert the rights afforded by
       his nationality, and there is no reason to think that  he  could  not
       successfully relocate to one of the numerous large cities in Pakistan
       which are doubtless home to many internal migrants; and  he  will  be
       able to devote himself  fully  to  his  own  sustenance  without  the
       continued burden of caring for others.

   21. As to his claim outside the Rules,  whilst  it  may  be  that  it  is
       relatively rare for an Article 8 case not to  require  that  form  of
       "second stage" consideration,  I  cannot  accept  that  it  would  be
       appropriate to conduct that exercise here. Whilst I  do  not  propose
       departing from the factual acceptance by the First-tier  Tribunal  of
       the care he claims  to  provide  for  two  individuals,  no  detailed
       information has been provided as to the identity of those for whom he
       cares, their  actual  needs,  and  what  alternative  care  might  be
       available  in  his  absence,  either  from  relatives  or  the  local
       authority. There is no evidence to suggest that the care he  provides
       them represents a fundamental aspect of his own identity, though  one
       may assume it has some significance  to  them.  He  has  provided  no
       detailed evidence of associations with the United Kingdom that  could
       not reasonably be replicated on a return  to  his  home  country.  In
       these circumstances  it  is  not  established  that  the  immigration
       decision would arguably occasion any serious  interference  with  the
       private life of any individual nor that such  interference  would  be
       disproportionate.

   22. The appeal is dismissed.


[pic]
Signed:     Date: 13 November 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

