
IAC-FH-CK-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07091/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 April 2015                      |On 6 May 2015                        |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MCGOWAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                             Ramesh Rathnasingam
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Walker Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Appeal refused.

BACKGROUND

 2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national.  He  was  born  on  15  October
    1980.  He married his wife in Sri Lanka on 20  January  2011.   She  is
    also a Sri Lankan national.  She obtained entry clearance as a  student
    in November 2010 and returned to Sri Lanka on 15 January 2011  for  the
    marriage.  She returned  to  the  UK  to  continue  her  studies.   The
    appellant came to the  UK  as  her  dependant  and  was  granted  entry
    clearance from 10 March 2011 to 25 March 2012.  He arrived in the UK on
    19 March 2011.  On 3 May 2011 he claimed asylum and was interviewed for
    screening purposes that day.  On 9 May 2011 he was served  with  notice
    of liability to removal as he was considered to have used deception  to
    gain entry to the UK.  He was further interviewed on the  substance  of
    his claim on 18 May 2011.

 3. The decision of the Secretary of State to refuse the claim was given in
    a letter of 2 June 2011.  It is a lengthy explanation of her  reasoning
    and refusal considering, in particular, all that had been said  by  the
    appellant in his interviews.

 4. The appellant appealed against that  refusal  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision was contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR and that he had a
    well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention right.  It  was  said
    that the decision was Wednesbury unreasonable.

 5. His appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on  2  August  2011
    after a hearing on 14 July 2011 in a detailed determination.  He sought
    permission to appeal against  that  determination  on  8  August  2011.
    Permission was refused on 15 August 2011.  A  further  application  for
    permission was made dated 5 September 2011.  That was also  refused  on
    15 September 2011.

 6. On 15 December 2011 the appellant  made  an  application  for  Judicial
    Review.  On 23 March 2012 permission to  bring  a  claim  for  Judicial
    Review was refused by Timothy  Dutton  QC  on  the  papers.   That  was
    renewed on an oral hearing before Geraldine Andrews QC and  granted  on
    21 November 2012 on the basis that there had been  errors  in  treating
    the country guidance as set out  in  TK  (Sri  Lanka)  as  having  been
    superseded and  failing  to  have  regard  to  the  harassment  of  the
    appellant's family after he had left Sri Lanka.   By  a  consent  order
    dated 23 January 2013 the  parties  agreed  that  the  application  for
    permission to appeal be reconsidered by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   On  19
    January 2015 permission to appeal was granted by the Vice-President  of
    the Upper Tribunal.

THE HEARING

 7. The appellant had set out his case in two witness statements, dated  10
    July 2011 and 14 July 2011.  He had given answers in two interviews and
    gave evidence at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.   We  are
    very grateful to the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  for  his  clear
    recitation of the history, which does not need to be repeated  in  full
    here.

 8. The important facts are that the appellant had come to the attention of
    the authorities for the first time in 2000 when he was a  student.   He
    had been arrested on suspicion of assisting the  LTTE  because  of  his
    association with another young man.  A not uncommon experience in 2000.
     He gave an account of being tortured during  his  detention.   He  was
    released on bail in October 2000 but was required to sign on at an army
    camp, which he continued to do until 2004.

 9. Following a ceasefire in 2004 he was again threatened and  so  gave  up
    his tutorial centre in Jaffna and moved to Vanni.  The local  rule  was
    that every household  in  Vanni  had  to  provide  one  member  of  the
    household as a member of the LTTE.  The appellant joined the LTTE on 10
    December 2004 to prevent his sister being required  to  join.   He  was
    trained for about a month and was required to continue  in  his  chosen
    career as a teacher.  He was posted to the camp of the  leader  of  the
    intelligence wing of the LTTE, a man called Pottu Amman and taught  his
    children.  In addition he taught illiterate fighters to read in batches
    of  five  or  six  at  a  time.   He  was  also  required  to  do  some
    administrative work for the LTTE.  In 2008 he was sent to Iranaimadu to
    provide administrative support to the Forest Mobile  Team.   He  became
    separated from the group and having encountered a police camp  he  felt
    he had no choice but to surrender as a member  of  the  LTTE.   He  was
    bound and beaten and eventually taken before a court.   From  there  he
    was sent to a rehabilitation centre where he stayed until  his  release
    on 19 April 2010.  He returned home and was  visited  by  police  on  a
    "routine visit" to confirm his identity and address.

10. He was called back to the  camp  and  questioned  a  number  of  times.
    Eventually he moved to Colombo to avoid this level of  harassment.   He
    was married that month and then came to the UK.  He had had to bribe an
    official to be able to leave.

11. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's account  in  many
    of its details.  Her response was that even taking  everything  at  its
    highest the appellant was not at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

12. The Judge found,  "the  appellant's  account  to  have  been  extremely
    detailed, completely consistent and entirely credible."  He went on  to
    consider the risk factors, outlined in  TK (Tamils) Sri Lanka CG [2009]
    UKAIT 49 which might apply to the appellant if he was returned  to  Sri
    Lanka.

13. The Judge listed his findings as follows in detail.  He found that  the
    appellant had been released  from  the  rehabilitation  centre  by  the
    authorities because he was not perceived as a threat to  the  peace  of
    Sri Lanka, nor had he ever been seen as one.  He would be able to  show
    that he had been through the process of rehabilitation in  the  centre.
    Importantly the Judge found no real risk of re-detention or further ill-
    treatment.

14. In reaching  his  conclusion  the  Judge  specifically  considered  the
    authority of LP (LTTE) Sri Lanka CG [2007] UKAIT 76 in addition to TK.

15. He found that even the risk factors from those listed which applied  to
    this appellant did not, in his personal circumstances and in the  light
    of the changed situation in Sri Lanka create any degree of real risk at
    all.  The appellant's successful completion of the required  period  of
    rehabilitation was an  important  feature  of  the  decision  that  the
    appellant would not be at any  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  from  the
    authorities.  Therefore the Judge  found  that  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed either under the 1951 Convention  Relating  to  the  Status  of
    Refugees or Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

16. He found, on the facts, that the removal would not be  disproportionate
    and that the appellant would have a family  and  private  life  in  Sri
    Lanka.

17. He also found that the Secretary of State was unreasonable  in  finding
    that the appellant had been deceptive  on  his  entry  to  the  UK  and
    therefore his application to enter and remain as his  wife's  dependant
    should be reinstated.

THE APPEAL

18. The appeal, in summary, is that given the findings of  credibility  and
    consistency made about the appellant's account, the Judge erred in  his
    application of the situation in Sri Lanka as described in  the  country
    guidance in TK in 2009.  Additionally it was submitted that  he  failed
    to consider the evidence that the appellant's family had  been  visited
    by the authorities since his departure.

19. The Tribunal is obliged to follow "extant, relevant  country  guidance"
    and apply it to the facts of a case, as the Tribunal finds them to  be.
    In this case the Judge did consider the relevant country  guidance  and
    further applied it directly to the particular facts as he found them to
    be.  He found that the authorities in Sri  Lanka,  however  they  might
    treat others, would not treat this appellant in the manner he genuinely
    feared because his limited role during the fighting and his  successful
    completion  of  the  rehabilitation  process,  which  the   authorities
    themselves had instituted, would mean that he was not at any real risk.

20. The court in TK expressed the function of the Tribunal Judges as  those
    who undertake the primary role of fact finding and guidance on  country
    conditions.  It set that out in terms, at paragraph 4,

         "In country guidance cases the Tribunal has a dual function.  As in
         every case, it must decide the appeal before it, but it also  seeks
         to identify relevant risks that arise in  relation  to  classes  or
         groups of  persons.   It  does  this  in  two  main  ways:  (i)  by
         identifying  one  or  more  'risk  categories'  (usually  when  the
         evidence is sufficiently clear-cut to justify a  finding  that  the
         generality of persons in a particular category are at  risk);  (ii)
         by  delineating  'risk  factors',  i.e.   factors   of   particular
         significance when assessing risk, a mode usually  chosen  when  the
         evidence is less clear-cut."

21. The task of the Tribunal as identified  in  TK  is  precisely  the  one
    performed in this case.  The Judge made an assessment of  the  evidence
    of the appellant's individual circumstances.  He then applied the  risk
    factors in LTTE cases as laid down in TK.  By properly applying one  to
    the other he found that this particular appellant would not be at  risk
    if returned.

22. The Judge did not pay insufficient regard to the country guidance.   He
    rightly considered  all  the  relevant  material  before  him,  on  the
    conditions in Sri Lanka at the date of the decision.  The court  in  TK
    went on to observe at paragraph 6,

         "The Court also fully  recognised  that  country  guidance  is  not
         inflexible; it must be applied by reference to new evidence  as  it
         emerges; otherwise it would fall foul of the principle of  ex  nunc
         assessment of risk.  Our country guidance system can only expect to
         have authority domestically and command respect abroad,  therefore,
         if it maintains these standards."

23. The evidence of the police harassment  of  his  family  came  from  the
    appellant himself in his interview of 18 May 2011 at questions 124-125.
     He said that they had gone to his mother's house  and  asked  for  his
    telephone number, when his mother said she did not  remember  it,  they
    left their number and asked him to get in touch. Such an event, against
    all the other findings in this case would not have altered the outcome.

24. There were no errors of law in the reasoning and the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and accordingly this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed   Date 30 April 2015

Mrs Justice McGowan

