
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07529/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MAR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Rothwell of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ferguson promulgated  on  1  October  2015,  brought  pursuant  to  the
    permission granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott-Baker  on  19
    October 2015.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant and MAR is the respondent, for the  sake  of  consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  hereafter
    refer to MAR as the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

3.   The Appellant is a national of  Afghanistan  whose  date  of  birth  is
    given as 1 January 1986.  He first came to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student in April 2011 and secured subsequent grants of leave  until  30
    October 2014.  He returned  to  Afghanistan  for  a  visit  between  27
    September 2012 and 13 October 2012.  During the currency of his  leave,
    with still something approaching a year of leave left to run,  he  made
    an application for asylum on 27 November 2013.  His application was  in
    due course refused by the Secretary of State for reasons set out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter  ('RFRL')  dated  6  March  2015,  and  an
    immigration decision refusing to vary  leave  and  directing  that  the
    Appellant be removed from the United Kingdom was taken on 10 March 2015
    (served on 12 March 2015).  The Appellant appealed to the IAC  and  his
    appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge for the reasons set
    out in his decision.

4.    The  background  to  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  is  set  out  at
    paragraphs 2 and 3 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and
    I can do little better than to quote those paragraphs:
         "2.  His claim is based on a number of  different  reasons  why  he
             fears that he will be persecuted by the Taliban.  As  set  out
             in his interview and statements these include that  he  worked
             in various roles including as an interpreter for the  American
             security forces from 2003 translating documents to be used  in
             the training of Afghanistan police.  He left that role in 2004
             after the unit where he was based was the subject of a suicide
             bomb attack.  He then worked  with  USAID  for  a  short  time
             delivering medical  supplies.   After  that  he  worked  as  a
             finance officer for an NGO founded  by  USAID  called  Bakhtar
             Development which provided finance and training  to  help  the
             health sector in Afghanistan.   He  was  promoted  to  various
             roles and continued working there until 2011.  He also studied
             part time at American University in Afghanistan  in  2008  but
             stopped his studies within the year because of threats to  him
             from the Taliban that  he  was  working  with  Christians  and
             against Islam.  He  stopped  that  job  after  the  office  in
             Baghlan where he had been working was attacked by the Taliban.
              He said that he had received phone  calls  from  the  Taliban
             personally threatening him.
         3.   In addition, he claims he is at risk because he  worked  as  a
             finance officer in Dr Abdulah Abdulah's Presidential  election
             campaign in 2009.  He said that he did this part time as  well
             as working for the NGO.  He was given a bodyguard in this role
             and provided evidence  of  his  involvement  with  Dr  Abdulah
             including identity cards and photographs of them together.  He
             received two threatening phone calls from the  Taliban  whilst
             working there."

5.   It is also to  be  noted  that  the  Appellant  gave  evidence  of  his
    involvement with the British army during his time in the United Kingdom
    - which is recorded in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in
    the following terms at paragraph 10:
         "Other photos of him in  army  uniform  were  taken  in  2011  with
         British soldiers training in London: he had a contract  to  provide
         interpreting services to help them role play exercises to train for
         deployment in Afghanistan".

6.   It may readily be appreciated that the Appellant has a very  particular
    and specific profile indicating a longstanding association with the  US
    and British armed forces  as  well  as  other  agents  for  change  and
    development in Afghanistan.

7.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    supporting evidence (cited at length at paragraph 6 of  his  decision),
    and also identified those issues  that  were  in  dispute  between  the
    parties (paragraphs 7 and 8).  The Judge, having  heard  evidence  from
    the Appellant both in examination-in-chief and under cross-examination,
    reached positive findings on credibility which he adequately  explained
    at paragraphs 20-25 of the decision.  These findings are not challenged
    by the Respondent.

8.   In particular I note the following  findings  and  conclusions  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, at paragraph 24:
         "Every  aspect  of  his  education  and   employment   history   is
         established to the low standard.  As a  result  the  Appellant  has
         established that he has the profile of  a  person  who  may  be  of
         interest to the Taliban.  He has directly worked for  organisations
         linked to the USA.  His account is consistent with  the  background
         evidence."

9.   The Judge went on to quote at  paragraph  24  some  of  the  background
    evidence that was before him,  in  particular  extracts  from  a  UNHCR
    assessment that confirmed the climate  of  intimidation,  threats,  and
    abductions against individuals targeted by the Taliban in the period in
    2012 congruent with the Appellant's  return  to  Afghanistan  during  a
    brief break from his studies in the UK.

10.  The Judge also referred to the Secretary of State's OGN  from  February
    2015 at paragraph 27 of his decision, and at paragraph 28 made  general
    reference to background evidence.  In particular the Judge said this:
         "The background evidence referred to at paragraphs 25 and 28  above
         establishes that there is no sufficiency of protection for  someone
         in the position of [the Appellant], whatever general sufficiency of
         protections the country guidance case may have found  to  exist  in
         parts of the country."

11.  It is common ground between the  representatives  before  me  that  the
    reference to paragraphs 25 and 28 in the quotation above must represent
    a typographical error or slip, it appearing that the Judge had in  mind
    the passages cited at paragraphs 24 and 27.

12.  It is to be noted that in addition to the express citation of  the  OGN
    at paragraph 27  the  Judge  also  said,  "there  are  many  background
    documents in the Appellant's bundle which show  examples  of  the  risk
    posed by the Taliban to people targeted by them".

13.  The Judge went on at paragraph 29 to say this:
         "The risk to him has arisen over time including when he was working
         in Kabul.  Kabul therefore cannot  be  considered  as  a  place  of
         internal relocation for him.  Internal relocation to any other part
         of Afghanistan would be unduly harsh in the absence  of  assistance
         from a network of family members and without being able to work  in
         the roles he has previously held out  of  fear  of  coming  to  the
         attention of the Taliban again."

14.  In those circumstances the Judge allowed the appeal under  the  Refugee
    Convention.

Consideration of Challenge

15.  The Secretary of State raises  a  challenge  based  on  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal relocation.

16.  Ms Fijiwala acknowledges that the first paragraph of the  Secretary  of
    State's Grounds of Appeal is not drafted in a coherent manner.   It  is
    in these terms:
         "In allowing the asylum appeal the Judge finds that the risk to the
         appellant "has arisen over time including when he  was  working  in
         Kabul" [29].  The Judge fails to explain why Kabul cannot in  those
         circumstances be considered as a place of internal relocation".

    Ms Fijiwala acknowledges that in circumstances where the Judge  appears
    to be finding that there is a risk of persecution in Kabul, necessarily
    it is not a suitable place of internal relocation.

17.  Be that as it may the Respondent seeks to argue that the Judge has  not
    adequately set out his findings in respect of a lack of sufficiency  of
    protection in Kabul, and has not otherwise adequately  dealt  with  the
    issue of internal relocation.  I note that the grant of  permission  to
    appeal does not expressly  grant  permission  on  the  basis  of  these
    grounds but rather raises a further matter which is to suggest that the
    Judge had not made adequate findings from the  background  material  to
    which he had referred.

18.  In seeking to amplify the grounds  and  develop  the  case  before  me,
    particular reference has been made by Ms Fijiwala to a  number  of  the
    passages in the background evidence, and in particular passage  in  the
    OGN note to which the Judge made  reference  at  paragraph  27  of  the
    decision.  Ms Fijiwala has emphasised a passage at paragraph  2.3.6  of
    the OGN, (which may be found at page 582 of the Appellant's bundle that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal).  The passage is in  the  following
    terms:
         "In commenting on security in Kabul the Danish Immigration  Service
         Fact Finding Mission report on Afghanistan of May  2012  cited  the
         International Police Co-operation Board as stating that 'there  are
         places in Afghanistan where Afghan National Police  is  functioning
         well in terms of providing security especially in Kabul  and  other
         big cities like Heart, Mazar-i-Sharif and Faizabad'."

    This passage was relied upon by the Respondent as indicating that there
    was indeed a sufficiency of protection in Kabul.

19.  It seems to me that that passage must be read in  its  proper  context.
    It comes under the section of the OGN dealing with internal relocation,
    and in my judgment its value is with regard to considering  the  extent
    to which the  risk  of  generalised  violence  may  be  ameliorated  by
    mechanisms of state protection.  It is not, in my judgment,  a  passage
    that  directly  relates  to  individuals  who  have  been  specifically
    targeted: that is not the context of the  paragraphs  in  which  it  is
    placed in the OGN.

20.  In a similar way the case of H & B  v  United  Kingdom  (heard  in  the
    European Court of Human  Rights  on  9  April  2013),  upon  which  the
    Respondent places reliance, is not in my judgment directly 'on  point'.
    The case is noted at paragraph 2.4 of the OGN.  Necessarily  the  court
    in that case  focused  on  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  two
    individual claimants, concluding that they had  not  demonstrated  that
    their  profile  was  such  that  the  Taliban  would  be   sufficiently
    interested to target them - see in this regard the following: "there is
    insufficient evidence at the present time to suggest that  the  Taliban
    have the motivation or the ability to pursue low-level collaborators in
    Kabul or other areas outside their control" and "there is  also  little
    evidence that the Taliban are targeting those who have as requested  by
    them already stopped working for the international  community  and  who
    had moved to other areas".  The decision, however,  significantly  goes
    on to say this:
         "...  individuals  who  are  perceived   as   supportive   of   the
         international community may be  able  to  demonstrate  a  real  and
         personal risk to them from the Taliban depending on the  individual
         circumstances of their case, the nature of their connections to the
         international community and their profile".

21.  In my judgment it is clear that the outcome  in  the  case  of  H  &  B
    turned on the very particular facts of  those  claimants.   Nonetheless
    the Court recognised that there were individuals who might still be  at
    risk from the Taliban, depending on  the  particular  circumstances  of
    their case.  Indeed, as with most asylum cases, the level of risk  will
    turn  on  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  individual.   It  is
    abundantly clear that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  this  case
    considered that the very particular background  of  the  Appellant  was
    such as to make him of continuing adverse interest to the Taliban -  as
    indeed had been the case when he had  returned  to  Afghanistan  for  a
    brief period in 2012.  Not only did the Judge identify the risk to  the
    Appellant at  that  time  by  citing  from  the  UNHCR  assessment  (at
    paragraph 24 of his decision), the Judge also identified the continuing
    risk by citing from paragraph 3.10.11 of the  Respondent's  OGN,  again
    citing the UNHCR as a source of information - see paragraph 27.

22.  As regards internal relocation, Ms Fijiwala emphasised the  passage  at
    2.3.6 - already cited above - in which it  was  said  that  the  Afghan
    National Police were functioning well in big cities outside Kabul.   It
    was argued that even if  the  Appellant  were  at  risk  in  Kabul  the
    Immigration Judge had not dealt adequately with  the  notion  that  the
    Appellant might be able to relocate to some place outside  Kabul  where
    he would not be at risk and where it would not be unduly harsh for  him
    to go.

23.  In the first instance I note that the RFRL only  proposes  Kabul  as  a
    location  of  internal  flight.   Moreover  it  is  apparent  that  the
    submissions of the Presenting Officer - summarised in  this  regard  at
    paragraph 15 if the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  -  also  only
    suggest Kabul as a possible location for the Appellant in Afghanistan.

24.  Be that as it may, and in any event, I note the Judge's  conclusion  at
    paragraph 29 was, in effect, that it would not be  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant to relocate to another area where he did not have  a  support
    network and he would not be able to undertake the  same  sort  of  work
    that  he  had  previously  undertaken  whilst  in  Afghanistan.    This
    approach, in my judgment, echoes that identified in  the  case  of  MSM
    (journalists: political opinion: risk) Somalia [2015] UKUT 00413  (IAC)
    to the effect that an individual should not be denied refugee status on
    the ground that they could seek alternative employment.  In effect what
    the Judge is saying in my view is that it would not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the Appellant to relocate to a  zone  where  he  would  have  to
    change the way that  he  had  led  his  life  hitherto  and  cease  his
    involvement  in  the  reconstruction  of  Afghanistan  because  to   do
    otherwise would attract a very real risk of persecution.

25.  Ms Rothwell for her part placed emphasis on the  Judge's  reference  to
    having had regard to "many  background  documents  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle which show examples of the risk posed by the Taliban  to  people
    targeted by them".  In this regard Ms Rothwell  drew  my  attention  in
    particular to the European Asylum  Support  Office  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report dated January 2015, (which begins at page 359 of the
    Appellant's bundle), and in particular those passages dealing with  the
    risk in and around Kabul at page 395 onwards.  Ms Rothwell argued  that
    in as much as the Judge did not descend to any greater  specificity  in
    citing the background materials, such an omission  was  not  ultimately
    material.  Ms Rothwell acknowledged in this  regard  that  perhaps  the
    Judge could have better expressed his  findings  and  conclusions,  but
    submitted that there was a wealth of evidence  such  that  the  overall
    conclusion of the Judge in the context of his careful analysis  of  the
    individual circumstances of the Appellant, and  his  identification  of
    relevant passages from the background material that were cited, is such
    that no material error is detectable.

26.  I accept Ms Rothwell's submission. It seems to  me  that  it  is  clear
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that the Appellant had  a
    very particular profile that had caused him to be directly targeted  by
    the Taliban, and to have  been  the  subject  of  specific  personally-
    targeted threats such as to put him  at  risk  both  in  2012  when  he
    visited, but also subsequently and at the present time. The Judge  also
    dealt adequately with the concept of internal relocation as it was  put
    to him by the Respondent, and in any event.

Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  material  errors
    of law and stands.

28.  The Secretary of State's challenge is dismissed. MAR's  appeal  remains
allowed

29.  The anonymity order is preserved.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:  Date: 25 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
