
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07724/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2016                            |On 13 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     M J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order given the nature  of  the
    appellant's claim as an asylum-seeker.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or
    Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall  directly
    or indirectly identify the Appellant.  This direction applies  to  both
    the appellant and to the respondent and a failure to comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Background

 2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Pakistan of  Hazara  ethnicity.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom in 2007 and claimed  asylum.   He  was
    removed to Greece under the Dublin II Regulations.  He returned to  the
    UK on 17 June 2014 and again claimed asylum.  On 23 September 2014, the
    Secretary  of  State  refused  his  claims  for  asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and under the European Convention on Human Rights.  On  that
    date also the  Secretary  of  State  made  a  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant by way of directions to Pakistan.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 28 May 2015, Judge A Cresswell dismissed the appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  Although  Judge  Cresswell  accepted  that  the
    appellant was a citizen of Pakistan (despite having previously  claimed
    to be a citizen of Afghanistan) he rejected the appellant's claim to be
    of Hazara ethnicity and from Quetta  in  Pakistan,  an  area  in  which
    Hazaras  mainly  live  in  Pakistan.   Further,  in  any  event,  Judge
    Cresswell concluded that the appellant would, as an Hazara in Pakistan,
    obtain a sufficiency of protection from the  Pakistan  authorities  and
    could safely and reasonably internally relocate.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    three grounds.

 5. First, the judge had failed to give adequate consideration to a country
    expert report from Dr Livia  Holden  which  supported  the  appellant's
    claim.  Secondly, the judge had wrongly taken  into  account  that  the
    appellant had failed to mention in his screening interview, when  asked
    about what languages and dialects he  spoke,  that  he  spoke  Hazaragi
    (wrongly spelt as "Hazaranghi" in the determination) but had,  instead,
    said that he spoke Dari/Farsi Persian.  Thirdly,  the  judge  had  been
    wrong to apply the 12-year-old country guidance case of AH (sufficiency
    of protection, Sunni extremists) Pakistan CG [2002] UKAIT 0682, and had
    disregarded the more up-to-date evidence including that of  Dr  Holden,
    in finding that Hazaras were not at real risk  in  Pakistan  and  would
    obtain a sufficiency of protection.

 6. Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal, but on  23
    September 2015 the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Perkins) granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal on all grounds.

 7. On 8 October 2015, the Secretary of State served  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 8. The appeal was initially listed before the President  of  UTIAC  on  29
    September 2016 but was adjourned.

 9. The appeal came before me on 6 December 2016.

Discussion

10. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Neale  relied  upon  the  three  grounds
    which  he  developed  in  his  written  skeleton  argument   and   oral
    submissions.

11. I will deal with each ground in turn.

    Ground 1

12. Mr Neale submitted that the judge had erred in law in two  respects  in
    failing  to  give  proper  consideration  to  Dr  Holden's  report,  in
    particular at para 21(xvi) of his determination.

13. First, he submitted that the  judge  had  been  wrong,  in  effect,  to
    disregard the report because of the involvement of "Mr Ali" leading  to
    the production of the expert report.  At para 21(xvi)  the  judge  said
    this:

         "(xvi)   The expert report by Dr Livia Holden was a 'curate's egg'.
                 Dr Holden may be an expert in some matters, but she did not
                demonstrate  in  her  report  that  she  is  an  expert   in
                establishing   the   authenticity   of   documents   or   in
                establishing  the  ethnicity  of  Pakistani  Hazaras.    Her
                methods too, in some respects, are questionable, such as her
                reliance  upon  'Mr   Ali',   a   shopkeeper   of   unproven
                'provenance' and unproven skills to  vouch  for  a  person's
                language and ethnicity and an interview with  the  Appellant
                by an associate, a Mr Marius Holden,  of  unproven  language
                skills via Mr Ali via Skype.  I  could  have  no  confidence
                whatsoever that Mr Ali is  an  ethnic  Hazara  who  has  any
                skills at all.  The report says that Mr  Holden  interviewed
                the Appellant and, was 'assisted by Mr Ali'.  I  could  have
                no confidence whatsoever, that Mr  Holden  is  a  proficient
                Dari  speaker  able  to  interpret  for  Dr  Holden  as   no
                indication of his skills in that regard is recorded  in  her
                report (or was he simply using Mr  Ali  as  an  interpreter,
                which raises  the  question  as  to  why  he  conducted  the
                interview rather than the expert, Dr Holden)."

14. Mr Neale submitted that Dr Holden was an expert in her  field  and  had
    indicated in her report Mr Ali's background as an ethnic Hazara born on
    the Afghan/Pakistan border with family ties in Quetta and  was  someone
    who had "regularly helped the author of  this  report  for  field  work
    research".  Mr Neale referred me to para 21 of her report (at page  A21
    of the bundle) in which Dr Holden set  out  Mr  Ali's  background.   Mr
    Neale submitted that the judge  was  wrong  to  say  that  he  had  "no
    confidence" in Mr Ali's knowledge and skills, in particular in relation
    to the Hazara language.  Mr Neale submitted that the judge's  reasoning
    was inadequate.

15. Secondly, in any event, Mr Neale submitted that the judge had failed to
    take into account Dr Holden's report, in particular  at  paragraph  23,
    where she had identified a number of positive  factors  supporting  the
    appellant's claim which arose  from  her  own  personal  knowledge  and
    research and not simply because of Mr Ali's claimed knowledge.

16. Mr Richards submitted that, in effect, Mr Ali had  been  acting  as  an
    expert in giving his opinion  on  matters  when  his  expertise,  as  a
    linguist or otherwise, was not stated.  Mr Richards submitted  that  Mr
    Ali was not simply acting as an interpreter but as  an  expert.   There
    was no expert's declaration  in  respect  of  him  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to give Dr Holden's report the weight that she  did  in  those
    circumstances.

17. Dealing with Mr Neale's submissions in reverse order, even if the judge
    was entitled to give little or no weight to parts of Dr Holden's report
    which were based upon any assessment of the appellant's  background  by
    Mr Ali, it is clear that the matters set out in para 23, were  relevant
    to assessing  the  appellant's  claim  and  were  based  upon  her  own
    knowledge and expertise and not solely relying upon what  was  said  or
    confirmed by Mr Ali about the appellant.  At para 23,  Dr  Holden  said
    this:

         "23.     The interview lasted around 20 minutes and  the  Appellant
             responded as following:

             1)   The Appellant first answered with his address  in  Quetta
                  as in the witness statement,  when  asked  to  name  other
                  parts of the city where Hazaras live he mentioned Mariabad
                  on one side of the city and Burori on the other.  This  is
                  consistent with the information provided by  Mr.  Ali  and
                  also with my  research  on  Hazara  ethnic  minorities  in
                  Quetta.  After requesting the  specific  location  of  the
                  road where the Appellant used to live in Quetta,  he  said
                  that the road belongs to the area named Burori.  Burori is
                  part of a larger area called Hazara Town.   The  Appellant
                  also mentioned the location of another road, Alamdar road,
                  in Mariabad area.  All this information is consistent with
                  the areas where Hazara live in Quetta.

             2)   ['MJ'] spontaneously named the Hazaragi language, stating
                  that it is a variation of Farsi:   'Hazaras  speak  Farsi,
                  the same with Dari, but they call it the Hazaragi  because
                  Hazaragi  is  not  a  language  it  is  an  accent'.    He
                  recognised that Hazaragi is spoken slightly differently in
                  Afghanistan and that he is able to understand it.  This is
                  also perfectly consistent with the information that I have
                  as anthropologist doing fieldwork in Pakistan  and  having
                  visited Kabul recently: in both  countries  Hazaras  speak
                  Hazaragi.

             3)   The Appellant stated that his family had come to Pakistan
                  from Afghanistan, that he does not know when and  that  he
                  still has relatives in  Afghanistan.   He  said  that  his
                  family comes from Daikundi in Afghanistan, which is one of
                  the  areas  from  which  Hazaras  usually   migrate   from
                  Afghanistan to Quetta.

             4)   The Appellant was  also  able  to  identify  the  Jagori,
                  Daisangi,  and  Daikundi   as   Hazara-clans.    This   is
                  consistent with the set of information  collected  in  the
                  field by the author of this report and also  confirmed  by
                  Mr. Ali.  Hazaras usually identify themselves mainly  with
                  the place of origin in Afghanistan  and  Diakundi  is  the
                  group to which the Appellant belongs.

             5)   The Appellant declared to be  Shia  which  is  consistent
                  with the sectarian affiliation of the majority of  Hazaras
                  but there are also Sunni and Ismaili Hazaras."

18. The judge's failure to deal with this evidence  was,  in  my  view,  an
    error of law.  What is there set out relies upon Dr Holden's  expertise
    (even if also confirmed by Mr Ali) and could, therefore, not be tainted
    by any view that Mr Ali was inappropriately  acting  as  an  expert  or
    someone with specialist knowledge.

19. Turning to Mr Neale's first  submission,  there  were  aspects  of  the
    report,  however,  which  derived  any  cogency  or  support  for   the
    appellant's  claim  from  Mr  Ali's  assessment  of   the   appellant's
    linguistic facility or local knowledge.  Consequently, at paras  25-26,
    Dr Holden's report contains the following:

         "25.     Once the interview was completed  I  asked  Mr.  Ali,  his
             opinion about the ethnical, linguistic, cultural belonging  of
             the Appellant.  Mr. Ali confirmed the points already  reported
             as above, and he added also another detail:   in  an  area  of
             Afghanistan called Besut, near  Diakundi,  the  name  commonly
             used by Hazara  for  'mother',  'abai'  is  instead  used  for
             father.  According to Mr. Ali, only Hazaras  know  about  this
             linguistic specificity and the region concerned  is  close  to
             the area from where the Appellant's  family  originates.   Mr.
             Ali asked this question to  the  Appellant  and  he  responded
             correctly.

         26.  Mr. Ali stated that 'MJ' speaks fluently the Quetta's  variety
             of Hazaragi.  When asked what elements make he  think  so,  he
             said that the pronunciation of the  verb  'to  do'  'kida'  is
             different  in  Quetta.   There,  it  sounds  'kada',  Mr.  Ali
             insisted that, even with the exposure to  external  linguistic
             influences, 'MJ' was using the Quetta Hazaragi.   We  listened
             together to the recording of the interview where the Appellant
             used the expression 'Rashi Bikhai' to answer a question  asked
             in Quetta's Hazaragi by Mr. Ali.   The  latter  asserted  with
             certainty that no Hazara from Afghanistan would  use  such  an
             expression which is typical of  the  Quetta's  Hazaragi.   The
             expression 'Rashi Bikhai' means 'if you want the right thing I
             am here'.  Concluding, Mr. Ali is certain,  on  the  basis  of
             culture, language, and location that the Appellant belongs  to
             the Quetta Hazaras."

20. There is no doubt that in these paragraphs Mr Ali takes on  the  mantel
    of an expert or, at least, someone who  has  specialist  linguistic  or
    other knowledge.

21. In this jurisdiction, there is no evidential rule that opinion evidence
    is only, in  general,  admissible  from  an  expert.   Subject  to  the
    gatekeeper of "relevance", any evidence is, in  principle,  admissible.
    I leave aside evidence that would be inadmissible on  a  public  policy
    basis, for example, professional legal  privilege  or  public  interest
    immunity.  But, in assessing Mr  Ali's  evidence,  albeit  that  it  is
    admissible, Judge Cresswell  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  in
    determining what, if any, weight should be given to it whether  it  was
    established that Mr  Ali's  background  meant  that  his  evidence  was
    reliable.  The only evidence before the judge was that set out in  para
    21 of Dr Holden's report which recorded his background,  including  his
    ethnicity and the basis of his familiarity with Quetta, and that he had
    "regularly helped" Dr Holden in respect of "field research".  It is not
    clear how Dr Holden was able to report  Mr  Ali's  background;  whether
    that was based on what Mr Ali had told her and whether any  checks  had
    been carried out by her to verify his background.  This is not to  call
    into question Dr Holden's integrity but rather  to  identify  that  her
    report could have provided  clearer  details  of  why  a  judge  should
    consider Mr Ali's evidence to be reliable.

22. In those circumstances, in my judgment, Judge Cresswell was entitled to
    give those parts of Dr Holden's report, which relied upon  observations
    and assessment by Mr Ali, little or no weight.  I do not say that Judge
    Cresswell was bound to reach such a conclusion but merely that  such  a
    conclusion was open to him for those reasons which, in essence, he  set
    out in para 21(xvi) of his determination.

23. To that extent, therefore, I do not accept Mr  Neale's  submissions  in
    respect of ground 1.  However, as I have already  noted,  there  remain
    parts of Dr Holden's report, supportive of the appellant's claim, which
    were untainted by Mr Ali's involvement  and  which  the  judge  wrongly
    failed to take into account.

    Ground 2

24. In para 21(xxii),  Judge  Cresswell  counted  against  the  appellant's
    credibility, specifically his claim to be Hazara,  that  he  had  never
    claimed to speak Hazaragi.  The judge said this:

         "(xxii)   The  Appellant  had  never  suggested   that   he   spoke
                Hazaranghi.  At his screening interview, he was  interviewed
                in Dari.  He was asked to say what was his primary  language
                and the dialect he spoke and he said Dari/Farsi Persian.  He
                was asked to list all of the other languages and dialects he
                spoke and he listed Urdu, English and Greek.  No mention  at
                all of Hazaranghi there or at  any  time  during  interview.
                The interpreter at the hearing spoke with him in  Dari.   Ms
                Capel suggested that the Appellant would  be  identified  in
                other parts of Pakistan were he to relocate because he spoke
                Hazaranghi, but the simple truth is that he does  not  speak
                Hazaranghi; he speaks Dari,  Farsi,  Urdu  and  English  and
                there would  be  no  reason  to  speak  Hazaranghi  to  non-
                Hazaras."

25. There  are,  in  my  judgment,  a  number  of  difficulties  with  this
    reasoning.

26. First, in his interview  with  Dr  Holden  the  appellant  specifically
    identified that he spoke Hazaragi (see para 23(2) set out  above).   He
    also  identified  that  Hazaras  speak  Farsi/Dari  but  it  is  called
    "Hazaragi because Hazaragi is not a language it  is  an  accent".    In
    para 21(xxii), Judge Cresswell  criticises  the  appellant  as  he  has
    "never suggested" he spoke Hazaragi.  In fact, the appellant  had  done
    that in his interview with Dr Holden.

27. Secondly, the judge failed to grapple with the evidence before  him  as
    to whether, in fact, Hazaragi was a separate language  from  Dari/Farsi
    or a dialect or, as the appellant claimed, not a separate language  but
    one with "an accent".  In her report, Dr Holden at para 13 stated  that
    the "native language [of the Hazaras] is Persian  or  Dari."  She  then
    continues: "The Persian spoken by Hazara has a distinctive  accent  and
    terminology  which  are  strong  indicators  of  ethnic  and  religious
    affiliation."  The background evidence, referred to in  para  6  of  Mr
    Neale's skeleton argument, identifies the language of the Hazara as  "a
    dialect of Farsi" (see para 50 of  the  refusal  letter),  "an  Eastern
    dialect of Persian (Farsi) language" (see C97 of the bundle)  and  that
    it is simply Farsi (see C250 of the bundle).

28. In my judgment, it was not sufficient for the judge to observe that the
    appellant had been asked to  list  "other  languages  and  dialects  he
    spoke" but had not  referred  to  Hazaragi  only  Dari/Farsi.   It  was
    incumbent upon the  judge  to  grapple  with  the  background  evidence
    concerning the nature of Hazaragi - whether it was a separate  language
    at all, a dialect of Dari/Farsi or simply that language spoken with  an
    accent.   On  one  view  of  the  background  evidence,  there  was  no
    'omission' by the appellant to name  the  language  or  dialect  called
    Hazaragi.  And, of course, in his  interview  with  Dr  Holden  he  had
    referred to the fact that he spoke Hazaragi.

29. In my judgment,  Judge  Cresswell's  reasoning  in  para  21(xxii)  is,
    consequently, inadequate and flawed.

30. Although Mr Richards submitted that any error by the  judge  identified
    in grounds 1 and 2 was  not  material,  I  am  unable  to  accept  that
    submission.  The failure to consider Dr Holden's report in relation  to
    the appellant's claimed ethnicity, together  with  the  judge's  flawed
    reasoning in para 20(xxii), was material to the judge's crucial adverse
    finding.  It is  worthy  of  note  that  Judge  Cresswell  accepted  Dr
    Holden's report and opinion in respect of the issue of the  appellant's
    claimed nationality.  Whilst I accept that the  judge  did  give  other
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's claimed ethnicity, I am unable to
    conclude that, had  the  judge  not  fallen  into  the  errors  I  have
    identified, he would have made the same adverse finding in  respect  of
    the appellant's ethnicity.

31. For these reasons, the  judge's  adverse  finding  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's ethnicity cannot stand.

    Ground 3

32. Mr Neale submitted that the country guidance case of AH  was  12-years-
    old and that the judge was wrong  to  rely  upon  it  in  reaching  his
    finding that the appellant would not have a sufficiency of  protection,
    if he were an Hazara, in Pakistan.  Mr Neale pointed out  that  AH  was
    not concerned  with  the  Hazara  but  rather  with  Sunni  extremists.
    Subsequent decisions of the Upper  Tribunal  made  clear  that  whether
    there was a sufficiency of protection  in  Pakistan  depended  upon  an
    individual assessment of a person's circumstances (see AW  (sufficiency
    of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT  31  (IAC)).   In  particular,  the
    Upper Tribunal had acknowledged that a Christian facing  an  allegation
    of blasphemy would not receive a sufficiency of protection (see, AK and
    SK (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 569 (IAC)).

33. Mr Neale submitted that an individual assessment required the judge  to
    consider the up-to-date material concerning the position of  Hazara  in
    Quetta and elsewhere.   He  referred  me  to  a  number  of  background
    documents, including a Human Rights Watch report: "We are  the  walking
    dead/Killings of Shia Hazara in Balochistan, Pakistan" (June  2014)  at
    C168, in particular at C175, C177, C185, C189, C215 and C240.  Further,
    Mr Neale referred me to a number  of  documents  (at  para  10  of  his
    skeleton) including a UNHCR report dated 14 May 2014  (at  D57  of  the
    bundle),  in  particular  at  D97  which  noted  that  law  enforcement
    authorities are reportedly

         "unable or unwilling to protect members  of  religious  minorities,
         including Shias.  Sunni militant groups, such as the band Lashkar-e
         Jhangvi, reportedly operated  with  impunity,  including  in  areas
         where State authority is well established, such as Punjab  province
         and Karachi."

34. Mr Neale submitted that this documentation, which demonstrated that the
    Lashkar-e Jhangvi attacked Hazaras, post-dated the decision in AH.   He
    submitted that the judge in  his  reasoning,  in  particular  in  paras
    21(xxxvii) and 21(xxxviii), had failed to  consider  this  more  recent
    background evidence and had, therefore, wrongly applied the 12-year-old
    country guidance in AH.  Mr Neale submitted that it  was  not  adequate
    for the judge to say at para  21(xli):  "I  did  consider  the  country
    material in the appellant's bundle, but saw no  reason  to  follow  the
    country guidance in AH".

35. Mr Richards accepted that the judge's findings in relation  to  whether
    there  was  a  risk  to  Hazaras  in  Pakistan,  whether  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection and whether internal relocation was safe  and
    reasonable, were problematic.  He accepted that in para 21(xxxvii), the
    judge appeared to find that there was "a real risk that there would  be
    a lack of protection by the state authorities for  a  Hazara"  but  had
    then gone on to make the opposite finding.  Mr Richards  accepted  that
    the judge had not paid sufficient heed to the more recent  material  in
    relation to these matters.  However, he submitted that any error of law
    was not material unless grounds 1 and 2 were made out.

36. As I have already indicated, grounds 1 and 2 are made out to the extent
    I have indicated above.  In addition, as Mr Richards candidly accepted,
    Judge Cresswell  failed  to  grapple  with  the  up-to-date  background
    evidence  concerning  the  position  of  Hazaras  in   Pakistan.    The
    background evidence postdates the decision in AH  and,  in  particular,
    the first major attack by Lashkar-e Jhangvi on 4 July  2003  which  was
    some seven months after AH was promulgated.  It is far from  clear  why
    the judge appeared to accept there was  a  real  risk  of  a  "lack  of
    protection"  in  para  21(xxxvii)  when,  ultimately,  he  reached  the
    opposite finding.

37. I accept Mr  Neale's  submissions  that  the  Judge  erred  in  failing
    properly to consider the up-to-date country evidence.   In my judgment,
    the judge's reasoning that the appellant, if he were Hazara, had failed
    to  establish  a  real  risk  of  serious  ill-treatment,  a  lack   of
    sufficiency of protection or that he could not internally  relocate  is
    not sustainable in law.  As a consequence, those findings  also  cannot
    stand.

Decision

38. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand.

39. Both representatives invited me, in these circumstances, to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  However, Mr  Neale  invited  me  to
    preserve the judge's finding that the appellant had established that he
    was a citizen of Pakistan.  Mr Richards agreed that that finding should
    stand.

40. Consequently, given the nature and extent of the fact finding required,
    and having regard to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement, the appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Cresswell.

41. The only matter that is preserved is the finding that the appellant  is
    a citizen of Pakistan.  That apart, the First-tier Tribunal will decide
    afresh the appellant's appeal.




                                 Signed


                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                 Date
