
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07390/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6th April 2016                        |On 14th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                   Mr MAAB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, Solicitor Advocate, instructed by Aman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national  of  Sri  Lanka  whose  application  to  be
    treated as someone in need of international protection was rejected  by
    the Secretary of State and his subsequent appeal to First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Boyes dismissed in a decision promulgated on 8th December 2015.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  initially  refused  but
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in the following terms:-

         "The  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  has  distinguished  between  the
         Appellant's plight upon  return  to  Sri  Lanka  before  and  after
         January 2015 but it is arguable that the background  evidence  does
         not demonstrate sufficient durable changes to obviate a  real  risk
         for someone who it is accepted may  have  been  at  risk  prior  to
         January 2015. Ground 2 is not easy to understand.  It  is  asserted
         that an application for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  on  8th
         December 2013 but the FtT simply  refers  to  an  application  form
         dated 8th December 2013.  This ground  requires  clarification  but
         the point is sufficiently obscure and of fundamental importance  to
         the Appellant that I am prepared to grant permission in relation to
         it."

 3. In a Rule 24 response the Respondent  opposed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    saying that the judge had given adequate reasons for finding  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

 4. The judge had set out details of the Appellant's history in the  UK  at
    paragraphs 54 to 60.  The judge had correctly found that the  Appellant
    did not have section 3C leave from 11th December 2013  to  1st  October
    2014.  Therefore the Appellant could not show that he  had  ten  years'
    continuous leave in the UK in order to benefit from paragraph 276B.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 6. Before  me  Mr  Saeed  canvassed  numerous  paragraphs  of  the  recent
    background material which showed that post-January 2015 the history  of
    human rights abuses in Sri Lanka had continued without any real change.
     The judge had not directed herself to this evidence which  was  before
    her and thus the reasons given in paragraph 40 that the Appellant would
    not be at risk amounted to an error  of  law.   As  such  the  decision
    should be set aside and remade in the Appellant's favour.

 7. Secondly, the Appellant had made an application to  appeal  within  the
    time limit and as such continuous leave had been  established  even  if
    the application had not been received.

 8. For the Home Office it was said that the judge had been correct to find
    that she could not be satisfied, on the balance of  probabilities  that
    an appeal was instituted  by  the  Appellant.   The  argument  for  the
    Appellant on this aspect was unsound.  Clearly the matter  referred  to
    by the Appellant had to be received by the Secretary of  State  failing
    which the Regulations would make no sense.

 9. In terms of the asylum appeal the judge had found (paragraph  37)  that
    someone who criticised the previous President  on  social  media  would
    have been likely to have been  paid  a  visit  by  the  CID  or  others
    associated with the government.  At paragraph 39 the judge had accepted
    that this interest may have led to his arrest, detention and subsequent
    torture had he been  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  prior  to  January  2015
    (paragraph 39).  The judge then went  on  to  consider  the  particular
    profile of this Appellant having regard to GJ  and  others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  having  made  a
    point of saying that it was only the criticism of the  President  which
    would have caused him a difficulty had he been returned  to  Sri  Lanka
    prior to January 2015.

10. It was noteworthy that this Appellant had  no  LTTE  connections.   The
    judge had been correct to view his claim on the basis of the  facts  as
    found.

11. As such there was no error in law and the decision should stand.

12. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

13. Essentially the judge found that because of a change in the  government
    in Sri Lanka allied to the limited profile of the Appellant and "on the
    basis of the background country information before me"  (paragraph  51)
    she  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution or treatment contrary to Articles 2 or 3 ECHR  if  returned
    there.

14. The background  country  information  referred  to  by  the  judge  was
    contained in the Appellant's  bundle  and  Mr  Saeed  addressed  me  on
    various passages some of which I now refer to.  I refer to the "Country
    Information and Guidance" report dated September 2015 at page 52 of the
    bundle under paragraph 7.2.2.  It is reported there that the Foreign  &
    Commonwealth Office note that the human rights situation in  Sri  Lanka
    has not improved during the past three months.  An example is given  at
    paragraph 7.2.3.

15. On page 59 there is a report from Amnesty International dated September
    2015 which notes in the first paragraph that the legacy of impunity  in
    Sri Lanka is daunting and stretches back decades.  Alleged  war  crimes
    as  well  as  enforced  disappearances,  extrajudicial  executions  and
    torture that  continued  after  the  fighting  ended  have  never  been
    effectively investigated.  The report from the International Truth  and
    Justice Project dated 8th September  2015  notes  that  the  abduction,
    torture and sexual violence of mainly Tamils  by  the  security  forces
    continues despite the change of government after 8th January 2015.   On
    the same page it is noted that the 2015 cases follow the  same  pattern
    as abductions under the Rajapaksa government.  Page 65 of the bundle in
    the same report notes that the Sri Lankan government must as  a  matter
    of urgency embark on a programme of security sector reform in order  to
    dismantle the entrenched structures of represssion, torture and  sexual
    violence.  Page 69 from the International  Truth  and  Justice  Project
    dated 8th September 2015 points to Sri Lanka having a dismal record  of
    achieving truth of justice.  Many of the alleged perpetrators and their
    authority structures are still in place, still wielding power or  great
    influence, still allegedly committing ongoing violations.

16. Reference was made to the Freedom from Torture report dated 12th August
    2015 submitting that torture by the Sri Lankan military and  police  is
    deeply entrenched.  At page 78 it is said that more than a third of the
    MLRs (medical legal reports) show Tamils being tortured after returning
    to Sri Lanka from the UK usually following a period of  study  to  work
    and often when visiting their family back  home.   A  report  from  the
    International Truth  and  Justice  Project  dated  23rd  July  2015  is
    contained at page 84 of the bundle.  It is said that the use of torture
    and sexual violence was part of  a  well-coordinated  policy  and  that
    there is a continuation  of  state-organised  abductions,  torture  and
    sexual violence by  the  security  forces  long  after  the  change  of
    government in January 2015.  Page 89 points to the lack  of  action  by
    the authorities.  Page 101 refers to the surveillance and  intimidation
    of witnesses which has continued unabated after the  8th  January  2015
    elections.

17. Page 138 is a report from the INFORM Human Rights Documentation  Centre
    dated 23rd June 2015.  It notes that incidents relating  to  repression
    of dissent continue to  be  reported  under  the  Sirisena  presidency,
    despite a general  feeling  of  having  more  freedom  than  under  the
    previous presidency.  Page 160 refers to a report from the INFORM Human
    Rights Documentation Centre noting the repression of dissenters in  Sri
    Lanka in the first 100 days of the new presidency from 9th  January  to
    19th April 2015.  Page 166 from Human Rights Watch notes that there has
    been a promotion of a senior officer whose division was  implicated  in
    serious human rights abuses which casts doubt on government pledges  to
    credibly investigate alleged war crimes etc.

18. None of this background material was referred to by the  judge  all  of
    which is relevant to whether or not the Appellant is at  real  risk  on
    return.  Having found that the Appellant  was  at  such  real  risk  in
    January 2015 there would need to be evidence that the resultant changes
    on the ground justified the judge's conclusion that the Appellant would
    no longer be at risk.  As can be  seen,  far  from  being  any  changes
    pointing in the direction that the Appellant would not be  at  risk  on
    return the background material referred  to  above  goes  entirely  the
    other way.  It follows that by not  giving  weight  to  the  background
    material before her the judge erred in law and the decision is not safe
    and must therefore be set aside.

19. The judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  a  "relatively  low  level
    activist".  He was a member of the SLMDI UK.  It  seems  reasonable  to
    classify him as someone who is a human rights activist in terms of  GJ.
    It seems to me as submitted by Mr Saeed that he falls into the category
    of those identified in head note (7)(b) being a human  rights  activist
    who had been critical of the Sri Lankan Government.

20.  In  terms  of  the  Practice  Directions  paragraph  12.2  a  reported
    determination of the Tribunal bearing the letters "CG" shall be treated
    as an authoritative finding on the country guidance issue identified in
    the determination.  It is binding on the Tribunal.  As such it seems to
    me that the Appellant is someone who does remain at risk of persecution
    and serious ill-treatment as at the date of hearing before  me  and  is
    therefore entitled to the benefit of the Conventions.

21. For the sake of completeness I consider that there is no merit  in  the
    second Ground of Appeal.  I agree with the Rule 24  notice  which  says
    that the Appellant did not have section 3C  leave  from  11th  December
    2013 to 1st October 2014.  The burden of proof falls on  the  Appellant
    to prove he had applied timeously for further leave to remain  and  the
    judge gave clear reasons why she was not satisfied that the appeal  had
    been instituted by the Appellant (paragraph 58).  This is,  however,  a
    matter of little consequence.

22. The appeal must be allowed under the  1951  Convention  and  Article  3
    ECHR. I shall continue the anonymity order.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it  under  the  1951
Convention and Article 3 ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

