
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07109/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th March 2016                           |On 15th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                  [ALICE N]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with
    permission, against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Nicholson hereinafter "the judge"), promulgated  on  5th  August  2015,
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of 2nd April  2015  refusing
    to grant her asylum or any other form of international  protection  and
    deciding to remove her from the UK.

 2. By way of background, the Appellant was born on  [  ]  1988  and  is  a
    national of Kenya.  She entered the  UK  on  1st  October  2013  having
    obtained leave as a Tier 5 Migrant up to 30th September 2014.  I am not
    sure of the precise date on which she claimed asylum but it appears  to
    have been made prior to  her  above  leave  expiring.   In  any  event,
    nothing turns on that.

 3. When she claimed asylum the Appellant set out  the  facts  underpinning
    her claim in some detail.  She said that she  and  her  family  are  of
    Kikuyu ethnicity and that she had received an education  in  Kenya  and
    thereafter, in May of 2011, had obtained  a  secretarial  post  with  a
    transport company which was managed by one James [N].   She  said  that
    the two entered into a relationship and that he encouraged her to go to
    Saudi Arabia to take employment there.  She did travel to that  country
    in September 2011, believing that she  would  be  working  there  as  a
    secretary.  However, she says that upon arrival she was met by a friend
    of James [N] who raped her and forced her to be a sex worker.   In  due
    course, though, she was told by that friend that she had to  return  to
    Kenya and she did so.  James [N] met her upon return but when she  said
    to him that she wished to inform the police in Kenya  as  to  what  had
    happened to her he had  her  led  away  at  knifepoint  by  some  "body
    guards".  She says that, that evening, she was taken to a ceremony  and
    made to take a Mungiki and that she believed, in consequence,  that  if
    she disobeyed instructions she would suffer a painful death.  She  says
    she was also told that it was the Mungiki sect who had been responsible
    for her being sent to Saudi Arabia and having to act as  a  sex  worker
    there and that this made her realise that James [N] was a leader of the
    Mungiki sect.

 4. She says that, in due course, James [N] arranged for her  to  obtain  a
    Tier 5 visa enabling her to come to the UK.   The  basis  of  the  visa
    application was that she was to work here as a volunteer for a UK based
    Christian charity.  She says, though, that she knew the  intention  was
    that she would, once again, be forced into sex work.  However, although
    she was told that she would be met by persons linked to James [N]  when
    she arrived in the UK, there was, in fact, no one there  to  meet  her.
    Not knowing what to do she says that she phoned the  charity  and  that
    some one from there agreed to pick her up and  then  took  her  to  the
    charity centre where she did stay for a time and  start  to  carry  out
    some voluntary work.  She says, though, that  two  weeks  later,  being
    frightened  of  the  implications  of  the  oath  she  had  taken,  she
    telephoned James [N] and told him where she was.  He instructed her  to
    leave the charity and she did so, being subsequently met by  three  men
    linked to James [N] who did, once again, force her to be a sex  worker.



 5. The Appellant says that, having been forced to carry out sex work,  she
    met a Lithuanian woman named Martina who was in the same  situation  as
    her and who explained to her that many African women had  been  tricked
    into prostitution by being made to take such  an  oath.   Further,  she
    says that she had been instructed by James [N] that she had to speak to
    him via the telephone at a certain time each  night  but  that  on  one
    occasion she had been unable to because she was with a client.  She had
    noted that, despite her failure to do that, nothing adverse happened to
    her and the combination of that and what Martina had  told  her  caused
    her to realise that, in fact, breaching the terms  of  the  oath  would
    have no effect.  Armed with that realisation she left the  house  where
    she was being kept and forced to work and reported what had happened to
    her to the police.  This led to the  Home  Office  Competent  Authority
    considering her allegations but that authority decided that she had not
    been trafficked.

 6. The Appellant, notwithstanding the  view  of  the  Competent  Authority
    which is of course not binding upon any court or Tribunal, averred that
    she had been a victim of trafficking and that if she had to  return  to
    Kenya she would be at risk at the hands of James [N]  and  the  Mungiki
    sect.

 7. The Respondent, put simply, did not  believe  that  the  Appellant  had
    given  a  truthful  account  of  events.   Therefore,  the   Respondent
    concluded that the Appellant would not be at  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm upon return to Kenya and, accordingly,  the  asylum  claim
    was refused.

 8. The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum and  the  decision
    to remove her was heard by the judge on 21st July 2015.   She  was  not
    represented at that hearing but the Respondent  was  represented  by  a
    Presenting Officer.  She gave oral evidence and was cross-examined.  In
    addition to having the benefit of  her  oral  evidence  the  judge  had
    various documents before him including a report  of  a  psychotherapist
    and a report of a caseworker from an organisation called  City  Hearts,
    which he described as being "a charity that supports  vulnerable  women
    and in particular victims of trafficking".  The judge did  not  have  a
    copy of the Competent Authority's decision nor, as  he  noted,  did  he
    have any evidence regarding  any  investigations  carried  out  by  the
    police as a consequence of the report the Appellant had made nor did he
    have any evidence from the Christian charity  the  Appellant  says  she
    conducted some voluntary work for and stayed at having come to the  UK.



 9. The judge decided after what has to be described  as  a  very  careful,
    thorough and diligent consideration of the evidence  which  was  before
    him, concluded that he was unable to accept the account offered by  the
    Appellant, though he appeared to contemplate that  she  may  well  have
    been the victim of some trauma  at  some  time  in  her  past,  and  he
    dismissed the appeal on that basis.  It is right to say that the appeal
    largely turned on credibility though, I suppose, it might have been the
    case that had the judge believed all of the account he may have reached
    the view that there would be a sufficiency of  protection  for  her  in
    Kenya  or  that  she  could  take  advantage  of  an  internal   flight
    alternative.  However, as  a  result  of  his  disbelief,  it  was  not
    necessary for him to look  at  those  aspects.   He  did  express  some
    disquiet as to the lack of any evidence  from  the  Christian  charity,
    from the police and from the Competent Authority and  said  this  about
    it;

         "45. What does appear to be clear is that the  Competent  Authority
             made a final decision and decided, albeit again to a different
             standard - a balance of probabilities - that the Appellant had
             not been trafficked.  Paragraph 27 of the  letter  of  refusal
             specifically referred to the conclusive grounds  decision  but
             unfortunately no copy of that decision was placed  before  me.
             Mr Richardson [the Home Office Presenting  Officer]  explained
             that he was not able to place a copy before me for reasons  of
             confidentiality  although  given  that  the   Appellant   must
             presumably have received a copy it is difficult to  understand
             the logic of that particular argument.

         46.  I also note that unfortunately there is no evidence before  me
             regarding apparent police investigations which are referred to
             at question 140 of the interview.

         47.  Finally, I simply place on record that there is no documentary
             evidence before me from the Ashburnham  Christian  Charity  in
             relation to  the  Appellant's  actual  time  working  for  the
             charity.

         48.  That is unfortunate.  Although it is the Respondent's position
             that it is for the Appellant to prove  her  case,  commonsense
             and good practice suggest that  where  facts  can  be  checked
             easily  within  this  country  that  is  something  that   the
             Respondent should consider doing.  It is easy  to  see  how  a
             letter  from  the  Ashburnham  Christian  Charity  might  have
             assisted  the  Tribunal  in  reaching  a  decision.   If,  for
             example, the charity had confirmed that the Appellant  was  at
             liberty to come and go from the Ashburnham Centre  and  indeed
             that she did so on a regular basis  or  did  not  leave  until
             September that could have shown that her story about events in
             this country was patently untrue.  Equally, if a  letter  from
             the charity had indicated that the Appellant had been troubled
             during her time at the Ashburnham Centre,  but  unprepared  to
             explain the source of her troubles and worries  to  Ashburnham
             Centre staff, that might have assisted the Appellant's case.

         49.  However, it is not for me to speculate as to what may  or  may
             not have  been  revealed,  had  enquiries  been  made  of  the
             Ashburnham Centre prior  to  a  decision  on  the  appellant's
             application being taken or at least prior to the hearing.  Nor
             do I draw any adverse inference from any  failure  to  provide
             corroborative evidence from the Ashburnham Centre.  So far  as
             the  Appellant's  case  is  concerned,  corroboration  is  not
             required for a positive credibility finding."

10. The judge  also  expressed  the  view,  prior  to  embarking  upon  his
    credibility  assessment,  that  the  Appellant  "appeared  to   be   an
    articulate and intelligent young woman" but pointed out that one of the
    reports before him had suggested she was  "extremely  traumatised"  and
    observed that trauma "can affect memory and  understanding".   He  also
    reminded himself that, as he put it, the actions of  traffickers  "must
    not be viewed through the eyes of the man on the Strand in London"  but
    that, following Guinaz Esen v SSHD [2006] CSIH 23, judges "are entitled
    to draw inferences of implausibility when assessing credibility and  to
    draw on their commonsense and ability to identify what was or  was  not
    plausible as long as it is based on hard evidence."

11. The judge then embarked upon his credibility considerations.  He did so
    by identifying matters which,  in  his  view,  tended  to  support  the
    proposition that the Appellant was or may have been telling the  truth.
    In this context he noted that  it  was  not  disputed  that  she  is  a
    national of Kenya and that, since  she  had  been  interviewed  in  the
    Kikuyu language it was likely that she was a member of that tribe.   He
    noted some documentary evidence suggesting that she had been  in  Saudi
    Arabia at some point and that there was background country material  to
    indicate that Kenya is a source country for women subjected  to  forced
    labour and sex trafficking and that some Kenyans do voluntarily migrate
    to other countries, particularly Saudi Arabia, in search of  employment
    and some may end up being exploited.  He noted that background  country
    material suggested that the Mungiki is a secretive sect which does  use
    oaths to control people.  He observed that,  for  the  most  part,  the
    Appellant had been firm in  giving  her  oral  evidence  and  that  her
    evidence was, in some respects, "very detailed".   He  also  noted  the
    content of the two reports referred to above which had  talked  of  her
    suffering from  insomnia  and  nightmares  and  being  traumatised  and
    thought it unlikely that she would have  been  able  to  persuade  both
    authors of those reports that she had suffered "some sort of trauma  if
    in fact she had suffered no trauma at all".  Accordingly, he said  that
    he would place weight on the two reports whilst acknowledging  that  it
    did not necessarily follow that everything she had told the authors  of
    the reports was reasonably likely to be true.

12. Having made those points the judge then turned to matters which, in his
    view, tended to support the proposition that the Appellant was  not  or
    may not have been telling the truth.  Although the relevant passage  is
    quite extensive I have decided to set it out in full because  it  does,
    to my mind, serve to demonstrate the care and thoroughness  with  which
    the  judge  approached  his  task.   As  to  the  adverse   credibility
    considerations he said this;

         "64. It is the Respondent's case that there are a number of factors
             which undermine the credibility of the Appellant's  case.   Mr
             Richardson suggested  that  some  of  these  factors  strongly
             indicate that the Appellant's story is not  reasonably  likely
             to be true.

         65.  First, there are issues with regard to the Appellant's  claims
             in relation to the difficulties she had in Saudi Arabia:

             (i)  Amongst the papers submitted by the  Appellant  with  the
                  visit visa application is the foreign employment  contract
                  between the Appellant and Ahmed Ibrahim [A], her  employer
                  in Saudi Arabia.

             (ii) The document shows on its face that the Appellant  signed
                  this on 16th September 2011  before  she  left  for  Saudi
                  Arabia.  However, despite the  Appellant's  evidence  that
                  she thought that she was going to Saudi Arabia to work  as
                  a secretary the contract on its face states that  she  was
                  going to Saudi Arabia to work as a teacher.

             (iii)    This was put to the Appellant at question 62  of  her
                  second asylum interview.  She said that  as  they  do  not
                  speak English in Saudi Arabia she could teach  English  at
                  the same time as working as a secretary.

             (iv) I note that reply but it was essentially the  Appellant's
                  claim that she thought her main job would  be  that  of  a
                  secretary notwithstanding that  the  contract  she  signed
                  said she was to be a teacher.

             (v)  It is important in this  respect  to  remember  that  the
                  Appellant  signed  that   contract   before   having   any
                  difficulties with James [N] or anyone else.  At very least
                  it suggests that she was happy to sign  a  contract  which
                  was not accurate in order to ensure entry to Saudi Arabia.

             (vi) Perhaps more pertinently the contract shows on  its  face
                  that the document  itself  was  signed  by  her  employer,
                  Ahmed, on 15th September 2011 the day before the Appellant
                  herself signed it.

             (vii)    Yet, at questions  31  to  33  of  her  first  asylum
                  interview the Appellant said  that  when  she  arrived  in
                  Saudi Arabia she gave her contract to Ahmed, that  he  did
                  not sign it, that when she got to the house she asked  him
                  to sign it because she had already signed and that he then
                  turned against her and told her there was no such job as a
                  secretary.  When the issue was raised again at question 63
                  of the second interview the Appellant said  that  she  did
                  not know whether Ahmed had signed it but he did  not  sign
                  it when she was there.

             (viii)    I  have  difficulty  accepting  that  part  of   the
                  Appellant's account.  If the  document  had  already  been
                  signed by Ahmed, as the copy document purports on its face
                  to show, then there is no reason why the  Appellant  would
                  have asked Ahmed to sign it as she claimed.   Moreover  it
                  is by no means clear why, if Ahmed decided to sign it at a
                  later date, he would have felt it  necessary  to  backdate
                  the signature to a date earlier in September - albeit that
                  I remind myself that  it  is  important  to  proceed  with
                  caution when assessing the actions of alleged traffickers.

         66.  Secondly, I note in passing that at question 47 of the  asylum
             interview the Appellant was asked whether James [N] knew  what
             was happening to her  when  she  was  in  Saudi  Arabia.   She
             replied that whenever she 'spoke with him on the phone  I  did
             not think he knew but when I returned home I realised that  he
             is the one who had planned all this.'  She  then  went  on  at
             questions 48 and 49 to say that she tried  to  speak  to  him,
             that he brushed off what she tried to tell him and told her to
             be patient, that he said she was being observed and  that  the
             one who worked best would get a job as a secretary.  She  also
             said that when she tried to tell him what was happening to her
             in Saudi Arabia, he said that he did not believe her.

         67.  It is  very  difficult  to  accept  that  this  Appellant,  an
             intelligent and articulate young woman, would  have  continued
             to think that James [N] had not been involved  in  trafficking
             her to Saudi  Arabia  into  prostitution  until  she  actually
             arrived back in Kenya, as she indicated in answer to  question
             47 of the asylum interview - bearing in mind that she had said
             that James [N] had arranged the job for her in  Saudi  Arabia,
             that Ahmed was supposedly a friend of James [N], that she  had
             been  forced  into  prostitution  on  arrival  and   kept   in
             prostitution over  a  prolonged  period  and  that  James  [N]
             ostensibly refused to believe her and brushed it aside.

         68.  Thirdly, I note  that  in  her  first  asylum  interview,  the
             Appellant gave  a  relatively  detailed  description  of  what
             happened when she arrived back in Kenya.  At  question  77  of
             her first asylum interview she said that James [N] took her to
             a restaurant and bought her tea.  She then went on to say that
             she asked him if she could use his phone; that  she  stood  up
             and went to use the public phone booth;  that  he  pulled  her
             back; and that he told her that she  was  going  nowhere.   At
             that point, according to her  reply  to  question  78  of  the
             interview, she told him 'do you know what I have gone  through
             in Saudi Arabia?  Why are you refusing me to make a call to my
             parents?'  She then went on to say that when she mentioned the
             name Saudi Arabia and what she had been through, he  became  a
             different person and summoned his bodyguard.

         69.  In contrast, in her witness statement the Appellant said  that
             she had asked James [N] to use his  phone,  that  he  refused,
             that she got upset and that she asked him if he was  aware  of
             what had happened to her Saudi Arabia.   She  added,  however,
             that she then mentioned that she had to ring the police,  that
             she then stood up to go to the public phone booth and  it  was
             at that point that James [N] summoned the bodyguards.

         70.  It follows that at interview she  appeared  to  suggest  quite
             clearly that it was her mention of Saudi Arabia  coupled  with
             her decision to ring  her  parents  which  precipitated  James
             [N]'s reaction, whereas in her witness statement she suggested
             that it was actually her indication that she was about to ring
             the police.

         71.  Fourthly, Mr Richardson drew attention to issues regarding the
             Appellant's visit visa application:

             (i)  The Appellant now claims that both the visit visa and the
                  Tier 5 visa applications were made by James [N]  and  that
                  although she obtained the letters in support, she  did  so
                  entirely under his direction.  Indeed she told me that  at
                  one point he wrote things down that she had to say to  the
                  people who were going to be providing  her  with  letters.
                  It follows that she was saying that the letters in support
                  of the visas were written to James [N]'s order.

             (ii) Mr Richardson pointed out, however,  that  that  appeared
                  highly unlikely given that the letters written in  support
                  of the visit visa application were contradictory.  So,  by
                  way of example, in support of her visit  visa  application
                  there was a letter from the Springs of  Bethel  Ministries
                  signed by the bishop stating that she would be  travelling
                  to a church conference and then going back to Saudi Arabia
                  where she  had  a  working  contract  to  September  2013,
                  whereas  in  another  letter  from  the  Body  of   Christ
                  Children's Centre written on 26th March 2013 it was stated
                  that she would be returning to work there instead.

             (iii)    It does seem to me most unlikely that James [N] would
                  have gone to such trouble to force the Appellant to obtain
                  letters written to his order and then arrange for  her  to
                  get those letters to say two different things.  It is  far
                  more likely that these letters would have been written  in
                  two different ways if in  fact  they  were  being  written
                  independently by two different people  who  had  different
                  conceptions of what the Appellant intended to do.

             (iv) Mr Richardson also noted  that  despite  the  Appellant's
                  oral  evidence  to  me  that  she  was  the  one  who  had
                  effectively arranged for these letters and documents to be
                  obtained, at question 97 of her first asylum interview she
                  said that James [N]  had  arranged  the  visas  and,  more
                  pertinently, at question 60 of her  second  interview  she
                  indicated that the important thing for her was  simply  to
                  sign the  documentation.   No  mention  was  made  of  her
                  obtaining these letters at that time.

             (v)   Mr  Richardson  further  noted  that  initially  in  her
                  evidence the Appellant said to me that she only worked for
                  the Body of Christ Children's  Centre  until  the  end  of
                  February 2013.  She confirmed that she  had  worked  there
                  for just a month.  Yet according to the letter  from  this
                  organisation, which was dated 26th  March  2013,  she  was
                  still working there at the time.

             (vi) Faced with this inconstancy,  the  Appellant  first  said
                  that the letter was simply a supporting document and  that
                  she was just  following  James  [N]'s  orders  about  what
                  should go in the letter.  Mr Richardson  made  the  point,
                  however, that the issue was not what James [N] had or  had
                  not told her, but why the Body of Christ Children's Centre
                  would have said on 26th March 2013 that  she  was  working
                  there if in fact, as she told me, she was  not.   At  that
                  point the Appellant  said  that  she  could  not  remember
                  exactly when she finished.  Mr  Richardson  asked  if  she
                  could remember roughly.   She  said  that  she  could  not
                  because she worked part-time.

             (vii)    At paragraph 30 of the  letter  of  refusal,  it  was
                  pointed  out  that  despite  the  Appellant's  claim  that
                  everything had been arranged by James [N],  in  her  visit
                  visa application the Appellant  stated  that  it  was  her
                  parents who would be her Sponsors and undertake the  costs
                  of flights to the United Kingdom which the church  mission
                  letters   in   support   explicitly   stated    was    the
                  responsibility of  the  participant.   The  Appellant  has
                  since accepted that that application failed for  financial
                  reasons but it is difficult to see how it would have  done
                  so if in fact the  Appellant  was  under  the  control  of
                  traffickers who surely would have made  certain  that  she
                  had the necessary financial  documents  to  accompany  the
                  other documents in support.  It is in  addition  difficult
                  to accept that she would have indicated that  her  parents
                  were the Sponsors if in fact there was  some  third  party
                  agency involved.

         72.  Fifthly, Mr Richardson also queried why traffickers would have
             gone through  the  complex  process  of  trying  to  have  the
             Appellant brought to the United Kingdom as a  Tier  5  Migrant
             with a placement at Ashburnham.

         73.  As I have indicated it is most unfortunate there is no  up-to-
             date evidence from the Ashburnham Centre before me  but  there
             are letters from the Ashburnham Centre which were  written  in
             support of the second application for  a  visa  as  a  Tier  5
             Temporary Charity Worker.

         74.  In  those  letters  it  is  made  clear  that  candidates  are
             carefully selected for their genuine desire to grow  in  their
             faith as well as  improve  their  English  ability;  that  all
             candidates complete a comprehensive application form  and  are
             required to write detailed information  about  themselves  and
             supply two references (one of which must be from a  pastor  or
             minister); and that applicants would then  need  to  obtain  a
             temporary worker's visa from the  British  Embassy  using  the
             letter.  Whilst the  application  forms  which  the  Appellant
             completed for the Ashburnham Centre are not before me there is
             sufficient  in  the  letter  from  the  Ashburnham  Centre  to
             indicate this was by no means an easy route through  which  to
             traffic a person to the United Kingdom.  The Ashburnham Centre
             was clearly satisfied on the  basis  of  all  the  information
             provided that the Appellant was genuinely  travelling  to  the
             United Kingdom to work as a temporary charity worker  for  the
             Centre and the evidence indicates that in order to reach  that
             conclusion they would need to have  seen  references  from  at
             least one pastor or a minister.

         75.  Sixthly, I note that there have been  inconsistencies  in  the
             Appellant's account of her arrival in this country:

             (i)  At questions 100 and 101 of the  asylum  interview,  when
                  the Appellant was asked what  she  thought  she  would  be
                  doing in the United Kingdom she said 'I was told  that  to
                  take the first job that comes my way and then hope to  get
                  a secretary's job as per my qualification'.  She then went
                  on to say that on arrival she actually went to work for  a
                  charity.

             (ii) At question 67 of a second asylum interview the Appellant
                  was asked why she though James [N] allowed her to work for
                  the charity for six months when he could have been  making
                  money from her and she said 'he knows that in this country
                  there are rules and that is why he asked me to go  to  the
                  charity straight, so that the charity would not  look  for
                  me if I did not turn up'.

             (iii)    In marked contrast, however, the  Appellant  told  me
                  that she knew she was going to be forced into prostitution
                  when she came to this country and that it had  never  been
                  intended that she should work for the charity at all.  She
                  told me that she had been told that two  black  men  would
                  meet her on arrival and it was only when there was  no-one
                  there to meet  her  that  she  contracted  the  Ashburnham
                  Centre and somebody picked her up.

             (iv) In her witness statement she sought to explain  away  her
                  remarks at question 67 of the second asylum  interview  by
                  saying that her understanding of this question was:

                      'What  I  thought  at  that  moment  when  doing  the
                      interview and what I had already discovered were  his
                      plans but not  before  discovering  his  plans.   The
                      reason as to this is because when coming to the UK  I
                      had already been instructed that I will be picked  up
                      by two men at the airport but it did not go according
                      to plan as I was picked up by a lady from the charity
                      and back in my mind I thought she had  been  sent  by
                      these two men that I was meant to meet.  When driving
                      to the charity she seemed friendly but  I  was  still
                      not trusting her even though she said  she  was  from
                      the charity as I was still convinced back in my  head
                      that she was among  the  people  I  was  to  meet  in
                      connection with the Mungiki ...'.

             (v)  I have difficulty accepting this explanation  because  it
                  is quite clear that the Appellant volunteered in answer to
                  question 67 that she had been told by James [N] to  go  to
                  the charity 'straight' so that the charity would not  look
                  for her if she did not turn  up.   Moreover,  despite  the
                  Appellant's suggestion in her witness statement  that  she
                  did not trust the lady from the charity who picked her  up
                  and thought that she was connected with  the  Mungiki,  in
                  evidence to me the Appellant  gave  a  different  account.
                  She said that she had rung the charity, that  the  charity
                  said they were not expecting her, that  the  charity  told
                  her that by chance one of their drivers was in London  and
                  that that driver would pick her up.  The clear  indication
                  therefore was that these people were not expecting her and
                  had nothing to do with her traffickers at all.

             (vi) Mr Richardson questioned how a trafficking group that had
                  taken such trouble to get  the  Appellant  to  the  United
                  Kingdom on a Tier 5 visa and invested in her flight  would
                  then have failed to meet her on arrival.  I bear  in  mind
                  of course that mistakes do happen.  Contacts might  go  to
                  the wrong airport.  It is difficult however to accept that
                  the Appellant would have had on her the  telephone  number
                  for the Ashburnham Centre - an establishment that she  was
                  not expecting to go to at all - but would not have had  on
                  her any contact number for the traffickers.

         76.  Seventhly, Mr Richardson raised  serious  concerns  about  the
             Appellant's evidence of her time at the Ashburnham Centre:

             (i)  It  is  important  when  considering  this  part  of  the
                  Appellant's claim to remember that it is her case that she
                  was so in thrall to the Mungiki oath which she had  signed
                  that she feared she might die at any moment if  she  broke
                  the oath.  It is her case that she was so in thrall to the
                  oath that she did not tell her parents with whom she lived
                  when she got back to Kenya  even  though  they  themselves
                  were  not  Mungiki;  that   she   followed   James   [N]'s
                  instructions in getting letters so that he could obtain  a
                  visa to bring her to the United Kingdom for  prostitution;
                  that two weeks after coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  she
                  obtained a sim card and rang James [N] such was  her  fear
                  of the oath; and indeed that it was not until  much  later
                  when she heard the prostitute, Martina, talking about  the
                  oath and  was  then  late  in  answering  a  telephone  in
                  contravention of the oath that she realised that the  oath
                  had no power.

             (ii) Is it really likely that in that  context  the  Appellant
                  would have waited two weeks before ringing James  [N]  or,
                  if two weeks had gone by, that she would not have realised
                  by then that the oath had little if any power upon her?

             (iii)    Furthermore, the Appellant's evidence about  why  she
                  did not leave the Ashburnham Centre  thereafter  has  been
                  contradictory.  In her first  asylum  interview  she  said
                  that she did voluntary work for the charity and asked what
                  happened when this finished, she said 'I  had  one  year's
                  contract.  James called me and told me that from May I had
                  to leave the job and go to the other  job  like  in  Saudi
                  Arabia'.

             (iv) In her witness statement she said that she  travelled  to
                  the UK, that she was picked up by a member of the  charity
                  and then added 'I volunteered for the charity until  April
                  2014 that is when James [N] had ordered me  to  leave  the
                  place'.

             (v)  The inference to be drawn from those statements  is  that
                  James [N] did not require her to leave until April or May.
                   However, whilst  acknowledging  the  great  caution  that
                  should be taken before assessing how traffickers  operate,
                  bearing in mind that these men  are  said  to  have  taken
                  considerable trouble to bring the Appellant to the  United
                  Kingdom through a complex route that  it  had  never  been
                  intended she would work at the Ashburnham Centre  -  which
                  suggests that there would have been plans for her  -  that
                  her claim that no-one needed her to leave  the  Ashburnham
                  Centre until April or May 2014 lacks all credibility.

             (vi) In contrast to the statements made at interview,  at  the
                  hearing the Appellant told me repeatedly  that  after  she
                  contracted James [N] two weeks following her arrival  here
                  in October 2013, he threatened her and told her  that  she
                  had to leave the Ashburnham Centre.  In  cross-examination
                  she first said that  James  [N]  was  not  happy  when  he
                  learned she was at the Ashburnham Centre.  Then  she  said
                  that James [N] used to call her and tell her that she  had
                  to get out of that place.  Then she said  that  James  [N]
                  kept threatening her to get out.  Then she  repeated  that
                  James told her to get out regularly.

             (vii)    Asked, however, why she did not get out, she said she
                  could not do so because the Ashburnham Centre  had  rules,
                  that if you have signed a contract you could not leave  in
                  your own time and that in order to leave,  the  Ashburnham
                  Centre would first have to get  someone  to  replace  you,
                  that she told them that she wanted to leave but they  kept
                  saying that they had to find a replacement.

             (viii)   then she said that she could  not  go  because  'they
                  were the people who had kept her' but when  Mr  Richardson
                  pointed out that the Ashburnham Centre was hardly a prison
                  she said that you could not leave  the  Ashburnham  Centre
                  without getting a taxi and for this you would have  to  go
                  to reception and say when you were being picked up.

             (ix) Finally, she said that she was happy  at  the  Ashburnham
                  Centre and did not want to leave and that  she  eventually
                  left because she knew that when her visa ran out she would
                  have to go back to Kenya and she would be at risk from the
                  Mungiki at that time.

             (x)  the difficulty with all this evidence is  that  if  James
                  [N] had been  threatening  her  from  October  2013  until
                  April/May 2014, telling her to get out, then  if  she  had
                  been as in thrall to the Mungiki oath as she claimed,  she
                  would have done so.

             (xi) The suggestion that she could not  leave  the  Ashburnham
                  Centre, a  charitable  establishment  for  volunteers,  is
                  completely  incredible.   If  her  traffickers  had  never
                  intended that she should go to the  Ashburnham  Centre  as
                  she claims  they  would  simply  have  turned  up  at  the
                  Ashburnham Centre to get her or have arranged to meet  her
                  outside of the gates.  Her suggestion that she  could  not
                  leave because the establishment had rules and because  she
                  would have to go to reception to organise a  taxi  is  not
                  believable in the context of her claim that she was  under
                  the control of  abusive  potentially  violent  traffickers
                  believing that if she failed to adhere to  their  commands
                  she would die instantly.

         77.   Finally,  I  note  a  number  of  minor  concerns  about  the
             Appellant's claim that having left the Ashburnham  Centre  she
             went back into prostitution:

             (i)  In evidence to me the Appellant said that when she was at
                  the Ashburnham Centre, James [N] rang her every two  weeks
                  or so.  I checked that evidence with her and  pointed  out
                  to her that when she was asked at questions 32 and  33  of
                  the second asylum  interview  whether  James  [N]  was  in
                  contact with her when she was in the  UK  and  if  so  how
                  often, she said in contrast that he was  in  contact  with
                  her until she ran away and he used to call her every night
                  at 10pm.

             (ii) Faced with the apparent inconsistency, the Appellant said
                  that at her interview she meant that  he  was  in  contact
                  with her every night when  she  had  left  the  Ashburnham
                  Centre - when she was under the control of  his  men  once
                  again - although why he would have felt  it  necessary  to
                  contact her in those circumstances but not at a time  when
                  she was apparently free at the Ashburnham  Centre  is  not
                  clear.

             (iii)    Leaving that aside in evidence to me, despite  saying
                  at interview that he contacted her every night (apparently
                  when she was under the control of his men) she said to  me
                  that she had not spoken to James since three weeks  before
                  she escaped.

             (iv) Perhaps of most concern I note that at  question  129  of
                  the asylum interview the Appellant suggested that when she
                  made her escape she was able to  take  her  passport  with
                  her; she said her passport  was  in  her  pocket.   It  is
                  unclear why her traffickers would have  left  her  with  a
                  passport, the one document that would have enabled her  to
                  escape."

13. Having done all of that the judge, in light of the competing matters of
    evidence he had identified, set out his findings  and  conclusions  and
    explained why he felt unable to accept  the  account  as  offered.   In
    doing that, and this again serves  to  illustrate  the  diligence  with
    which he approached this task, he said this;

         "78. As I have indicated I have to look  at  the  evidence  in  the
             round.  In doing so I have borne in mind  that  the  Appellant
             was unrepresented, that it is  said  she  has  been  receiving
             antidepressant medication and that  those  who  have  suffered
             trauma can find it difficult to talk about their past.

         79.  There is evidence to support the Appellant's  claims  in  this
             case:

             (i)  There is no dispute that she is a Kenyan national  and  I
                  accept that she is of Kikuyu  ethnicity  bearing  in  mind
                  that she was interviewed in the Kikuyu language.

             (ii) There is a considerable amount of background evidence  to
                  indicate that young women are  effectively  trafficked  to
                  countries such as Saudi Arabia on the promise of work  and
                  then forced into domestic servitutde or prostitution.

             (iii)    The Appellant's account  of  taking  a  Mungiki  oath
                  accords broadly with the  background  evidence  about  the
                  Mungiki and I  bear  in  mind  that  the  Mungiki  operate
                  principally amongst the Kikuyu.  I also bear in mind  that
                  the Appellant's account of working for  a  matatu  company
                  under the management control of a Mungiki  leader  is  not
                  inherently implausible despite the comments in the  letter
                  of refusal.

             (iv) I bear in mind the Appellant's demeanour and the  details
                  she has given in respect of some parts of her claim.

             (v)  Most importantly I have before me the reports  of  Amanda
                  Hewitt and Anna Raynor.  I give  these  documents  weight.
                  Both these women appear to have known the Appellant over a
                  relatively long period of  time.   Both  have  formed  the
                  opinion that when she first arrived she  was  traumatised.
                  Whilst it is obviously possible that a highly  intelligent
                  and articulate young woman planning to make a false asylum
                  claim could mislead them, it seems to me unlikely that she
                  would have  been  able  to  persuade  them  that  she  was
                  traumatised if she had not experienced any trauma at  all.
                  Their reports therefore lend weight to the  overall  claim
                  that the Appellant experienced some sort of  trauma  prior
                  to going to City Hearts.  That  in  turn  obviously  lends
                  weight to her account to have been trafficked although  it
                  does not of course necessarily follow that the two go hand
                  in hand.  I have to look at that claim along with all  the
                  other evidence in the round.

         80.  Set against the factors which support  the  Appellant's  claim
             there are various  factors  which  undermine  the  Appellant's
             claim:

             (i)  I have difficulty accepting the  Appellant's  account  of
                  what happened on her arrival  in  Saudi  Arabia  when  she
                  suggested that her employer refused to sign  the  contract
                  because the contract on its  face,  as  I  have  indicated
                  shows that the contract was signed by the employer  before
                  she left Kenya.  It is possible that the  employer  signed
                  it at a later date and backdated his  signature  and  that
                  somehow that document later found its way to James [N]  to
                  be used in connection with visa applications but  I  treat
                  that claim with caution.

             (ii)  I  also  have  difficulty  accepting   the   Appellant's
                  assertion at question 47 of the asylum interview that  she
                  did not realise that James [N] had been complicit  in  her
                  trafficking to Saudi Arabia until she got back  to  Kenya.
                  This is an intelligent and articulate young lady.  She was
                  supposedly held in forced prostitution  over  an  extended
                  period of time by a person said to be James [N]'s  friend.
                  When she spoke to James [N] he did not want to know  about
                  her problems and brushed them aside.  It is  difficult  to
                  accept she would not have realised very early on  that  he
                  too was a guilty party.  That said, I cannot rule out  the
                  possibility that for whatever reason she chose  to  ignore
                  the obvious facts.

             (iii)    There were in addition concerns about the Appellant's
                  account of her arrival  back  in  Kenya.   At  the  asylum
                  interview she indicated that it was her mention  of  Saudi
                  Arabia coupled with her decision to ring her mother  which
                  led James [N] to summon  his  bodyguards  whereas  in  her
                  witness statement she mentioned for the first time that it
                  was her threat to call the police  that  precipitated  his
                  action.  In the normal course had it been  the  threat  to
                  call the police that precipitated his action I would  have
                  expected her to mention  that  at  the  asylum  interview.
                  Nonetheless, I do have to bear i mind, as  I  have  stated
                  above, that those who have been the victims of trauma  may
                  have difficulty recalling events  in  the  past.   It  may
                  simply  be  that  this  is  something  that  slipped   the
                  Appellant's mind when she was under  pressure  during  the
                  asylum interview.

             (iv) As I have indicated the  Appellant  then  made  two  visa
                  applications to come to the United Kingdom.  It is now her
                  case that these were made under the direction of James [N]
                  but I have great difficulty accepting that.   If,  as  she
                  claimed, James [N] had dictated to her the contents of the
                  letters that were to be written on her behalf it  is  most
                  unlikely that the  letter  from  Bishop  Walchere  of  the
                  Springs of Bethel Ministries and the letter from the  Body
                  of Christ Children's  Centre  would  have  said  different
                  things.  It also seems to me that if  all  this  had  been
                  arranged by traffickers it is most unlikely that the first
                  visit visa  application  would  have  indicated  that  the
                  Appellant's parents were to be the Sponsors  or  that  the
                  application would then have failed for financial  reasons.
                  Whilst I take great care before drawing conclusions as  to
                  what traffickers may or may not have done, it  would  have
                  been  a  fairly  pointless  exercise  to  state   in   the
                  application that the Appellant's flight would be paid  for
                  by her parents if they were not in a position  to  produce
                  their bank account  showing  sufficient  funds,  when  the
                  application could just as easily have said that the  money
                  was to be paid by another family member and then  produced
                  evidence from another bank account of the funds needed.

             (v)  I have also noted concerns  about  discrepancies  in  the
                  Appellant's evidence of the amount of contact she had with
                  James [N] whilst in the United Kingdom and concerns  about
                  how she came to have a passport with her when she  escaped
                  her traffickers.

         81.  All of these factors tend to undermine the credibility of  the
             Appellant's account.  Some, however, are relatively minor  and
             others can be explained to some extent.   If  these  were  the
             only points of concern they would not be determinative of  the
             issues before me.

         82.  However I have other far  more  serious  concerns  about  this
             Appellant's case.

         83.  First, I do not accept that  Mungiki  traffickers  would  have
             gone to the lengths of arranging for this Appellant to come to
             the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  5  Temporary  Charity  Worker
             without ensuring there were traffickers to meet her on arrival
             or alternatively that she had some means of contacting them if
             anything  went  wrong.   The  Appellant  in  both   interviews
             indicated that James [N] was a leader of the Mungiki.  She has
             described this as a powerful organisation from which she would
             be at risk throughout Kenya.  Whilst I am particularly careful
             about assessing how traffickers would or would not act  it  is
             not reasonably likely  that  they  would  have  gone  to  such
             lengths and paid for this Appellant's fare without making  the
             necessary arrangements to meet her or provision for contact if
             plans went wrong.

         84.  Secondly, the Appellant has given inconsistent accounts  about
             her journey and arrival in the United Kingdom.   She  told  me
             that it was never intended she would go to  Ashburnham  Centre
             and yet at question 67 of her second asylum interview she said
             that James [N] had told her to go straight to the  charity  so
             that the charity would not look for her if she  did  not  turn
             up.  That was an unequivocal statement  and  for  the  reasons
             stated in my analysis I do not accept her explanation for that
             inconsistency.

         85.  Thirdly, I do not accept the  Appellant's  assertions  in  her
             witness statement that she  mistrusted  the  person  from  the
             charity who came to  pick  her  up  thinking  that  they  were
             connected to her traffickers because in her oral evidence  she
             claimed  that  they  only  came  to  pick  her  up  after  she
             telephoned them, after they told her they were  not  expecting
             her and after they told her that by chance there  was  one  of
             their drivers in London who could call and get her.

         86.  Fourthly, if the Appellant  had  not  been  contacted  by  the
             traffickers for her first two weeks at the  Ashburnham  Centre
             it is difficult to accept that she  would  not  have  realised
             that the oath no longer had power.

         87.  More pertinently if she had felt so in  thrall  to  this  oath
             that she told her parents nothing about what was happening  to
             her, that she helped the traffickers bring her to  the  United
             Kingdom and that she then felt it necessary to  contact  them,
             it is not reasonably likely that she would then have  remained
             at  the  Ashburnham  Centre  for  six  months.   She  told  me
             repeatedly during the  hearing  that  throughout  this  period
             James [N] had been threatening her and telling  her  to  leave
             (despite giving no indication of this in her interviews).   If
             that was the case there was nothing to  prevent  her  leaving.
             Her suggestion that she could not do  so  because  she  had  a
             contract with the Centre, because they had rules  and  because
             she would have to go to reception to organise a taxi needs  to
             be seen in the context of her claim to be in thrall through  a
             blood oath to a ruthless Mungiki gang who  trafficked  her  to
             the United Kingdom for prostitution, failed to  meet  her  and
             who could undoubtedly have turned  up  to  pick  her  up  from
             outside the gates at any time.

         88.  When I look at all the evidence  in  the  round  I  reach  the
             conclusion that notwithstanding the background evidence  which
             lends some  general  support  to  the  Appellant's  case,  her
             demeanour, the details of some of the evidence she  has  given
             and the two reports from Amanda Hewitt and Anna  Raynor  which
             indicate that this young  woman  has  suffered  some  sort  of
             trauma in her past, her account of  being  trafficked  to  the
             United Kingdom is not reasonably likely to be true.   She  has
             not told the truth about being  trafficked  to  this  country.
             That account goes hand in hand with her earlier story of being
             taken by the same traffickers  to  Saudi  Arabia  and  in  the
             circumstances I do not find that it is reasonably  likely  for
             that part of her story to be true either.

         89.  It is not for me to speculate as to what exactly has  happened
             here.  It may be that having left  the  Ashburnham  Centre  to
             join up with her boyfriend he turned  on  her  and  she  found
             herself in trouble at that point in time.  It may be that  she
             had suffered other abuse in Kenya.  I do not think that Amanda
             Hewitt and Anna Raynor would have taken the view that she  was
             a traumatised individual unless there  was  something  in  her
             past to lead to that conclusion.

         90.  However, this Appellant's case is put on the basis that she is
             at risk from Mungiki traffickers because she has  defied  them
             by breaking an oath.  That part of her story is not  true  and
             in the absence of other clear evidence as to the cause of  her
             difficulties there is nothing before me on which  I  can  find
             that it is reasonably likely she would be at risk from  anyone
             now in Kenya.

         91.  It has  not  been  shown  in  the  circumstances  that  it  is
             reasonably likely that the Appellant would come to harm at the
             hands of others if returned to Kenya now.  In the light of  my
             findings there is  nothing  to  show  that  the  Appellant  is
             entitled to humanitarian protection either.

         92.  Whilst I accept that she may have suffered some sort of trauma
             in her past and  that  she  has  experienced  depression,  the
             reports of Amanda Hewitt and Anna Raynor actually suggest that
             she has made good progress with  the  counselling.   There  is
             nothing in those reports to suggest that thee is any Article 3
             suicide risk or that her mental health condition is such as to
             engage Article 3 of the ECHR.

         93.  So far as Article 8 under the Immigration Rules  is  concerned
             it suffices to state that the Appellant cannot  succeed  under
             paragraph 276ADE of the Rules because she has not been in  the
             United Kingdom for  twenty  years  and,  given  that  she  has
             parents and siblings in Kenya where  she  has  worked  in  the
             past, there is no reason to think  that  there  would  be  any
             obstacles to her integration back into that country.

         94.  In terms of Article 8 outside of the Rules, there  is  nothing
             to show that the Appellant has an Article 8 family life in the
             United Kingdom.  I accept that she has a private life and  for
             the purposes of this determination I accept that the  decision
             to remove her engages Article 8.

         95.  However the decision is lawful  and  taken  in  pursuit  of  a
             legitimate aim and I am bound to conclude on  my  findings  of
             fact that it is proportionate.

         96.  By virtue of Section 117B I am bound to find that it is in the
             interests of immigration control to remove the Appellant  from
             the United Kingdom.  There is nothing  to  show  that  she  is
             financially independent and so that is also a  factor  I  must
             take into account albeit that I accept that  she  speaks  good
             English.

         97.  On the other side of the equation she will be returning to the
             country of which she is a national.  She will have the support
             of family.  Whilst she will undoubtedly miss friends  and  the
             support that she appears to be getting from dedicated staff at
             City Hearts, that in itself does not give rise in this case to
             a successful claim under Article 8.

         98.  This is an  articulate  and  intelligent  young  woman.   Anna
             Raynor says that she has helped the Appellant look at  options
             for studying law or criminology.  There  is  every  reason  to
             assume that she could pursue a successful career of this  type
             and contribute towards the country.  It is  a  troubling  case
             because the two reports from City Hearts indicate that she has
             suffered trauma but I have not been  able  to  find  that  her
             account as to how the trauma came about is  reasonably  likely
             to have been true and in the  circumstances  for  the  reasons
             stated above, I have to dismiss this appeal."

14. The above was not the end of the matter because  the  Appellant  sought
    permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   She  was  not  formally
    represented when the grounds were drafted and submitted though I do not
    know if she had assistance in their drafting and if so to what  extent.
    Be that as it may, the thrust of the grounds, in summary, was that  the
    judge  had  erred  in  failing  to  attach  sufficient  weight  to  the
    psychotherapist and case worker's report or failing to accept that  the
    account offered was true on the basis of the content of those  reports;
    in proceeding without evidence concerning the decision of the Competent
    Authority, the police  investigation  and  the  Christian  charity;  in
    failing to undertaken an adequate assessment as to  credibility  by  in
    particular speculating about the motives and actions of traffickers and
    in failing to make sufficient allowance for her trauma.

15. A judge of the First-tier Tribunal refused permission on the basis that
    the application had been lodged out of time.  However, his view  as  to
    time was erroneous and permission was subsequently granted by  a  Judge
    of the  Upper  Tribunal  on  1st  October  2015.   The  judge  granting
    permission, stated as follows;

         "The  appellant  claims  she  is  a  victim  of  trafficking.   She
         represented herself at the hearing before the FtT  and  has  lodged
         the grounds herself.  She appears to challenge the judge's approach
         to the expert reports, the judge's adverse credibility findings and
         his failure to make findings on her  evidence  about  her  time  in
         Saudi Arabia and the treatment she suffered there.  It is  arguable
         that the judge erred for the reasons given in the grounds."

16. Permission having been granted there was a  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal (before me) so that it could be considered whether or not  the
    judge had erred in  law  and,  if  so,  what  should  flow  from  that.
    Representation at that hearing was as indicated above.

17. Miss Patel, for the Appellant, acknowledged that the  determination  of
    the judge was very thorough but pointed out, uncontroversially I think,
    that that, of itself, did not mean that it was free from  legal  error.
    She sought to comment upon a number of the judge's adverse  credibility
    findings suggesting in particular that the judge appeared at one  point
    to have lost sight of the fact that  even  intelligent  people  can  be
    duped and had also been wrongly seeking to "put himself in the minds of
    the traffickers".  He had not adequately explained, at paragraph 86  of
    the determination, his view that the Appellant would have  realised  at
    an earlier stage, if she had taken the oath  as  claimed,  that  it  no
    longer had any power.  He had failed  to  exercise  sufficient  caution
    bearing in  mind  the  Appellant's  trauma  when  considering  what  he
    perceived to be discrepancies in her account.  He had  failed  to  make
    any findings as to what she said had happened to her in  Saudi  Arabia.
    As to the items of evidence the judge had identified as being  lacking,
    if he had felt that evidence to be important he should have  adjourned,
    bearing in mind that the  Appellant  was  unrepresented,  in  order  to
    obtain it.  He should not have made adverse credibility findings in the
    absence of such evidence.  He should have  "taken  her  demeanour  into
    account more than he did".  Although he  cautioned  himself  about  the
    dangers of speculating as to the likely actions of traffickers  he  did
    go on to so speculate.  He  had  failed  to  ask  himself  why  if  the
    Appellant was not a victim of trafficking she  would  tell  the  police
    that she was.  The two reports were prepared by persons who  work  with
    vulnerable people and have experience  of  dealing  with  such  people.
    Therefore, more weight should have been attached to  them.   The  judge
    failed to make  a  direction  that  the  Appellant  was  "a  vulnerable
    witness".

18. Mr Diwnycz, for the Respondent, contended that  the  determination  was
    detailed and correct.  The judge had clearly been  even-handed  in  his
    consideration of the evidence and had weighed it  all  very  carefully.
    He did treat her as being a vulnerable person.  He made  no  error  and
    the grounds amount to no more than disagreement.

19. As I indicated to the parties, orally at the hearing, I have  concluded
    that the judge did not err in law and  that  his  determination  shall,
    therefore, stand.  I set out my reasoning below.

20. The  judge,  as  noted,  had  two  reports  before  him  regarding  the
    assistance the Appellant had received at  City  Hearts,  including  one
    prepared by the psychotherapist Amanda Hewitt indicating that  she  had
    had sixteen counselling  sessions  and  that  she  presented  as  being
    extremely traumatised.  That report is not particularly detailed but it
    is clearly expressed.  It is, though, readily apparent  from  what  the
    judge said that he did carefully consider and  weight  the  content  of
    both  reports.   He  appeared  to  accept  (see  paragraph  63  of  the
    determination) that it was likely she had suffered some sort of  trauma
    as opposed to no trauma at all.  As he pointed out, though,  and  as  I
    have quoted from him above, the fact that  he  was  prepared  to  place
    weight on the two reports did not mean  that  he  had  to  accept  that
    everything the Appellant had told the authors of the report was  likely
    to be true.  Indeed, his task as he made clear at  paragraph  79(v)  of
    the determination, was to consider all of the evidence as a  whole  and
    to decide, on that basis, what aspects of the account  were  reasonably
    likely to be true and what were not.  It is abundantly clear  from  the
    passages of the determination I have cited above that that is  what  he
    actually did.  It cannot be said, therefore, in my  judgment,  that  he
    erred in failing to accept the truth of the account on the basis of the
    content of the reports or, in fact, in  failing  to  attach  sufficient
    weight to them.  Weight was a matter for the judge  to  decide  and  he
    clearly did accord weight to the content of the reports he  simply  did
    not regard them as being decisive as  to  the  truth  of  the  account.
    Everything he did and said in that regard was entirely permissible  and
    open to him.

21. It is right to say that the judge did decide to go  ahead  without  the
    evidence from the Christian  charity,  the  police  and  the  Competent
    Authority.  It is certainly true that he expressed some disquiet as  to
    the lack of any  such  evidence  before  him  but  he  did  have  quite
    extensive  documentary  evidence  available  to  him  and  he  had  the
    opportunity of  hearing  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant  herself.
    Looking at things from the Appellant's perspective and in so far as  it
    might be relevant, it was not obvious that all of that  evidence  would
    necessarily  have  assisted  her.   The  evidence  from  the  Christian
    charity, for example, as the judge pointed out, might,  depending  upon
    what it was, have gone either way.  The point  is,  though,  it  cannot
    realistically be contended that  the  judge  did  not  have  sufficient
    material before him to enable him to proceed.   That  position  is  not
    affected by the Appellant's lack of representation.  It  is  true  that
    the judge could have adjourned in order to seek  further  evidence  and
    that, had he done so, that might or might not have led to the obtaining
    of some relevant evidence either from the Christian charity or from the
    police.  However, it is one thing to say that  adjourning  for  further
    evidence was an option available  to  the  judge  (which  it  was)  and
    another to say that, as a matter of law, his already having a good deal
    of evidence before him, he was obliged to do so.  In my judgment he was
    not so obliged at all.  I conclude, therefore, that he did not  err  in
    the manner suggested.

22. As to the judge's credibility assessment, it is very clear that he  was
    conscious of the possibility that  as  a  result  of  trauma  which  he
    thought the Appellant might have suffered  in  the  past,  despite  his
    rejection of the account she offered, she might  have  some  difficulty
    with respect to memory.  The judge reminded himself as  to  this  risk,
    very clearly, at paragraph 40 of his determination prior  to  embarking
    upon a consideration of the evidence she  was  offering.   He  reminded
    himself of this again, at paragraph 78, prior to making and setting out
    his findings.  He reminded himself of this,  yet  again,  at  paragraph
    80(iii) when considering  a  particular  inconsistency.   Against  that
    background it is  really  impossible,  in  my  judgment,  to  seriously
    contend that the judge either failed to warn himself of the possibility
    that trauma might affect recollection or failed to apply  that  in  his
    overall consideration of the evidence.  The judge was  not  obliged  to
    disregard each and every inconsistency simply because he considered she
    may have or had suffered from some form of trauma in the past.  He did,
    in fact, at paragraph 84 of his determination, attach  some  importance
    to what he perceived to be inconsistent evidence given by her regarding
    her journey to and arrival in the United Kingdom but was entitled to do
    that.  I do not consider that the judge erred in the manner suggested.

23. As  to  what  is  said  to  be  speculation  as  to  the  behaviour  of
    traffickers, once again, the judge gave himself  clear  warnings  about
    the dangers involved in so doing.  In particular, at  paragraph  41  of
    the determination, he said it was particularly important in a  case  of
    this nature to take into account the circumstances in  the  country  in
    which events are said to have taken place and pointed  out,  correctly,
    that assertions which may appear unreasonable in the context of life in
    the UK may be  perfectly  reasonable  in  the  context  of  life  in  a
    different  country.   Then,  and  more  specifically  in  relation   to
    traffickers and their likely behaviour, and as noted above, he reminded
    himself that the actions of such persons must not be viewed through the
    eyes "of the man on the Strand".  Nevertheless,  again  as  he  himself
    pointed out, he was entitled to apply a degree of  commonsense  to  his
    analysis of the evidence and the claims which had been made.   That  is
    what he did and that is all he did.  There is nothing to suggest  that,
    having given himself an appropriate warning, he lost sight of it or for
    some reason decided not to apply it.  I find that he did not err in the
    manner suggested.

24. Ms Patel contended, although this was not specifically  raised  in  the
    written grounds, that the judge had  erred  in  failing  to  treat  the
    Appellant as "a vulnerable witness" or as she put  it  in  her  closing
    submissions failing to make a  "vulnerable  witness  direction".   That
    argument, in my view, was largely undeveloped and it is not for  me  to
    seek to make anything more of it than what was actually said.  What  is
    clear, to my mind, is that the judge was very much aware of the content
    of the Appellant's claims and the content of the two reports  with  the
    attendant indications of past trauma.  He explained to her  what  would
    happen  during  the  course  of  the  hearing  (paragraph  10  of   the
    determination) and the point behind some of the Home Office  Presenting
    Officer's submissions (paragraph  14)  prior  to  her  being  given  an
    opportunity to respond.  Though noting that any ill effects  of  trauma
    were not apparent during the hearing he took  into  account  that  such
    matters may affect memory and understanding (paragraph 40).   There  is
    nothing to suggest, and I am not taken to anything which does  suggest,
    that the Appellant was not treated sympathetically or properly or  that
    she was in any way inhibited from presenting her evidence and her case.



25. There is the contention that the judge failed to make  findings  as  to
    what had happened in Saudi Arabia.  In fact, at  paragraph  88  of  his
    determination, he confirmed his view that her account  of  having  been
    trafficked to the UK was not, to  the  necessary  standard,  true.   He
    observed that that account went "hand in hand" with her earlier account
    of being taken by the same traffickers to Saudi Arabia and said;

         "In the circumstances I do not find that it  is  reasonably  likely
         for that part of her story to be true either."

26. So, the judge addressed sufficiently the claims as to what had happened
    in Saudi Arabia.  He concluded, in light of all of the  evidence,  that
    what was said about that was not reasonably likely to be true so  there
    is no failure on his part to make findings.  Further, in light  of  the
    evidence as a whole, his conclusion that the claimed  events  in  Saudi
    Arabia were not reasonably likely to be true was one which was properly
    open to him.

27. I do not consider, therefore, that the grounds which I have  summarised
    above demonstrate that the  judge  made  an  error  of  law.   For  the
    avoidance of doubt I regard anything else which was said in the written
    grounds or in oral submissions before me to be mere re-argument  as  to
    matters  of  fact  which,  of  course,  is  incapable  of   itself   of
    demonstrating legal error.

28. In conclusion, and  at  the  risk  of  repeating  myself,  the  judge's
    determination was very thorough, careful  and  complete.   The  various
    items of evidence were properly addressed  and  matters  favourable  as
    well as unfavourable to the Appellant were properly taken  account  of.
    The determination represented a full and fair evaluation of all aspects
    of the Appellant's claim.  No error of law is disclosed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, that decision shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any anonymity direction.   I  have  not
been asked to make one by the Appellant's Counsel and do not do so.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

