
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07671/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10th November 2014                      |On 12th December 2014          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                    Mr SP
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant Miss A Benfield, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, born on 27th February 1986, is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka
    who arrived in the United Kingdom on 3rd  December  2012.   He  claimed
    asylum on 3rd January 2013.

2.   His application was refused by the respondent for the  reasons  as  set
    out in the decision letter dated 26th July 2013.   A  further  decision
    was made to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom under  Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal against  such  decisions,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla on 14th January 2014.

4.   The appeal was allowed on asylum grounds.

5.   That decision was  the  subject  matter  of  an  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal made by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    contending that there were inadequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant came within  any  of  the  risk  factors  identified  in  the
    decision of GJ and others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

6.   Permission to appeal was granted and  the  matter  came  before  me  in
    pursuance of that permission.

7.   It was my finding that there was a material error of law and  that  the
    Judge, although focusing upon paragraph 356(4) of  GJ  which  indicated
    that if a person is detained by the  Sri  Lankan  security  authorities
    there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or harm, did not  link  that
    within the context of paragraph 356(6) which indicated that only  those
    who appear on a stop list will be detained from the airport.  The Judge
    had given no reason why that  conclusion  should  not  be  followed  or
    rather why he had chosen to depart from it.   Further  there  had  been
    little appreciation as to the fact that although the appellant had come
    to the attention of the authorities  on  several  occasions  since  his
    release he had not been ill-treated on those occasions.  The failure of
    the Judge to indicate why there should be a departure from  that  which
    is set out in GJ amounted in my estimation to an error of law such that
    the decision should be set aside to be remade.

8.   It was, however, only necessary to revisit the matter  to  the  limited
    area as to risk on return, in the light of the fact that no  challenges
    had been made to  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  Judge  as  to
    experiences of the appellant when in Sri Lanka.

9.   In general terms, therefore, the findings of fact were  preserved.   It
    was not considered necessary to remit the matter for rehearing  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, rather that the area of concern could be  properly
    considered by myself in the light of  any  submissions  that  might  be
    made.  That position was agreed by the parties.

10.  Thus it was that the matter came before me on  10th  November  2014  to
    determine specifically the  issue  as  to  risk  on  return.   In  that
    connection I also had before me on that occasion  a  skeleton  argument
    submitted on behalf of the appellant together with photographs  of  his
    scarring.  I had regard also to the country guidance case  of  MP  (Sri
    Lanka) and Another v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 829 and also to the Home Office country  information  guidance
    for Sri Lanka dated 28th August 2014.  I also had the  benefit  of  the
    matters set out in the supplementary bundles submitted for the purposes
    of the hearing.

11.  In assessing the present risk on return it is necessary to consider  in
    some detail the experiences of the appellant in Sri Lanka and  to  look
    at his profile real or perceived.

12.  In terms of his background it was accepted that  he  was  abducted  and
    forcibly recruited by the LTTE on 15th April 2007.  He was  held  at  a
    political wing camp at  Mankulam  before  being  transferred  to  Vanni
    Vellakulam.  There he worked in the  finance  division,  food  section,
    from May 2007 to 10th October 2008  when  he  was  wounded  by  gunfire
    resulting in wounds to the left of his face and his  stomach.   He  was
    known within the LTTE by the name "Semmalayaam".

13.  He came to the attention of the CID on 15th May 2009 whilst  transiting
    to an IDP camp as a result of his facial scarring.  It  was  considered
    that that scarring may indicate that he was an LTTE member.

14.  He was detained from 15th May 2009  to  28th  January  2012  at  Joseph
    camp.  He was tortured  and  ill-treated  during  that  period  of  his
    detention.  He confessed to  LTTE  involvement  under  duress  and  was
    photographed and fingerprinted.

15.  He was released in January 2012 without reporting conditions.

16.  On 14th June 2012 the appellant was detained for  three  days  when  he
    failed to report to the police. It  seems  that  he  had  attended  the
    police station on 9th  June  2012  as  required  and  had  carried  out
    physical work such as chopping wood and was required to  attend  again.
    He had failed to do so which led to the detention.  An issue  arose  as
    to whether he was detained for a day or three days but it was  accepted
    that he was released without reporting conditions.

17.  His third detention on 28th November 2012 was very brief when he  along
    with others was suspected of sabotage.  He was released after two hours
    also without any reporting conditions.

18.  It was the finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  there  was  a
    common thread between the three detentions.  Although the appellant had
    been processed during his last detention and released, he was  a  Tamil
    who in the past had been involved with the LTTE.  That was  the  reason
    why he was called in June 2012 to go to the police station and made  to
    work and why it was that in November 2012 he was detained  with  others
    because of a suspicion that he, being a Tamil, might have been involved
    in sabotage.

19.  It was noted that the appellant has scars on  his  body,  especially  a
    large scar on the left side of his face.  Throughout the course of  his
    evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the  appellant  had
    indicated that there was an arrest warrant out for his arrest and  that
    the authorities were actively seeking him.  The Judge  noted,  however,
    at paragraph 35 of the decision that the appellant was issued with  his
    own passport and able to leave the country without  problems.   In  the
    absence of any further evidence he did not accept that there was such a
    warrant or interest in him.  That matter has not  been  pursued  before
    me.  No evidence has been led on that particular issue.  The Judge also
    accepted that the appellant had mental health  problems  and  the  fact
    that he was suffering from PTSD was accepted by the Judge.  Indeed  the
    diagnosis of Dr Persaud dated  7th  January  2014  indicated  that  the
    appellant was suffering from a serious psychiatric  disorder  including
    major depression and PTSD.  There seems to have been  no  challenge  to
    that conclusion.

20.  An area where evidence had been given but no clear  findings  had  been
    made was in relation  to  the  appellant's  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He said that  he  had  attended  a  number  of  protests  and
    demonstrations in the United Kingdom which have served to have enhanced
    his  profile.   In  particular  it  was  said  that   he   attended   a
    demonstration organised by the British Tamils Forum at  Downing  Street
    on 2nd November 2013, and a similar demonstration in the Pall  Mall  on
    15th November 2013. He attended Heroes Day at the London  ExCeL  Centre
    on 27th November 2013 and Mullaivaikkal Remembrance  Day  on  18th  May
    2014.

21.  Miss Benfield, who represents the appellant,  invited  me  to  consider
    that a starting point in my consideration was in fact paragraph 339K of
    the Immigration Rules.  The appellant had been arrested for an extended
    period of time and subjected to torture and physical abuse and that  in
    itself, she submitted, was a serious indication as to his  well-founded
    fear of persecution or risk of serious harm.

22.  She invited me to consider also that the appellant  by  reason  of  his
    activities and profile was someone who fell within the risk  categories
    as set out in GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

23.  She submitted leaving  aside  the  issue  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's name appeared on a computerised stop list accessible to the
    airport or whether there was an extant court order or  arrest  warrant,
    he nevertheless fell within the categories  of  a  person  at  risk  as
    envisaged in paragraph 356(7) of that case.  That provides as follows:

         "(7) The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  Diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities  within  Sri
                  Lanka."

24.  It is her submission that the appellant is known to the authorities  as
    a former LTTE member.  The length of his detention and questioning  was
    an indication that he was a person having important  information  about
    the LTTE owing to  his  employment  in  the  finance  division.   Since
    arriving in the United Kingdom he had attended pro-Tamil events in  the
    Diaspora  which  had  been  actively  critical  of   the   Sri   Lankan
    authorities.

25.  As stated in paragraph 356(7) and (8) it is the perception of  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities which is significant.  At paragraph  311  the  Upper
    Tribunal had stated that:

         "The government's concern  now  is  not  with  past  membership  or
         sympathy, but with whether a person is a  destabilising  threat  in
         post-conflict Sri Lanka."

26.  It is her submission that the appellant is likely to  be  viewed  as  a
    destabilising threat on the basis of his  former  involvement  and  his
    prolonged absence from Sri Lanka in the UK, which is viewed by the  Sri
    Lankan authorities as a centre of Tamil Diaspora  activities,  and  his
    attendance at protests and demonstrations in the United  Kingdom.   The
    fact that he has experience of the finance wing within the LTTE is  not
    an irrelevant consideration in whether or not it is perceived  that  he
    is someone associating with attempts at reviving the LTTE.  Further  in
    that connection my attention was drawn to the country  information  and
    guidance Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism 28th August 2014 and to  a  letter
    from the British High Commission (BHC) Colombo to the Home Office dated
    25th July 2014 which is attached as Appendix D to that report.

27.  There is an  issue  of  the  proscription  of  sixteen  Tamil  Diaspora
    organisations, including the British Tamil Forum (BTF) and the UK-based
    Global Tamil Forum  (GTF),  UN  Security  Resolution  1373  on  Counter
    Terrorism on 1st April 2014.

28.  The letter continues that there had been no reports in the local  press
    of anyone being arrested because of their membership of or  association
    with one of those proscribed  organisations.   Seemingly  no  returnees
    from any country have been arrested yet because  of  their  association
    with one of the proscribed groups nor has any returnee been arrested on
    arrival for that reason.  It indicated, however, that returnees may  be
    questioned on arrival by immigration, CID, SIS and TID.   They  may  be
    questioned about what they have been doing whilst  out  of  Sri  Lanka,
    including whether they  have  been  involved  with  one  of  the  Tamil
    Diaspora groups.  It was said that it was normal practice for returnees
    to be asked about their activities in the country  they  are  returning
    from.  A spokesman from the SIS was quoted to  say  that  people  being
    "deported" will always be questioned about their  overseas  activities,
    including whether they have been involved with one  of  the  proscribed
    organisations.  A spokesman for the international NGO had  not  noticed
    any changes in the airport procedure for returnees.

29.  Miss Benfield submits that it is a reasonable conclusion to  draw  from
    the action of the government of Sri Lanka in April 2014 announcing  the
    designation of sixteen Tamil Diaspora organisations and 424 individuals
    as being members of a proscribed organisation, that they are taking the
    activities of the Diaspora very seriously and that  the  government  is
    concerned lest there be a revival of LTTE activity.  She  asked  me  to
    find that whether or not the appellant has a significant  profile  must
    be viewed in the light of this increased sensitivity on the part of the
    Sri Lankan authorities.

30.  It was in that context that my attention was drawn to  MP  (Sri  Lanka)
    and Another v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 829 and to paragraph 25 of that judgment, it being noted that there
    was evidence before the Upper Tribunal  of  sophisticated  intelligence
    gathering by the Sri Lankan authorities.  There was a surveillance  and
    video recording or photography of Diaspora demonstrations.  She submits
    therefore that the appellant as a known individual to  the  authorities
    could be readily identified by them as being part of the Diaspora.

31.  Miss Benfield submits that it is not simply limited to  people  on  the
    stop list as being those who would be  stopped  at  the  airport.   The
    appellant would require an emergency travel document (ETD) to return to
    Sri Lanka.  The process of  an  application  for  an  emergency  travel
    document was considered in the case of GJ at paragraph  307  and  would
    require a lengthy disclosure by the appellant  to  the  authorities  in
    London of his situation and circumstances in order to get the  document
    concerned.  The Sri Lankan authorities would  be  forewarned  that  the
    appellant may return.  It  was  noted  that  forced  returnees  can  be
    expected to be asked about their own LTTE  connections  and  sympathies
    upon return.  That is set out in paragraphs 308 and 345.

32.  She submitted that if asked about his activities in the United  Kingdom
    it would not be proper to expect the appellant to lie about them.

33.  In the UKBA Country of Origin Information Report of 7th March  2012  it
    is clear that upon arrival at the airport the appellant is likely to be
    escorted or presented to the Chief Immigration Officer as  a  returnee.
    Either that or he would come to the  attention  of  the  Department  of
    Immigration and Emigration (DIE).  He would  be  asked  for  his  prior
    biological details and historical details.

34.  The appellant had been previously identified by the CID in 2009 due  to
    his facial scars as someone who was likely to be a former LTTE  member.
    Although the country guidance  does  not  consider  scarring  to  be  a
    distinct risk category it is, however, a factor  which  would  lead  to
    interest in the appellant.

35.  As was established in GJ at paragraph 356(6) if there are no  detention
    facilities at the airport  and  if  detained  the  appellant  would  be
    transferred to a prison or detention centre where he would continue  to
    be at risk of physical abuse.

36.  There was nothing to prevent the appellant, however, even permitted  to
    leave the airport without being detained not to  be  put  on  a  "watch
    list" and picked up by the authorities at his home rather than  at  the
    airport.

37.  In summary therefore  she  submits  that  it  is  inevitable  that  the
    appellant as a returnee will be questioned upon arrival,  and  as  such
    the authorities know of his past and have ready access  to  details  of
    his detention.  Although attendance at demonstrations is not in  itself
    evidence that a person is a committed Tamil activist  it  is  a  matter
    adding to the appellant's profile as somebody who is  still  interested
    in pro-Tamil or LTTE activities.  If detained he would suffer violence.

38.  She invites me to find that although he  was  not  ill-treated  on  the
    last two occasions  when  he  was  detained  by  the  authorities,  his
    circumstances have now changed given his absence from Sri Lanka and his
    involvement in the demonstrations and also that  the  attitude  of  the
    authorities has markedly changed for the worse  considering  those  who
    may potentially  be  Tamil  extremists.   In  those  circumstances  she
    invites me to find that there is a possibility of ill-treatment.

39.  Miss Holmes, on behalf of the respondent, invites me to find  that  the
    appellant was and remains low profile.  Had matters  been  contrary  to
    that he would not  have  been  released  on  the  last  two  occasions.
    Although torture is not to be in any way condoned it was right to  note
    that on the last two detentions which, upon the findings of  the  Judge
    were related to the first, the appellant was not ill-treated.

40.  She invites me to find, therefore, that even were it the case  that  he
    were stopped at the airport and questioned  such would simply result in
    his release without ill-treatment.

41.  She invites me not to overstate the importance  of  the  activities  in
    the Diaspora and invites me to have  regard  to  the  full  context  of
    paragraph 25 in MP.

42.  That paragraph reads as follows:-

         "There was evidence before the UT of such intelligence gathering by
         the Sri Lankan authorities and that  it  has  reached  a  level  of
         sophistication.  However, it did not take  the  form  of  a  cogent
         correlation between mere participation in such  demonstrations  and
         persecution  on  return.   Nor,  for  that  matter,  do  the  UNHCR
         guidelines put it so low.  The reference to LTTE

             'propaganda activists and those with, or perceived  as  having
             had, links to the Sri Lankan Diaspora  that  provided  funding
             and other support to the LTTE'


         seems to assume a higher level than mere participation  in  one  or
         more demonstrations.  No doubt it can form a part  of  the  picture
         but I do not consider that it was legally erroneous of  the  UT  to
         conclude that it needs more  to  qualify  as  a  risk  category  or
         operative risk factor.  The real issue in this  case  is  how  much
         more - essentially the basis of the first ground of appeal."

43.   Thus  she  submits  that  even   accepting   the   sophistication   of
    surveillance, mere attendance at a demonstration is not without more to
    significantly raise a profile of an individual.  She invites me to find
    that the appellant has such a profile as to cause any interest  in  him
    upon return.  She invites me therefore to dismiss the appeal.

44.  For the most part the risk categories  of  GJ  are  adopted  in  MP  at
    paragraph 3.  The government's present objective is to  identify  Tamil
    activists in the Diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and  to
    destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan  state.   Its  focus  is  both  on
    preventing the resurgence of the LTTE and the revival of the civil  war
    within Sri Lanka.

45.  The authorities maintain a computerised  intelligence-led  watch  list.
    A person whose name appears on such a list is not reasonably likely  to
    be detained at the airport but will be monitored by  security  services
    after his or her return.  If the monitoring does not indicate that such
    a person is a Tamil activist working to  destabilise  the  unitary  Sri
    Lankan state the individual in question is not  in  general  reasonably
    likely to be detained by the security forces.  That will be a  question
    of fact in each case, dependent upon any  Diaspora  activities  carried
    out by such an individual.

46.  It was recognised in paragraph 356(8) of GJ that the  approach  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities is based on sophisticated intelligence, both  as
    to activities within Sri Lanka and in the  Diaspora.   The  Sri  Lankan
    authorities know that  many  Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as
    economic migrants and also that everyone in the northern  Province  had
    some level of involvement with the LTTE during the civil war.  In post-
    conflict Sri Lanka, an individual's past history will be relevant  only
    to the extent that it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as
    indicating a present risk to the state or government.

47.  The court in MP considered the UNHCR guidelines  and  found  that  they
    were less demanding than the UT's guidance.  It considered  whether  or
    not therefore the UT's departure from the more generous guidelines  was
    justified.

48.  Consideration was given to the features which led  the  Upper  Tribunal
    to conclude that there had been real changes since  the  LP/TK  factors
    were propounded.  Those were set out as identified in  paragraphs  303,
    311, 318, 325, 342, 345 and 349 of GJ.

49.  The conclusion at  paragraph  19  to  the  judgment  was  that  it  was
    rational and  permissible  to  narrow  the  risk  categories.   It  was
    recognised that the UT had heard a great deal  of  evidence  which  had
    been subjected to forensic examination.  It  was  considered  therefore
    that the UT, having given consideration to the  UNHCR  guidelines,  was
    entitled to adopt a less generous approach to risk demonstrated by  its
    guidance and the explicit and implicit reasoning underlying it.

50.  The Court  of  Appeal  considered  in  particular  the  grounds  raised
    specifically to NT and it was noted that that appellant  was  separated
    from his family, transferred  by  the  CID  to  a  camp  where  he  was
    interrogated under torture many times.  The Court  of  Appeal  did  not
    agree with the approach taken by the Upper Tribunal to that  individual
    and allowed the appeal to the extent that his  case  was  remitted  for
    reconsideration.

51.  The individual MP had a distinguishing feature in that  he  had  mental
    health difficulties with suicide risk.  He had been involved  with  the
    LTTE in the 1990s and had been detained and tortured in 2001 and  2002.
    His case was dismissed under immigration  and  asylum  as  he  remained
    properly protected under Article 3.

52.  The mental health of  the  appellant  in  this  appeal  clearly  is  an
    important consideration in the overall context of  the  safety  of  his
    return.  It was not submitted that he is at risk  of  suicide  nor  was
    Article 8 argued on the basis of his mental health.   It was submitted,
    however, that his mental health was an important factor to bear in mind
    as to his ability to give a good account of himself if questioned or to
    cope with the rigours of interrogation.

53.  The Court of Appeal in MP upheld the view as expressed in GJ  that  the
    focus of interest of the authorities had moved to the organisations and
    individuals who presented a significant threat to the state rather than
    purely having connections with the LTTE.  In that connection  it  would
    be helpful to have had some clear evidence as to what happened to those
    who were being returned, particularly at the airport or elsewhere.   In
    that connection I have had regard to the supplementary bundle that  was
    provided  and  particularly  an  extract  from  The  Guardian  of  23rd
    September 2014 which criticises the stance taken by the  UK  government
    in returning asylum seekers despite evidence of torture.  It  was  said
    of UK resident Tamils who had been  detained  and  tortured  when  they
    visited Sri Lanka in 2013, half of whom were picked up at  the  airport
    on arrival.  It spoke of some 90  cases  being  documented.  A  further
    report from the Federal Office for Migration dated 26th May 2014  spoke
    of the events in the summer of 2013.  Two Sri Lankan nationals returned
    from Switzerland were arrested upon return to Sri Lanka.  Such seems to
    be  somewhat  at  variance  with  the  letter  from  the  British  High
    Commission of 25th July 2014 to the effect that no returnees  had  been
    arrested because of  their  association  with  one  of  the  proscribed
    groups.  This is notwithstanding the fact that  people  being  deported
    would always be questioned about their overseas activities.

54.  Such perhaps is somewhat unhelpful if the context of  how  many  Tamils
    are forcefully removed to Sri Lanka is not stated.  This seems to be at
    variance with other material.  The Guardian article also  does  not  of
    course indicate the nature of the profile of those that  were  in  fact
    arrested and then ill-treated.

55.   From  the  background  material  as  presented  I  cannot  detect  any
    significant change in attitude and approach from that as identified  by
    the Tribunal in GJ and recognised and  acknowledged  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MP.

56.  It seems to me therefore that in one way the aspect of risk turns  full
    circle to the category of person as defined  in  GJ  356(7)(a),  namely
    individuals who are or are perceived to be a threat to the integrity of
    Sri Lanka as a single state because they are or are perceived to have a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism  within
    the Diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities  within  Sri  Lanka.   The
    appeal in MP endorsed the narrowing of risk categories.  I do not  find
    that the appellant by reason of his previous involvement with the  LTTE
    comes within that category.  That he is a Tamil and previously involved
    with LTTE activities is to be acknowledged and indeed it was  for  that
    reason that he has faced three arrests.  I find that it is  significant
    in the context of attitude that in the  last  two  cases  when  he  was
    detained he was not ill-treated.

57.  I do not  find  that  mere  attendance  at  demonstrations  necessarily
    increases that profile in the eyes of the authorities.  Nor do  I  find
    that scarring adds to the profile  as  it  is  said  to  be  reasonably
    inferred that by the time the appellant comes or returns to  Sri  Lanka
    his background will be known.

58.  Clearly the focus of consideration must be recognition that he will  be
    questioned upon arrival as a returned asylum seeker and  it  is  to  be
    assumed that at that questioning he will required to  reveal  the  fact
    that he attended demonstrations and the fact that he  was  formerly  in
    the LTTE. His mental difficulties are relevant as to whether or not  he
    can give an explanation for himself and there was no suggestion that he
    could not.

59.  The  letter  relied  upon  by  Miss  Benfield  from  the  British  High
    commission does not it, seems to  me,  support  her  proposition  of  a
    clampdown of those who are returned.  Quite the reverse.

60.  I remind myself  that  I  should  not  be  unduly  constrained  by  the
    formality of the risk categories  if  there  be  something  within  the
    profile or background of the appellant as would lead to a danger to him
    were he to return.  I can find none.  I remind myself also  that  there
    is a danger in relying upon the predictability of outcome from previous
    experience, particularly in regimes where consistency of  approach  may
    not  be  the  safest  basis  upon  which  to   project   future   risk.
    Nevertheless it is an important matter in this case that the  appellant
    has been arrested on three occasions and on the last two not subject to
    violence albeit that the authorities would have  known  full  well  his
    background and antecedents.

61.  Miss Benfield invites me to find that he was likely to find himself  in
    detention and  thereby  under  ill-treatment  rather  than  just  being
    questioned upon return.  I can find little basis for  that  conclusion.
    As I have indicated, it would have been helpful  had  there  been  some
    positive  evidence  that  such  happens  to  a  significant  number  of
    individuals upon return but that evidence is not forthcoming and indeed
    the letter to which reference has repeatedly been made makes quite  the
    opposite point.

62.  I remind myself also that a lower standard and burden of  proof  should
    be applied in this case, namely whether  it  is  reasonably  likely  or
    there is a possibility that the appellant would face ill-treatment upon
    return.  I conclude, having looked at all matters in the round, that he
    would not.

63.  I emphasise, however, that no evidence was adduced before me as to  the
    issue of whether or not he is actively wanted  by  the  authorities  or
    indeed if an arrest warrant is issued against him.  Clearly, were  that
    evidence to be forthcoming it might be a relevant factor in the overall
    assessment because then it would seem to be reasonably likely  that  he
    would be detained upon arrest and ill-treated.  However, it is not  the
    basis upon which I make my findings.

64.  In the absence of any suggestion that his mental illness  would  result
    in a breach of his Article 3 rights per se I do not proceed to find  in
    favour of the appellant in any aspect of his appeal.

65.  In the circumstances therefore the asylum appeal  is  dismissed.   That
    in relation to humanitarian protection is dismissed.   The  appeals  in
    relation to Articles 3 and 8 are also dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is Dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 10th November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


