
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07607/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd December 2016                          |On 22 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                                     S D
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st January 1994 is a citizen of  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo.  The Appellant was represented by  Mr  Nicholson  of
    Counsel.  The Respondent was represented by Mr  McVeety,  a  Presenting
    Officer.

 2. The Appellant had made application for asylum on 30th January 2013  and
    the Respondent had refused that application on 22nd  April  2015.   The
    Appellant had appealed that  decision  and  her  appeal  was  heard  at
    Manchester on 12th October 2015 by Designated Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal McClure.  The judge dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 3. The Appellant sought application for permission to appeal that decision
    on four grounds.  On 15th February 2016 Designated First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy found an arguable legal error in respect of  the  second
    and third grounds but found no merit in the first and  fourth  grounds.
    A further application for permission  to  appeal  was  then  made  such
    application being to extend the Grounds of Appeal to the original first
    and fourth points.  A Judge of the Upper Tribunal on  21st  March  2016
    found that there was no merit  in  the  first  ground  but  found  that
    arguably there was merit in the fourth ground.

 4. The Respondent opposes the grant of appeal by their letter of 7th April
    2016.

 5. The matter comes before me firstly to decide whether or not an error of
    law was made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 6. Mr Nicholson relied upon the three grounds upon which  different  dates
    permission to appeal had been granted.  Firstly it was  submitted  that
    the judge had failed to pay any or any sufficient regard to the medical
    evidence in this case which went to an  issue  of  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's case.  Secondly it was submitted that the judge  had  given
    inadequate  attention  to  the  Appellant's  fear  that  she  would  be
    perceived as Rwandan and therefore at risk on return.  Thirdly  it  was
    submitted the judge had  failed  to  give  full  consideration  to  the
    position of the child in this case whom  it  was  said  was  a  British
    citizen.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 7. Mr McVeety accepted that there was force in the submissions  raised  in
    respect of the first and third grounds when looking  at  the  decision.
    It was agreed that those grounds  did  disclose  a  potential  material
    error of law such that the matter needed to be reconsidered.

 8. I provide below a brief decision with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. As part of the Appellant's evidence she had presented to the Respondent
    a lengthy Medical Foundation  report  prepared  by  a  psychologist  Dr
    Bashir.  That report had reached conclusions regarding her mental state
    consistent with PTSD and a severe depressive episode.  The psychologist
    had concluded that the findings of the report was consistent  with  the
    short and long-term consequences of rape that had been described by the
    Appellant as part of her account on events in the DRC.  The  judge  had
    not found the Appellant to be credible and had not accepted her account
    of events in the DRC including her account of  detention  where  it  is
    said the rape took place.  At paragraph 53 of the  decision  the  judge
    had noted that he had taken account of the psychologist's  report  when
    considering the evidence as a whole.  Unfortunately thereafter there is
    no mention of the report or any assessment of that report.   Whilst  it
    may well be the judge took the report into account, given the nature of
    that report and the strength  of  its  findings  it  was  necessary  in
    dealing with issues of credibility particularly to the  lower  standard
    of proof to deal with the findings of the report or at the  very  least
    to set the findings of the report within the context of all  the  other
    evidence if the decision  was  to  be  reached  that  was  against  the
    conclusions of that medical report.  Unfortunately that process did not
    appear within the written decision although it may well have been  done
    by the judge.  In circumstances where there is on the  face  of  it  no
    engagement with a detailed medical report there is a perception that an
    error of law has been made.  When the medical report is supportive of a
    medical condition consistent with the Appellant's account which in turn
    is a central feature of both her fear and the issue of credibility then
    a silence upon that report and no engagement with the report amounts to
    a material error of law.

10. In terms of the third matter raised by Mr Nicholson  it  was  submitted
    that inadequate attention  had  been  given  to  the  position  of  the
    Appellant's child who was said to be a British citizen.  The judge  had
    considered the position of the child at paragraph 70  onwards.   It  is
    noteworthy at paragraph 70 the judge accepted the child was  a  British
    citizen having gained that  citizenship  through  his  father  who  was
    himself granted  British  citizenship  in  2012.   The  judge  provided
    reasons why he did not find it unreasonable for the child to  accompany
    the mother (Appellant) back to the DRC.  However there does not  appear
    to have been perhaps the focus on the circumstances and indeed case law
    regarding the removal or de facto removal of a  British  citizen  child
    from the UK.  It is accepted that there was an error in this aspect  of
    the case.



Notice of Decision

11. I find that a material error was made by the judge  in  this  case  and
    uphold the appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 22/12/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

