
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07514/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th January 2016                 |On 1st February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Fox promulgated on 13th November 2015 in which  he  dismissed  an
    appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of State on 16th  April
    2015 to refuse the appellant's claim for asylum.

 2. The appellant is a minor now aged 17.   Pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an
    anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court   directs
    otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication
    thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original  appellant.
    This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 3. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant at the hearing
    before  me.   Notice  of  the  hearing  was  sent  to  the  appellant's
    representatives on 6th January 2016. I am satisfied that it is  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in the absence of  the
    appellant's representatives.

 4. The appellant is a national of Eritrea.  Although the Judge  states  at
    paragraph [1] of his decision that "The appellant  applied  for  asylum
    owing to a well founded fear of persecution in Albania.", in  the  same
    paragraph it is recorded that the convention reason relied upon by  the
    appellant, is the imputed political opinion based upon the  appellant's
    profile as a military service draft evader and his  illegal  exit  from
    Eritrea.

 5. In light of the very narrow issue in this appeal, I can deal  with  the
    matter in short form without rehearsing the background to  the  appeal.
    The sole ground of appeal is that it is clear from  a  reading  of  the
    decision as a whole and in particular the findings, that the Judge  has
    mistakenly dismissed the appeal when it should have been  allowed.   In
    the grounds of appeal, the appellant invites the  Tribunal  to  correct
    the error without the need for a further hearing.   The  appellant  has
    appealed the decision rather than invite  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    correct a clerical mistake or accidental slip or omission under Rule 31
    of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
    9th December 2015.

 7. The respondent has filed a response dated 23rd  December  2015  to  the
    grounds of appeal under Rule 24.  The respondent does  not  oppose  the
    appeal and invites the Tribunal to correct the clerical  error  at  the
    end of the determination.

 8. I have carefully read the decision and it is plain  from  the  findings
    set out at paragraphs [19] to [23] of  his  decision,  that  the  Judge
    intended to allow the appeal.  In fact, at paragraph  [23],  the  Judge
    expressly states that "It  follows  that  the  appellant's  claim  must
    succeed upon the current country guidance"  and  "The  appeal  succeeds
    under Article 3 ECHR for the same reasons".

 9. I find there to be an error of law and I re-make the decision, allowing
    the appeal for the same reasons given by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox
    at paragraphs [19] to [23] of his decision.

 Notice of Decision

10. The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox  promulgated  on  13th
    November 2015 is set aside.   The  appeal  is  allowed  on  asylum  and
    Article 3 grounds.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
