
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07692/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 December 2016                           |On 19 December 2016          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                MR HAGOS [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Neil
Barnes, Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) The appellant was born on 10 October 1984 and is a national  of  Eritrea.
   He appeals against a decision by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Clough
   dismissing his appeal on asylum and human  rights  grounds.   Before  the
   First-tier Tribunal it does not appear to have  been  disputed  that  the
   appellant was of an age when he would be  required  to  perform  national
   service, that he was a  military  deserter,  and  that  he  left  Eritrea
   without permission.  Nevertheless, seemingly  on  the  basis  of  country
   information relied upon by the respondent, the judge  was  not  satisfied
   that the appellant would face a real risk of mistreatment were he  to  be
   removed to Eritrea.

2) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  the  judge  had  not
   given adequate reasons for her decision even though she  had  found  that
   the appellant was in the category of  those  at  risk  in  terms  of  the
   relevant country guideline cases.

3) The appeal was heard before the First-tier Tribunal in July 2015 and  the
   decision promulgated in November 2015.   Since  then  there  has  been  a
   further country guideline case of MST and Others (national service - risk
   categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 443 which leaves largely unaltered the
   risk categories identified in the previous country guideline decisions.

4) On 12 December 2016 the respondent wrote to  the  Tribunal  stating  that
   the Secretary of State had reconsidered this case in the light of the up-
   to-date legal position and would seek to withdraw the underlying decision
   with a view to granting status.  A request was made for the  case  to  be
   withdrawn.  At  the  hearing  before  us  Mrs  O'Brien  referred  to  the
   Secretary of State's decision being withdrawn.

5) We considered the appropriate course was to allow the  appeal  on  asylum
   grounds on the basis that it was no longer resisted  by  the  respondent.
   The parties agreed to this course of action and to the issuing of a short
   decision without detailed reasons.  The decision  is  allowed  on  asylum
   grounds.

Conclusion

6) The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

7) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

8) We re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.

Anonymity

9) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   We  have
   not been asked to make such an order and we see no  reason  of  substance
   for doing so.

Fee Award              (Note: This is not part of the decision)

No fee was paid or payable and accordingly no fee award is made.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
