
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/07812/2014
                                                               AA/07817/2014
                                                               AA/07051/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 January 2016                    |On 16 March 2016                |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between
                                    [R R]
                                    [A S]
                                    [A N]
                       (anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:   first appellant in person
For the respondent: Mr Johnston, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant and the circumstances of the appeal

1. The appellants are  nationals  of  Pakistan  and  the  second  and  third
   appellants are the first appellant's dependents.  The  first  and  second
   appellants are partners and the third appellant is their minor child.  As
   the second and third appellant's appeals rests or falls with that of  the
   first appellant, I  shall  consider  the  first  appellant's  appeal  and
   referred to her as "the appellant".

2. The appellant's appeal the Upper Tribunal was against  the  determination
   of First-tier Tribunal Judge Tully dated 9  December  2014  refusing  her
   appeals against the decision of the respondent  dated  3  September  2014
   refusing her asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

3. Permission to appeal was at first refused by  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Scott Baker on 12 January 2015 and subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal
   Judge Lindsay on 22 April 2015 on limited  grounds  stating  that  it  is
   arguable that the Judge has erred in law as he has not considered whether
   the appellant would be at risk from the authorities on return to Pakistan
   as the unmarried mother of a child, (the second dependent)  she  has  had
   with a married man (the first dependent) and with whom she has an ongoing
   romantic relationship. The decision is incomplete  without  consideration
   as to whether there is a future risk of serious harm to the appellant and
   her dependents on this basis.

4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in his determination  found  the  following
   which I summarise. The appellant's claimed partner, the second  appellant
   made his own asylum claim on 5 January 2011 which was refused on 19  July
   2011. He became appeal rights exhausted in January 2012.  An  application
   for permission to seek judicial review was refused on 23 February 2012.

5. Essentially the appellant's case is that she met the first  dependent  in
   Pakistan in June 2008 when she was already married. They entered  into  a
   relationship which ended in June 2010. In August 2010, the appellant came
   to the United Kingdom as a student. The first appellant in September 2010
   also came to the United Kingdom as  a  student  and  they  resumed  their
   relationship in October 2010. They moved in together  in  December  2010.
   The appellant says that she returned to  Pakistan  in  December  2010  to
   discuss marriage to the first dependent with her family and return to the
   United Kingdom on a student visa  in  January  2011.  They  underwent  an
   Islamic marriage service on 14 February 2011.

6. Essentially the appellant's claim is the same as  the  first  dependent's
   asylum claim which he made in his own right and which was  refused.  This
   is that he was previously married and is  not  divorced  from  his  first
   wife, that both families have disapproved of his  relationship  with  the
   appellant and have threatened them  that  they  have  reported  them  for
   adultery which is being pursued by the authorities in Pakistan.

7. Although the decision reached by immigration Judge Aziz  relates  to  the
   first dependent claim, I find  it  has  direct  bearing  on  this  matter
   because the factual matrix of both claims is essentially  the  same.  The
   Judge relied on the case of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 in which it was
   said that the first Tribunal's determination stands as an  assessment  of
   the  claim  the  appellant  was  making  at  the  time   of   the   first
   determination. That decision is always the starting  point.  There  is  a
   material overlap of evidence in both appeals.

8. In  the  earlier  determination  of  the  second  appellant,  Judge  Aziz
   accepted that the first dependent had been married in  Pakistan  that  he
   had started a relationship with the appellant in 2008 and that  they  had
   continued that relationship in  the  UK  when  they  both  came  here  as
   students. There has been no further evidence produced  on  these  matters
   and this was not  disputed  by  the  respondent  at  the  hearing.  These
   findings are adopted in this appeal. Judge Aziz further accepted that the
   relationship between the appellant and the first dependent  was  romantic
   in nature and this finding is also preserved. The  relationship  is  also
   ongoing.

9. Judge Aziz accepted that the appellant and the first  dependent  families
   were not supportive of the relationship and concluded that the  families,
   including the first  dependent's  first  wife,  were  unhappy  about  the
   situation. However, the Judge concluded on the evidence before  him  that
   the parties had "essentially  fabricated  and  asylum  and  human  rights
   application on the back of a relationship which is disapproved of by both
   families".

10. Judge Aziz's findings are the starting  point  and  the  fresh  evidence
   provided has to be  considered.  The  appellant  reproduced  the  FIR  in
   respect of the appellant husband and asserts that it is genuine. She  has
   however not sought to explain address the factors raised by Judge Aziz in
   respect of that warrant. The documents provided by the appellant are  not
   such that reliance can be properly placed upon them. The judge placed  no
   reliance on them to prove the appellant's claim.

11. "I find that the appellant has continued in her concoction of an  asylum
   claim. I find that this gives amounts to little more than an  attempt  to
   re-litigate the issues raised in the first appeal, which  was  determined
   against the parties. I do not accept that  the  appellant  has  been  the
   subject of legal proceedings in Pakistan or that she is at risk from  the
   State as a result."

12. "Whilst Judge Aziz accepted that both families may be unhappy about  the
   relationship she has with the first dependent I find  that  there  is  no
   reliable evidence other than the claim of  the  parties  that  they  have
   issued threats. In view of my findings I am not prepared  to  accept  the
   word of the parties in this case is  reliable.  Even  if  threats  having
   issued the parties would be returning to Pakistan as  a  family  unit.  I
   have been offered no explanation why the parties could  not  live  in  an
   area away from the family".

13. There is also sufficiency of protection in Pakistan  because  it  has  a
   functioning security system and the parties  could  avail  themselves  of
   such a protection if required. The Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
   grounds.

14. The grounds of appeal state the  following  in  respect  of  the  ground
   permission was granted. The Judge failed to consider  objective  material
   and the Pakistan penal code and country of origin information and women's
   position in Pakistan. The Judge only found regarding  threats  is  flawed
   and stated at paragraph 33 that even if  threats  have  been  issued  the
   parties would be returning to Pakistan as a family unit.

  Discussion and findings whether there is an error of law

15. I have  given  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  determination  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Tully and have taken into account the parties  submissions
   at the hearing, the full notes of which are in my Record of Proceedings.


16. The Judge in his determination found that the appellant  has  fabricated
   her asylum claim based on her relationship with the second appellant. The
   Judge was entitled to take into account the guidance given in  Devaseelan
   that the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz, in  respect  of
   the second appellant's asylum claim based on the same matrix of facts, as
   the starting point. There is no material error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
   evaluation of the appellant's appeal in this regard.


17. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  the  Judge  did  not
   consider whether the appellant and her dependents are at risk of  serious
   harm from the State authorities because of their relationship. The  Judge
   accepted that the families of the  parties  may  have  disapproved  their
   relationship but did not accept that they have been threatened with  harm
   or that they will come to any harm from their  respective  families.  The
   Judge also did not accept that their families have reported them  to  the
   authorities in Pakistan for  adultery  and  placed  no  reliance  on  the
   documentary evidence provided that their families have reported  them  to
   the authorities.


18. In light of this therefore,  there  was  no  reason  for  the  Judge  to
   suspect or consider that the authorities, in themselves, would  have  any
   interest in the appellant and her husband. The appellant's case  was  put
   on the bases that she and her partner's family  have  reported  them  for
   adultery to the authorities. The Judge did  not  accept  the  documentary
   evidence provided that  the  authorities  have  any  knowledge  of  their
   relationship or that the families have reported them for adultery. Having
   not accepted this evidence, there was no reason for the Judge to consider
   whether the authorities would have any interest in  the  appellant's  and
   second appellant's second marriage. There  was  no  evidence  before  the
   Judge that in Pakistan people do not divorce and marry again such  as  to
   give them cause for concern that the authorities would  look  into  their
   relationship in the absence of any report by their families.


19. Therefore, the Judge was entitled to find that the  appellant  would  be
   returning with her husband and child as a family unit and the authorities
   would have no interest in them as no one has reported them  for  adultery
   to the authorities. The appellant would return as a  married  woman  with
   her husband and child. There is no reason to believe that the authorities
   would have any interest in them.


20. The Judge  also  considered  that  the  appellant  and  her  family  can
   relocate within Pakistan. He was entitled to make  this  finding  on  the
   bases that Pakistan is a huge and populous country with  many  towns  and
   cities and that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  and  child  can  live
   elsewhere.


21. The Judge  in  a  careful  determination  did  not  find  the  appellant
   credible and did not find  the  evidence  credible.  He  found  that  the
   appellant had continued in a concoction of an asylum claim which amounted
   to little more than an attempt to re-litigate the issues  raised  in  her
   husband's appeal which has been determined against the parties.


22. There was no credible background  evidence  provided  that  in  any  way
   supported the appellant's thesis that she, her husband and child would be
   at risk from the authorities in Pakistan.


23. The appellant's grounds of appeal are her last desperate attempt to  re-
   litigate the issues once again. Two first-tier Tribunal Judges have found
   the appellant and her husband not to be  credible  and  their  claim  not
   credible. It has not been accepted that their families have reported them
   for adultery to the authorities or that they are at risk for this or  any
   other reason in Pakistan from anyone.


24. I find that no error of law  has  been  established  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge's determination. I find that he was entitled  to  conclude
   that the appellant's not entitled to be recognised as a refugee or to  be
   granted humanitarian protection in this country. I uphold the decision.


DECISION

I find that there is no error of law and I dismiss the appeal




     Dated this 7th day of March 2016

Signed by
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Mrs S Chana


