
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07348/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             KHODADAD HASANZADA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs J Moore, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By decision dated 4 August  2015,  the  Vice  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal granted permission to appeal against a determination by First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyd,  dated  23  June  2014,   dismissing   the
    appellant's appeal against refusal of asylum.

 2. Mrs O'Brien for the respondent  conceded  that  in  the  light  of  the
    opinion by Lord Malcolm, [2014] CSOH 97, and of a joint minute  between
    the parties resolving proceedings in the Court of Session, error of law
    was not only arguable but was established.   Parties  agreed  that  the
    appropriate outcome would be a rehearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    (Copies of the opinion and joint  minute  were  not  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal at the  hearing,  but  are  attached  to  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's solicitors, dated 26 October 2015,  which  is  now  on  the
    file.)

 3. Evidence which the First-tier Tribunal overlooked is to be found in the
    appellant's  bundle  provided  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   second
    inventory, item 13 at pages 84-91.  The judge referred to the  evidence
    at item 6 of that bundle, but not item 13.

 4. The respondent's refusal letter  rejects  the  appellant's  claim  even
    "taken at highest" on the basis of internal relocation, and also  under
    the heading of sufficiency of protection (paragraphs  81-100,  101-136,
    and summarised at paragraph 137).   Mrs  Moore  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal at paragraph 15 are inaccurate in  saying
    that the judge was correct not to find internal  relocation  available.
    The judge did make a finding that internal  relocation  was  available,
    although briefly, at paragraph 42.   Mrs  O'Brien  said  that  she  was
    unable to submit that the determination should  be  sustained  on  that
    basis.  However, these issues should not be lost sight of  in  remaking
    the decision.

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal errs in  law,  as  referred  to
    above, and as conceded.  It is set aside.  No findings  are  to  stand.
    Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and  Practice  Statement  7.2
    the nature and extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  The member(s) of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    chosen to reconsider the case are not to include Judge Boyd.

 6. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                    [pic]
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                    27 October 2015
