
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07838/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 June 2015                               |On 26 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                   Mr S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman (Counsel instructed by Croydon & Sutton
                    Law Centre)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the determination of the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Traynor) ("FtT") promulgated on  26  February  2015  in
    which the FtT dismissed the appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds  and
    human rights grounds under Article 3.

2.   The appellant, whose date of birth is 28 September 1998, is  a  citizen
    of Albania.



The Appellant's Claim

3.   The appellant aged 15 years arrived in  the  UK  on  28  May  2014  and
    claimed asylum the next day.  He  feared  kidnapping  by  his  father's
    creditors who had approached and issued a threat  to  the  family.   In
    addition  the  appellant  feared  return  because  his  father  was  an
    alcoholic and gambler. He had been forced to work to make money for the
    family.  The  details  of  his  claim  were  set  out  in  a  screening
    interview, SEF interview, witness statement and representatives' letter
    dated 15 July 2014 and  grounds of appeal.

Reasons for Refusal

4.    The  respondent  in  reasons  for  refusal  dated  18  September  2014
    concluded that he did not meet the criteria for a grant of  asylum  but
    discretion was exercised in his favour and he was granted a  period  of
    discretionary leave for eighteen months ending on 28 March  2016.   The
    respondent  specifically  considered  Section  55   of   the   Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (S. 55 2009 Act) together with its
    policy on unaccompanied minors.  Whilst taking the view that  it  would
    be in the appellant's best interests to return to his  family  (mother,
    father and two sisters) in Albania the respondent  invoked  its  policy
    that no unaccompanied child would be returned unless safe and  adequate
    reception arrangements  were  in  place.   The  appellant  was  granted
    limited leave to remain; the respondent would not seek to remove him to
    Albania until contact was made with his family or until he reached  the
    age of  18  years.   The  respondent  confirmed  that  details  of  the
    appellant's family had been taken and passed on to the British  Embassy
    in Tirana. He was advised to contact the Red Cross direct.

Determination by FtT

5.   In a lengthy and detailed Decision and Reasons the FtT  concluded  that
    the appellant's account and claim  was  lacking  in  credibility.   The
    Decision set out comprehensively the details of the appellant's  claim,
    his evidence and the issues raised  in  the  respondent's  reasons  for
    refusal.  The findings of fact are set out from [68] onwards.  At  [70]
    the FtT found the  appellant's  claim  to  be  vague  and  premised  on
    speculation and supposition.  The FtT  acknowledged  that  neither  the
    respondent's decision letter nor  the  representative  at  the  hearing
    sought to make adverse comments about the details  of  the  appellant's
    claim, nevertheless the FtT found that in all respects it was vague and
    implausible.

6.   At [69] the FtT took the point that no reference had been made  by  the
    appellant to  membership  of a particular social group  in  his  asylum
    claim. At [71] the FtT found no  evidence  that  the  appellant  was  a
    member of a  particular  social  group  in  Albania  and  rejected  the
    submission to follow the guidance in AA Afghanistan.  At [72]  the  FtT
    found no evidence that  he  was  an  unaccompanied  child  at  risk  in
    Albania. It found that the appellant had family living in Albania.



7.  The FtT held:

         "Having considered what has been said, I  find  that  there  is  no
         evidence which would show that if the appellant was to be  returned
         to Albania, even at the age of 16, that arrangements would  not  be
         made for his care.  The fact is that the respondent does  not  seek
         to propose his removal at least until after his 18th birthday  and,
         then again, in highly controlled circumstances where the  appellant
         will be given the means to  secure  accommodation  and  employment.
         Whilst I accept that I am assessing the  appellant's  circumstances
         as he describes them, realistically he will not return  to  Albania
         until he is an adult and with the means that the authorities of the
         United Kingdom would provide him with."


8.   At [73] and [74]  the  FtT  concluded  that  the  appellant  failed  to
    establish his asylum claim and that internal relocation was  an  option
    open to him:

         "As I have already indicated, he will not be returning before he is
         18 years of age and, again, he will not be  arriving  without  some
         considerable support from the UK  authorities.   I  do  not  accept
         Counsel's argument that I have to assess what would happen if he is
         to return now because the simple fact is he will not  be  returning
         now."

9.   At [76] the FtT found no merit in the claim that  the  appellant  would
    face the risk of trafficking in Albania.  It found that he  had  family
    members for support and he would not be alone or vulnerable  and/or  at
    risk.  The FtT covered sufficiency of protection at [76] - [77] of  the
    decision.

Grounds of Application

10.  The grounds contend that the FtT erred by:

    (1)  finding that the appellant was not a member of a particular social
         group as wholly unsupported by the evidence;


    (2)  misdirecting itself cf. Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97  by  failing
         to consider the evidence as at the date of hearing  as  opposed  to
         when the appellant reaches the age of 18 years old.

    (3)  finding at [71] and [72] that the appellant was not a member of  a
         particular social group with reference to AA (unattended  children)
         Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  16  (IAC)  and  LQ  (Age:  immutable
         characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005.  The FtT failed  to
         take into account that the appellant had been granted limited leave
         to remain in the UK in accordance  with  the  published  policy  on
         discretionary leave as an unaccompanied minor in  respect  of  whom
         the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  adequate  reception
         arrangements were available in Albania.




Permission to Appeal

11.  Permission was granted on 15 April 2015 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cheales.  It was arguable that the  FtT  should  have  found  that  the
    appellant is part of a social group as an unaccompanied Albanian  child
    and that it should have considered the appellant's risk  on  return  at
    the date of hearing.

Rule 24 Response

12.  The respondent opposed the appeal.  The  respondent  acknowledged  that
    the FtT may have erred in law in assessing the appeal on asylum grounds
    on the basis that the appellant would not be returning to Albania until
    he was 18 years of age.  However, such error was not material in  light
    of the findings at paragraphs [72] and  [76]  that  the  appellant  has
    family members in Albania. The appellant would not therefore be at risk
    on return to Albania for a Convention reason.

Error of Law Hearing

13.  At the start of the hearing I indicated my preliminary  view  that  the
    FtT erred in law by treating the appellant as if he was 18 years of age
    and having no regard to the fact  that  he  was  granted  discretionary
    leave by the respondent and disregarding the relevant date, the date of
    hearing, at which time the appellant was 16 years old.  I requested the
    representatives to focus on the issue of materiality and the extent  to
    which the FtT's error had infected the findings and conclusions made in
    its decision.

Submissions

14.  Ms Chapman submitted that there was a clear error of  law  accepted  by
    the respondent that the FtT dealt with the appellant's case  as  if  he
    were an 18 year old rather than a 16 year old.

15.  Furthermore the FtT had  failed  to  engage  with  the  detail  of  the
    appellant's claim, in particular in the further representations made in
    a letter dated 25.7.2014( page 67 appellant's  bundle)  which  included
    his fear of ill-treatment and protection  issues  in  relation  to  his
    father together with a fear of trafficking. The FtT's  observations  at
    [69 & 76] in this regard were simply wrong.

16.  The FtT adopted a position contrary to  the  respondent's  decision  to
    grant him temporary protection.  It was  difficult  to  reconcile  that
    with the position taken in the Rule 24 response and as indicated by  Mr
    Bramble.

17.  The FtT raised the issue of credibility which had neither  been  raised
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter nor  by  the  representative  at  the
    hearing.

18.  The finding as to sufficiency of protection  was  not  sustainable  and
    was contrary to background material U.S.  State  Department  Report  as
    referred to in the Reasons for Refusal Letter  at  paragraphs  [38]  to
    [40] .

19.  As to materiality Ms Chapman submitted that the error  with  regard  to
    the appellant's age infected the Tribunal's perception of the claim  as
    a whole including credibility, risk of trafficking ,  membership  of  a
    particular social group,  which taken together with  the  unsustainable
    conclusion as to sufficiency of protection,  the  decision   could  not
    stand.

20.  Mr Bramble accepted that the appellant fell within the  category  of  a
    particular social group.  He accepted that the FtT erred by looking  at
    the appellant's circumstances at the age  of  18  years.   However,  he
    argued that such errors were not  material  as  there  were  sufficient
    references in the determination to be satisfied that  the  FtT  had  in
    fact considered  the  appellant's  circumstances  as  at  the  date  of
    hearing, not only in respect to risks on  return  but  with  regard  to
    family living in Albania.  It was clear that the FtT identified  family
    members, namely parents and the appellant's sisters, who  he  would  be
    able to contact on return and he would not therefore  be  returning  to
    Albania as an orphan.

21.  Mr Bramble specified parts of the decision where the FtT  set  out  the
    appellant's detailed claim, with regard to his alcoholic father and the
    factors that put him in danger.  He submitted that the  FtT  had  taken
    into account that  evidence  in  reaching  his  findings.   Mr  Bramble
    submitted that the finding that  the  appellant  could  return  to  his
    family in Albania was not undermined by the apparent errors.

22.  Ms Chapman responded that the finding that the appellant  could  return
    safely at the age of 16 years, was not open to the FtT  to  make  given
    that it contradicted the respondent's grant of discretionary leave. The
    FtT failed to engage with the detailed evidence given by the  appellant
    concerning his contact and relationship with his sisters.  No reference
    was made to Section 55 - best interests of the child.  The FtT   looked
    at the appellant's claim from the prism of an adult in the belief  that
    he would be returned as an adult. It was thus fundamentally flawed.

Discussion and Decision

23.  At the end of the hearing I found that there was a  material  error  of
    law in the Decision and Reasons of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  set
    aside the decision.  I  remit the matter for fresh hearing to the First-
    tier Tribunal at Taylor House.  My reasons are as follows.

24.  The FtT made two clear errors of law that are  material.   It  assessed
    the appellant's claim on the basis that he would  not  be  returned  to
    Albania until he was the age of 18 years. It  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's claim at the time of the hearing when he was aged 16 years.
     The FtT made clear in its decision that it rejected this  approach  at
    [74] by stating: "I do not accept Counsel's argument  that  I  have  to
    assess what would happen if he is to return now because the simple fact
    is he will not be returning now."  There are other  references  in  the
    decision, in particular at [71] and [72], which indicate that  the  FtT
    has adopted what it considers to be a realistic approach to the  issues
    under appeal rather than  the  correct  approach  in  law  as  held  in
    Ravichandran to consider the circumstances as at the date of hearing.

25.  I am satisfied that there was no legally  sound  consideration  of  the
    appellant's claim in light of his age and/ or of the evidence  to  show
    that he is a member of a particular social group  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor. Further, the FtT failed to  engage  with  any  of  the  detailed
    evidence relied on by the appellant  as  regards  his  family  life  in
    Albania and his fears on return of homelessness, destitution and  being
    trafficked, which formed part of his claim from the outset.

26.  I am satisfied that the FtT's approach to the appellant's age  and  its
    disregard for the  decision  taken  by  the  respondent  to  grant  the
    appellant discretionary leave as an unaccompanied  minor  whose  return
    cannot be established, is in my view flawed. I find that the error made
    is material to the outcome of the decision and  it  has  permeated  the
    whole of the decision such that none of the findings may be  preserved.
    I have taken into account the Presidential guidance on remitting  cases
    to the FTT.

27.   Finally, Ms Chapman raised 2 issues which did not  form  part  of  her
    grounds of appeal. There was no formal application to amend the grounds
    of appeal.  Those issues related to the unsustainability of  the  FtT's
    finding that there was a sufficiency of protection available in Albania
    and the failure to make any reference and/or consideration of where the
    best interests of a child lie pursuant to Section 55 of the  2009  Act.
    As these matters formed no part of the grounds of  the  application  or
    permission, I make no further reference to them save  to  observe  that
    such arguments are identifiable as arguable errors of law.


Notice of Decision

I find material errors of law in the decision and  reasons  which  shall  be
set aside.

I remit the matter to Taylor House (excluding Judge Traynor)  for  rehearing
on the 27th day of July 2015.  The appellant will be  called  as  a  witness
and an Albanian interpreter will be required.

An anonymity direction is made as the appellant is a minor.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 25.6.2015
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                  Date 25.6.2015
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

