
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07203/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 May 2016                                |On 1 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)

                                   Between

                                     FH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge I M  Scott)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision made on 20 June 2014 refusing him  further  leave
    and to remove him from the UK.


Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on July 1995.   He  made
    a clandestine entry into the UK on 11 February 2009, claiming asylum on
    arrival.  His application was refused on 11  August  2009  but  he  was
    granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  until  1  July  2012  as  an
    unaccompanied minor.  On 15 June 2012 he applied for further  leave  to
    remain but his application was refused  on  20  June  2014  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and  human  rights  grounds.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal following a hearing on 17 November
    2014 but this decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal following  a
    hearing on 18 September 2015 and the appeal was remitted  for  a  fresh
    hearing which took place before Judge Scott on 9  March  2016  and  his
    decision was issued on 4 April 2016.

3.   In brief outline the basis of the appellant's claim  was  that  he  was
    born in Laghman Province in Afghanistan where he worked on  the  family
    farm with his parents.  The Taliban used to come  to  the  village  and
    forcibly recruit boys who  had  reached  the  age  of  13.   After  the
    appellant reached that age the Taliban came to their house and spoke to
    his father to recruit him.  As neither the  appellant  nor  his  father
    wanted him to join the Taliban his father paid an agent to take him out
    of Afghanistan.  He travelled through various unknown countries  before
    being put on a lorry along with five other Afghan  boys  which  brought
    him to the United Kingdom.

4.   The respondent did not accept the appellant's account.  She noted  that
    he claimed that he  had  left  Afghanistan  about  four  months  before
    arriving in the UK on 11 February 2009 but on checking his fingerprints
    against the  European  Data  Base,  it  was  found  that  he  had  been
    fingerprinted on two previous occasions, once in Greece on 10 July 2008
    and once at Calais on 7 January 2009.  The  earlier  fingerprinting  in
    Greece was regarded as clearly inconsistent with the appellant's  story
    because it predated not only the time of  his  claimed  departure  from
    Afghanistan but also the time when the  Taliban  supposedly  sought  to
    recruit him.  On the issue of family tracing  it  was  noted  that  the
    appellant's family had not been traced.  The respondent had advised the
    appellant to contact the Red Cross to locate any  remaining  family  in
    Afghanistan.  The respondent had not been able to do this  through  the
    Foreign and Commonwealth Office in Kabul because the appellant had  not
    given his consent.  In any event, as he was now an adult it  was  found
    that he would be able to return to Kabul even without family support in
    Afghanistan.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant.  He said that he  had
    not been in contact with his family  in  Afghanistan.   He  had  sought
    assistance from the Red Cross but was never given an  appointment.   He
    had received information from his cousin who also gave oral evidence at
    the hearing that his parents had been killed by the Taliban  and  after
    that he did not pursue any attempt to trace them.  He said that he  was
    not able to trace his family himself  and  the  respondent  had  simply
    proceeded to do it and he had never refused the Home Office  permission
    to contact them [29].

6.   The judge found  that  the  appellant  had  maintained  an  essentially
    consistent  and  plausible  account  of   his   reasons   for   leaving
    Afghanistan.  His account was supported by the evidence of  his  cousin
    ('M').  He was satisfied that the reasons the respondent had given  for
    disbelieving the appellant's story were in fact due to his  young  age.
    He accepted that it was  perfectly  possible  the  appellant  had  left
    Afghanistan earlier than his estimate and before his fingerprints  were
    taken in Greece but that in any event the appellant had  turned  13  in
    January 2008 and it was his attainment of that age which  drew  him  to
    the attention of the Taliban.  Accordingly, he  found  the  appellant's
    account to be credible.

7.   The judge was satisfied on the evidence that the appellant  would  face
    a real risk of suffering persecution in his home area  in  Afghanistan,
    which was under the control of the Taliban, but he went on to find that
    he could safely relocate to Kabul.  In [55] the judge said:

         "I find, however, that the  appellant  could   safely  relocate  to
         Kabul, which the Taliban do not control, and that it would  not  be
         unduly harsh to expect him to do so.  There is nothing  to  suggest
         that the Taliban would have any continuing interest in him or  that
         they would be concerned,  or  indeed  able,  to  trace   him.   The
         appellant is now an adult in good general health and he speaks  the
         language.  He also has two cousins in Kabul who, potentially, could
         afford him some assistance.  [M] indicated that the difficulty  was
         not with providing financial support for  the  appellant  but  with
         offering him effective protection.  On that matter, it  is  obvious
         that the situation in Kabul is far from perfect, but  I  find  that
         there is a sufficiency of protection in the Horvath sense."

8.    The  judge  also  found  that  the  appellant  was  not  entitled   to
    humanitarian protection, not being  satisfied  that  the  situation  in
    Afghanistan, whilst deteriorating, had yet reached the  position  where
    article 15(c) was engaged.  The appellant was unable to show that there
    would be very significant obstacles in relocating to Kabul  under  para
    276ADE(1)(vi) and his claim failed under the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    judge then dealt with the issue of family tracing at [* ]as follows:

         "The issue of family tracing and whether the appellant did, or  did
         not, fail to cooperate properly with the Home Office has ceased  to
         have any relevance.  The appellant is now an  adult  and  I  accept
         [M's] evidence that he learned from  a  reliable  source  that  the
         appellant's family were all killed by the Taliban in 2012."

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

9.   In the grounds of appeal it was argued that  the  judge  erred  in  law
    when  considering  the  reasonableness  of  relocation  to  Kabul,   by
    dismissing the relevance of the failure to trace on the basis that  the
    appellant was now  over  18,  by  failing  to  consider  the  route  to
    indefinite  leave  under  the  discretionary  leave  policy  and   when
    considering article 15(c).  Permission to appeal  was  refused  on  the
    first, third, and fourth grounds but allowed on ground 2 in respect  of
    the failure to trace for the following reasons:

         "However, it is arguable, as submitted in the ground  2,  that  the
         judge having accepted the  credibility  of  the  appellant  as  the
         reasons why he fled Afghanistan, erred in failing to  consider  the
         guidance in KA (Afghanistan) [2012] EWCA  Civ  1014  regarding  the
         effect of a failure to trace by the  respondent,  even  though  the
         appellant was now over 18 years of age.  There was no consideration
         of this issue within the decision."

10.  Ms McCarthy submitted that the judge had erred by taking the view  that
    the tracing obligation had ceased to have any relevance.  She submitted
    that it could  continue to be relevant  even  after  an  appellant  had
    turned 18.  She referred in particular to KA and to the  spectrum  into
    which cases might fall set out at [23] of that judgment.  The appellant
    was a young man whose account  had  been  accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and, had  the  tracing  obligation  been  complied  with,  the
    veracity of his claim could have been established at an  earlier  stage
    and accordingly the protective principle referred to in [24] - [25]  in
    KA should have been considered and applied.

11.  Mr Kandola submitted that the judge had not erred.  He referred  to  EU
    (Afghanistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 32 and in particular  to  [6]  where  Sir
    Stanley Burnton said that he  did  not  think  that  the  court  should
    require  or  encourage  the  Secretary  of  State  to  grant  leave  in
    circumstances where someone was found not to be in need  of  protection
    either to mark the court's displeasure at her conduct or as a  sanction
    for that misconduct.

12.   In  reply  Ms  McCarthy  submitted  that  the  appellant  could   have
    demonstrated a right to asylum if the respondent has  carried  out  her
    obligation to trace  and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
    considered whether indefinite or discretionary leave should  have  been
    granted.

Consideration of the Issues

13.  In KA the Court of Appeal reviewed  the  implications  arising  from  a
    failure to endeavour to trace the members of an  unaccompanied  minor's
    family as soon as possible as  required  by  the  Reception  Directive,
    article 19.3 transposed into domestic law by regulation 6 of the Asylum
    Seekers (Reception Conditions) Regulations 2005.   The  court  held  at
    [24] that certain principles emerged from the authorities as follows:

    "(1) The duty to  endeavour  to  trace  is  not  discharged  by  merely
         informing a child of the facilities of the Red Cross.
    (2)  A failure to discharge  the  duty  may  be  relevant  to  judicial
         consideration of an asylum or humanitarian protection claim.
    (3)  Such failure may also be relevant to a consideration of  the  s.55
         duty."

14.  At [25] the court referred to a hypothetical spectrum.  At one end  was
    an applicant who gave a credible and cooperative account of  having  no
    surviving family in Afghanistan or of having lost touch with  surviving
    family members and having failed, notwithstanding his best  endeavours,
    to re-establish contact.  If he had reached the age of 18 by  the  time
    his appeal was considered he might, depending on the  totality  of  the
    established facts, have the basis of a successful  appeal  by  availing
    himself of the Rashid/S principle  and/or  s.55  by  reference  to  the
    failure of the Secretary of State to discharge the duty to endeavour to
    trace.  At the other end of the spectrum would be  an  applicant  whose
    claim to have no surviving family in Afghanistan was disbelieved and in
    respect of whom it was found that he had been uncooperative so as to as
    frustrate any attempt to trace his family.

15.  The court said that whereas in the first case the  applicant  may  have
    lost the opportunity of corroborating his evidence about the absence of
    support in Afghanistan by reference  to  a  negative  result  from  the
    properly discharged duty to endeavour to trace, in the second  case  he
    could establish no  such  disadvantage.   However  at  [26]  the  court
    emphasised that when considering  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or
    corrective relief, there was a burden of proof on an applicant not just
    to establish the failure to discharge the duty to trace but  also  that
    he was entitled to what he was seeking.

16.  In JS (Former  unaccompanied  child  -  durable  solution)  Afghanistan
    [2013] UKUT 00586, the Upper Tribunal held  that  the  failure  of  the
    respondent to endeavour to trace  family  members  of  a  child  asylum
    seeker was only relevant to an appeal after the appellant ceased to  be
    a child where he was able to show a causal link  between  that  failure
    and issues relevant to the outcome of the appeal.

17.  Ms McCarthy submitted that  if  the  respondent  had  carried  out  her
    tracing obligations, in all likelihood this would  have  revealed  that
    the appellant's parents had been killed  in  2012  and  then  he  would
    either have been able to show that he was  entitled  to  asylum  or  at
    least to discretionary leave under article 8.  That argument  is  based
    on the Rashid [2005] EWCA Civ 744 line of cases analysed by  the  Court
    of Appeal in R (S) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 546 and SL  (Vietnam)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] EWCA Civ 225.  In S the  Court  of  Appeal  made  the
    point that it had no power to grant indefinite leave to remain nor on a
    conventional basis did it have the power to  direct  the  Secretary  of
    State to grant it or to exercise her discretion.

18.  In EU the Court of Appeal again expressed great difficulties  with  the
    judgments in Rashid saying that in cases that are concerned with claims
    for asylum the purpose of the grant of leave  to  remain  is  to  grant
    protection to someone who would be at risk or whose  Convention  rights
    would be infringed if returned to the country of nationality.  Breaches
    of duty by the respondent in  addressing  a  claim  might  lead  to  an
    independent justification for leave to remain.  The  paradigm  was  the
    article 8 claim but to grant leave  to  remain  on  asylum  grounds  to
    someone who had no risk on return and  who  had  no  other  independent
    claim to remain would be to use the power to grant leave to remain  for
    a purpose other than that for which it was conferred.

19.  Permission to appeal  was  not  granted  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    assessment that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to
    relocate to Kabul or on whether the appellant  could  rely  on  article
    15(c).  It follows that the  appellant  failed  to  show  that  he  was
    entitled to relief on asylum or humanitarian protection grounds.

20.  It is argued that, had the respondent complied with her  obligation  to
    endeavour to trace, the appellant might have been able to show  a  need
    for  protection  whilst  still  a  minor.   However,   the   grant   of
    discretionary leave when he was an  unaccompanied  minor  provided  the
    protection he needed at that  time.   Were  the  appellant  now  to  be
    granted leave as someone entitled to  protection  when  he  is  not  so
    entitled, would, in the words of the Court of Appeal in EU, be  to  use
    the power to grant leave to remain for a purpose other  than  that  for
    which it was conferred.  The  respondent's  failure  to  trace  has  no
    causal connection with the issue of whether the appellant would now  be
    at risk of serious harm on return to Afghanistan.  In  any  event,  the
    judgment in EU has been approved by the Supreme Court in TN  and  MA  v
    Secretary  of  State  [2015]  UKSC  40  where  it  was  held  that  the
    Ravichandran principle applies on the hearing of asylum appeals without
    exception and that Rashid should no longer be followed: para 72.

21.  However, a failure to  trace  may  be  relevant  to  an  assessment  of
    whether the appellant has a claim under the Rules or under article 8.

22.  The judge was not satisfied that the appellant was  able  to  meet  the
    requirements under para 276ADE(1)(vi) finding that whilst  there  would
    obviously be difficulties for the appellant on returning to Afghanistan
    and in relocating to Kabul they did not  amount  to  "very  significant
    obstacles".  The judge took into account the fact  that  his  immediate
    family had died but he had two other  paternal  cousins  in  Kabul  and
    there was nothing to suggest that they would be unwilling or unable  to
    help him secure accommodation and look for work.  He  also  noted  that
    there was a possibility of further financial assistance from them as  M
    had said  that  the  problem  he  could  foresee  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's return to Kabul was not one of  finance  but  of  providing
    effective protection.  The issue of family tracing had, in  the  event,
    no bearing on this assessment as the  judge  had  found  the  appellant
    credible and was making his assessment on this basis.

23.  Taking into account the judge's finding under para 276ADE(1)(vi)  there
    is nothing to indicate any basis for a grant of leave under  article  8
    outside the rules.  The appeal had no  realistic  prospect  of  success
    under article 8.  The respondent's  failure  to  trace,  again  had  no
    bearing on this assessment.

24.  In these circumstances the judge  was  entitled  to  comment  that  the
    issue of family tracing had ceased to have any relevance.   If  he  was
    stating that as a general principle, arguably that would have  been  an
    error of law at least so far  as  article  8  is  concerned  but  I  am
    satisfied that he was  simply  setting  out  his  conclusion  that  the
    appellant had failed to show that the respondent's failure to trace  in
    his circumstances had any bearing on the outcome of the  appeal.   Even
    if he did err as submitted, the judge would inevitably have come to the
    same conclusions for the reasons I have given.

Decision

25.  I am not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside.  It follows that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.

26.   An  anonymity  order  was  made  by  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    No
    application has been made to vary or discharge that order which remains
    in force.




                  H J E Latter
Signed                                  Date: 29 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter




