
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07705/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th October 2015                 |On 25th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     KA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. In decisions made respectively on 10th June 2015 and 19th  August  2015
    the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal gave permission  to  the
    appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge Raikes in  which  she
    dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse asylum, humanitarian and human  rights  protection
    to the appellant, a male citizen of  Afghanistan  born  on  17th  March
    1996.  The decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  extended  the  grant  of
    permission to all the grounds raised in the application as  opposed  to
    the limited grounds specified in the permission decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of application criticize the judge for:

      a) Failing to take into account the appellant's  age,  background  and
         the lengthy delay in the respondent dealing  with  his  claim  when
         assessing his  credibility  and,  in  particular,  the  appellant's
         inability  to  give  further  details  of  his   father's   Taliban
         activities.

      b) Requiring corroboration in respect of parts of the claim.

      c) Rejecting the  appellant's  claim  of  forced  recruitment  by  the
         Taliban on grounds of plausibility despite concessions made by  the
         respondent,  an  expert  and  background  evidence  supporting  the
         appellant's claim.

      d) Assessing background evidence after the hearing. In particular  the
         judge's consideration of the respondent's Operational Guidance Note
         did not take into consideration the guidance given in FS  (Domestic
         violence - SN and HM - OGN) Pakistan CG [2006] UKAIT 00023.

      e) Asserting that the appellant  could  have  made  contact  with  his
         family  in  Afghanistan  when  the  respondent  had  conceded  that
         reception facilities in Afghanistan were inadequate and that  there
         had been a failure to comply with the duty to trace.

      f) Failing to assess the feasibility of  returning  the  appellant  to
         Kabul.

      g) Failing to include the  factor  of  delay  in  the  proportionality
         assessment.  However, the Upper Tribunal permission  comments  that
         the appellant would be required to explain why paragraphs 66 and 70
         of the questioned decision was insufficient to amount to  a  proper
         consideration of delay.

 3. At the hearing before me  Mr  Draycott  submitted  that  the  appellant
    relied on all the grounds.  He outlined the background  to  the  appeal
    pointing out that the appellant was an unaccompanied child  on  arrival
    who was granted discretionary leave for four and a half  years.   There
    was no appeal against the initial dismissal of the  asylum  claim.   He
    emphasised the importance of the expert report by Dr Foxley  commencing
    on  page  66  of  the  appellant's  main  bundle  of  documents  which,
    particularly in  paragraph  18,  had  explained  the  reasons  for  the
    appellant's lack of knowledge  of  his  father's  activities  with  the
    Taliban.  He  also  submitted  that   the   judge   wrongly   requiring
    corroborative evidence to support aspects of the appellant's claims.

 4. My attention was drawn to the significant  bundle  of  cases  involving
    children in the appellant's ring binder in relation to the  claim  that
    the judge had not taken account of the appellant's  age  when  reaching
    findings. Mr Draycott drew further attention to the  expert  report  in
    connection with the judge's view that forced recruitment of minors  did
    not occur in Afghanistan. He contended that the  judge  had  overlooked
    the contrary conclusion in the  report.   Additionally  the  judge  had
    applied information from research conducted after the  hearing  without
    giving the parties an opportunity to comment.

 5. Mr McVeety reminded me of the short response under Rule  24  dated  2nd
    September  2015  asserting  that  the  judge   had   directed   herself
    appropriately. He contended that the judge's reference  to  information
    in  the  Operational  Guidance  Note  was   to   publically   available
    information and, as such, was akin to reference to  the  COIS  reports.
    He also submitted that the expert report was  a  statement  of  opinion
    although he did concede that the information covered was comprehensive.
     He thought that the judge had made reference to the appellant's  young
    age before reaching conclusions and decisions based upon implausibility
    coupled to inconsistency in evidence.  In the latter  respect  he  made
    reference to paragraphs 39, 40 and 41 of the decision.  He also  argued
    that the  judge  did  not  specifically  refer  to  a  requirement  for
    corroboration but simply identified deficiencies in  evidence.   As  to
    the alleged delay, Mr McVeety pointed out that  this  had  amounted  to
    only about twelve months which should not be seen as significant and so
    was not material.

Conclusions

 6. As to the alleged failure to take into  consideration  the  appellant's
    age when reaching  credibility  findings,  the  judge  does  make  some
    reference to this in conjunction with the appellant's alleged  lack  of
    knowledge of his father's activities. Specifically in paragraph 39  the
    judge refers to the appellant's age but thought  it  relevant,  without
    further  explanation,  that  the  appellant  could  not  answer   basic
    questions about the Taliban and his father's role within it. It  should
    be noted  that  the  unfavourable  conclusions  about  the  appellant's
    credibility are reached without any reference to the expert  report  of
    Dr Foxley who, at paragraph 18 of his report,  gives  possible  reasons
    for "weakness in detail" in the appellant's evidence.  It was incumbent
    upon the judge to consider the report  in  this  context  and  to  give
    cogent reasons  for  dismissing  its  conclusions  if  the  appellant's
    credibility was to be attacked.  It is also the case that the  decision
    rejects the appellant's claim of attempted forced  recruitment  by  the
    Taliban for implausibility rather than  a  reasoned  rejection  of  the
    expert evidence on this subject covered in paragraph 36 of Dr  Foxley's
    report.

 7. Although, in the context of credibility findings, the grounds  seek  to
    criticise the judge for taking into consideration the information in an
    Operational Guidance Note (paragraphs 44 and 45 of the decision), it is
    not evident that such reference breached  the  guidance  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in FS. That decision  points  out  that  such  notes  must  be
    considered in the context of subsequent evidence about the situation in
    the country of origin including reference to  subsequent  COI  reports.
    Paragraphs 44 and 45 of the decision show that the judge  did  consider
    such evidence in that manner and so the decision cannot  be  criticised
    on that account.

 8. The  judge's  conclusions  about  risk  on  return  do  not  show  that
    consideration  was  given  to  the  fact  that   the   respondent   had
    acknowledged that her obligations under Section 55  had  not  been  met
    (paragraph 85 of the refusal letter) and that reception  facilities  in
    Afghanistan were not adequate. The judge finds in paragraph 53 that the
    respondent had not breached her duty to  trace  without  giving  cogent
    reasons or taking into consideration the acknowledgement that reception
    facilities were not adequate.

 9. Finally, as to the allegation  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    consideration delay in his proportionality assessment, I conclude  that
    the error is not material as it is clear from the content of paragraphs
    66 and  70  of  the  decision,  that  the  judge  carefully  took  into
    consideration the length of time which the appellant had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom and the private life which he had  established  in  that
    period.

10. Although I have concluded that some of the grounds of application  have
    not been made out, the judge's failure to engage fully with the  expert
    report of Dr Foxley has tainted her  findings  of  fact.  Further,  the
    judge has failed to fully asses risk on return  in  the  light  of  the
    respondent's concessions. On the basis of those two material errors  it
    is my conclusion that the appeal should be heard afresh by  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal.   This  conclusion  accords  with  the  provisions   of
    paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement for the  First-tier  and  Upper
    Tribunal done by the Senior President on 25th September 2012 because of
    the judicial fact-finding which will be  necessary  in  order  for  the
    decision in the appeal to be re-made.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on  a  point  of  law
and is set aside.  The appeal is  to  be  heard  afresh  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal following the directions set out below.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction pursuant to Rule  13  of
the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
Chamber) Rules 2014.

I continue that order applying Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008):

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original appellant.   This
direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure  to  comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal is to be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at
    Stoke.

 2. The time estimate for the hearing is three hours.

 3. A Pushtu interpreter should be made available for the hearing.

 4. Representatives should submit a consolidated bundle of all documents to
    be considered at the hearing.

 5. The hearing will take place on a date to be specified by  the  Resident
    Judge at Stoke.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
