
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/07333/2014
                                                               AA/07334/2014
                                                               AA/07335/2014
                                                               AA/07336/2014
                                                               AA/07337/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th September 2015                        |On 22nd September 2015        |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                           mr d (first appellant)
                           WIFE (second appellant)
                        first child (third appellant)
                       second child (fourth appellant)
                        third child (fifth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Brakaj of Iris Law Firm Middlesbrough
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants and each of them are citizens of Albania, whose dates of
    birth are recorded respectively as 29th January  1975,  1st  May  1973,
    27th December 2009, 10th January 2007  and  18th  November  2012.   The
    First and Second  Appellants  are  husband  and  wife.   The  remaining
    Appellants are their children.  On  5th  January  2012  the  Appellants
    claimed international protection as refugees upon arrival at St Pancras
    International Station having travelled from Belgium.  On 8th  September
    2014 decisions were made to refuse the applications and to remove  them
    from the United Kingdom by way of directions pursuant to Section 10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The Appellants  appealed  and  on
    27th October 2014 their appeals were heard by Judges of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kelly and Evans, sitting  as  a  panel,  at  Bradford.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 11th November  2014  the  panel  dismissed  the
    appeals and each of them.

 2. The basis upon which the Appellants pursued their appeals is set out in
    the Decision and Reasons of the panel and was as follows:

         "2.  Credibility is not in issue in this appeal and the Appellants'
             history may conveniently be summarised as follows:

         3.   The Appellant [by which was meant the First  Appellant]  hails
             from a village called 'Morin', which is to the north of  Kukes
             in Northern Albania.  His family has been locked  in  a  blood
             feud (known in Albania as 'Kanun law') (sic)  since  the  time
             when his great-grandfather (I) took back  his  sister  from  a
             member of the 'S' family to whom she was married.  I's brother-
             in-law murdered him in revenge.   This  prompted  I's  son  to
             murder his father's killer.   There  has  been  at  least  one
             further killing  since  that  time  and  numerous  threats  of
             revenge.

         4.   In an attempt to escape from the consequences of  the  ongoing
             feud, the Appellant left Albania, aged 16 years, in 1991.   He
             resided in Greece for the following eight or nine years.  This
             period was frequently interrupted by the Greek police removing
             him to Albania, following which  he  would  return  to  Greece
             almost immediately.  In 1999, he went to Macedonia for  a  few
             months and then to Italy, where he stayed until either 2002 or
             2003.  He then returned to Albania for  two  to  three  weeks,
             before moving to Macedonia in either 2003 or 2004.   In  2005,
             he spent a few months in  both  Slovenia  and  Austria  before
             returning to Italy,  where  he  remained  (legally)  until  in
             January 2012, when he came to the United Kingdom.  He  claimed
             asylum at St Pancras Railway Station.

         5.   In 1999, whilst residing in Greece, the Appellant returned  to
             an olive grove where he, his mother, and his  younger  brother
             (then aged 14 years)  were  working,  only  to  find  two  men
             stabbing the apparently lifeless  bodies  of  his  mother  and
             brother.  The two men  then  turned  their  attention  to  the
             Appellant and began to stab him.  The Appellant  used  a  beer
             bottle in order to defend himself.  The  Appellant  was  later
             informed that one of the two men had  subsequently  died  from
             the injuries which the Appellant had inflicted upon  him  with
             the bottle and that he is being blamed by  the  S  family  for
             this man's death.

         6.   The Appellant woke up in a Greek hospital, having  been  in  a
             coma for some six months.  Once  he  had  recovered  from  his
             injuries, the Greek authorities told him that he had to  leave
             because he did not have any lawful status in the country.   So
             it was that he moved via Macedonia, to Italy.

         7.   Throughout the Appellant's  travels  with  his  family  around
             southern Europe, the family in Morin has remained  unoccupied.
             In 2011 whilst residing lawfully  in  Italy,  the  Appellant's
             paternal aunt (who had remained in Morin) died.  The Appellant
             and his father therefore returned to Morin in order to  attend
             her funeral.  However, the Appellant was threatened whilst  in
             the family home by a man who was armed with a  gun.   The  man
             told the Appellant that he needed the S family's permission to
             be in Morin.  He was rescued by his  cousins,  who  were  also
             armed and had travelled  to  Morin  in  order  to  attend  the
             funeral.  The Appellant  thereafter  returned  immediately  to
             Italy.  His father was permitted by the S family to remain for
             his sister's funeral and returned to Italy  on  the  following
             day.

         8.   In view of the incident at his aunt's funeral,  the  Appellant
             concluded that it was not safe  for  him  and  his  family  to
             remain in Italy.   They  therefore  travelled  by  train,  via
             Belgium, to the United Kingdom.

         9.   The Appellant fears that if he returns to Albania he  will  be
             killed by the S family and that the Albanian police  will  not
             protect him."

 3. The Secretary of State had accepted the Appellants'  account  generally
    but refused the application on the basis that  internal  relocation  to
    Tirana, the Albanian capital, was a viable and  reasonable  option  for
    these Appellants.

 4. The panel agreed with the Respondent.  Applying the lower standard  the
    panel was satisfied that the Appellants were not currently at  risk  of
    being killed or ill-treated by the  S  family  provided  they  were  to
    reside outside the general area of Kukes.  On that  basis  the  appeals
    and each of them were dismissed.

 5. Not content with the panel's decision, by Notice  dated  26th  November
    2014, the Appellants and each of them made application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds submit that  the  premise
    upon which  the  panel  found  that  the  Appellants  might  internally
    relocate was flawed amounting to an error of law. On 16th December 2014
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cruthers granted permission.

Was there a material error of law?

6.   In order properly to understand the issue it is helpful to set  out  in
    full the relevant paragraphs in the Decision demonstrating the  panel's
    reasoning:

         "18. On the basis of the primary facts that we have  summarised  at
             paragraphs  3  to  8  (above),  we  are  satisfied  that   the
             Appellants are not currently at risk of being killed  or  ill-
             treated by members of the S family, provided that they  reside
             outside the general area of  Kukes  in  northern  Albania.  We
             arrive at this conclusion because the last occasion upon which
             the S family demonstrated  a  commitment  to  reaching  beyond
             their home area was now some fifteen years ago.

         19.  We have noted that both the Appellant  [First  Appellant]  and
             his father returned to Kukes in 2011 and  thereafter  returned
             to Italy unharmed.  It is of course right also  to  note  that
             the Appellant had to be rescued  from  possible  harm  by  his
             cousins on that occasion, and that his father was only able to
             remain for his sister's funeral with the permission of  the  S
             family.  We thus accept that there continues to be a real risk
             that the Appellant would suffer serious harm  if  he  were  to
             return  to  either  Kukes  or  his  home  village  of   Morin.
             Nevertheless, the S family's reaction  to  this  recent  visit
             provides further evidence to show that their adverse  interest
             in the D family is now confined to opposition to their  return
             to the home area.

         20.  Mrs Liddle sought to persuade us that the Appellant  had  only
             been able to avoid persecution by the S family since  1999  by
             living in self-confinement.  However this phrase  is  intended
             to cover a situation in which a victim of a blood feud is only
             able to avoid its consequences by  living  discreetly  in  his
             home area [see paragraph 71 of EH (Blood feuds)  Albania]  not
             withstanding the fact  that  this  characterisation  was  also
             adopted by the decision maker [see paragraph 17 of the reasons
             for refusal letter] it is not in our judgment  appropriate  to
             describe the Appellant's account of how  he  has  been  living
             since 1991.  If it was, then internal relocation  could  never
             be considered as an appropriate means of avoiding  persecution
             by  non-state  actors.  In  our  judgment,   the   appropriate
             characterisation of the Appellant's lifestyle  since  1991  is
             one of self-imposed exile.

         21.  We have noted that the Appellant  claims  to  have  constantly
             changed his address whilst he  was  most  recently  living  in
             Italy. There is however no evidence  to  suggest  that  the  S
             family were seeking to trace him during this  period,  or  any
             other time since the  incident  in  1999.   We  are  therefore
             satisfied the continued exile outside  Albania  is  no  longer
             necessary in order to avoid being harmed by the S family,  and
             we have no real doubt that he would be able to live openly and
             safely with his family in  the  Albanian  capital  of  Tirana.
             Moreover, we are satisfied that it is reasonable to expect him
             to relocate to that city.  Despite the many years that he  has
             spent residing in other  countries  in  southern  Europe,  the
             Appellant remains fluent in Albanian (as was evidenced by  his
             use of an Albanian interpreter at  the  hearing)  and  he  is,
             incidentally, also fluent in Italian and Greek languages  (see
             his replies to the 'illegal entrant interview').  Furthermore,
             he has experience of working as a carpenter as well as in less
             skilled occupations [see  the  'illegal  entrant  interview'].
             There is thus no reason to suppose that he will  be  destitute
             in Tirana, anymore than he was when residing in  the  numerous
             other countries that he has visited since 1991.

         22.  Finally, we are satisfied by the evidence  that  is  cited  at
             paragraphs 19 and 20 of the reasons for refusal  letter,  that
             the Albanian  authorities  take  steps  in  order  to  prevent
             persecution or the suffering of serious harm by  operating  an
             effective legal system  for  the  detection,  prosecution  and
             punishment of the perpetrators  of  such  acts  and  that  the
             Appellant would have access to that legal system.  ..."

 7. The Appellants' case as set out in the grounds  is  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to take account of the fact that the First Appellant was stabbed
    whilst in Greece when the S family specifically sought out  the  family
    for the purpose of effecting the blood feud and that whilst that  event
    occurred approximately fifteen years ago that was evidence on the  part
    of the S family of its intention to seek out the  First  Appellant  and
    inflict harm upon him should he be found.  That no further harm came to
    the First Appellant was, in the submission made in  the  grounds,  only
    evidence that he was not found rather than any lack of interest in him.
     Further  it  was  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  attaching
    significant weight to the First Appellant and his father  returning  to
    the Kukes area for the wake.  Reliance was placed in the grounds on the
    fact that the First Appellant had to be  rescued  by  his  cousins  and
    therefore that, it was submitted provided significant evidence that the
    S family still wished to inflict harm upon the First Appellant were  he
    to be found. Insufficient regard therefore was said to have been  given
    overall to the risk to the First Appellant and his family.

 8. Though not mentioned in the grounds, Ms Brakaj began by seeking to draw
    my attention to a document dated 21st December 2012 which  was  headed,
    'Confirmation'.  The document purported to be from the Committee of the
    Pan-national  Conciliation.   Clearly  that  document  was  before  the
    Secretary of State; reference is made to  it  at  paragraph  7  of  the
    refusal letter and again at 8(g).  In fact, insofar as  there  appeared
    to the Secretary of State to be discrepancies concerning dates,  it  is
    clear that they arose from that document.  However it was common ground
    that there was no evidence that that particular document was before the
    panel: certainly it does not appear in the bundle of either party.  The
    reason why Ms Brakaj sought to bring the document to my  attention  was
    because its third paragraph reads:

         "The Committee of Pan-national Conciliation will do all the efforts
          to conciliate the parts but in the actual situation the  committee
         confirms that the life of B D and the lives of his  family  are  in
         danger from this blood feud in every moment and in every  territory
         of Albania" (sic).

 9. It is disappointing to note that since the Appellants'  representatives
    had relied upon the document and submitted it to the Secretary of State
    they had not, it would seem, sought to ensure  that  the  document  was
    available for the panel nor, given the provisions of Rule 15(2A) of the
    Tribunal Upper Procedure Rules 2008, made any application to the  Upper
    Tribunal for that document to be  considered.  Nevertheless  given  the
    nature of the appeal, with the consent of Mr Mangion, I looked  to  the
    document, though I remind myself that the country guidance case  of  EH
    (Blood  feuds)  Albania  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00348  makes  reference   to
    attestation letters from Albanian non-governmental  organisations  with
    the guidance being that little weight should be given to them  as  they
    should not be regarded as reliable, see paragraph 74(h).  On  any  view
    the 'confirmation letter' of 21st December 2012 was not accepted on the
    issue of internal relocation since the refusal letter made  plain  that
    that internal relocation was in issue.

10. It is difficult to see how the panel can be found to be  in  error  for
    not having considered this document when it was not placed before them.
    Even were I to have allowed the Appellants to amend  their  grounds  to
    place reliance on this document, given that  little  weight  should  be
    attached to it, it is difficult to see how any error could be found  to
    be material.

11. Ms Brakaj then made further submissions which  she  accepted  could  be
    summarised as follows, "There was no sufficient analysis of  the  reach
    of the S family or of its intent".

12. I remind myself of the guiding principles that affect  my  approach  to
    this appeal.  These are well-known and are helpfully summarised in  the
    case of R (Iran) -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 982:

         "... it may be convenient to give a brief summary of the points  of
         law that will most frequently be encountered in practice:

         (i)  making perverse or irrational findings on a matter or  matters
             that were material to the outcome ("material matters");

         (ii) failure to give reasons or any adequate reasons  for  findings
             on material matters;

         (iii)    failure to take into account and/or resolve  conflicts  of
             fact or opinion or material matters;

         (iv) giving weight to immaterial matters;

         (v)  making a material misdirection of law on any material matter;

         (vi) committing or permitting a procedural  or  other  irregularity
             capable of making a material difference to the outcome or  the
             fairness of the proceedings;

         (vii)    making a mistake as to a  material  fact  which  could  be
             established by objective and uncontentious evidence, where the
             Appellant and/or his advisers were  not  responsible  for  the
             mistake, and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a
             mistake was made".

13. The Court of Appeal went on to emphasise that any error  needed  to  be
    material.   Further  where  late  evidence  was  to  be  admitted,  the
    principles in Ladd -v- Marshall [1954] 1 WLR  1489  were  apposite.   A
    judge may only be overturned by the use of further evidence if  it  can
    be shown that:

         "(1) the new evidence could not with reasonable diligence have been
             obtained for use at the trial (or hearing);

         (2)  the new evidence  must  be  such  that,  if  given,  it  would
             probably have had an important influence on the result of  the
             case (though it need not be decisive);

         (3)  that the evidence was apparently credible although it need not
             be incontrovertible".

    Those principles are  relevant  to  the  confirmation  letter  of  21st
         December 2012.

14. In this case the panel directed itself  by  reference  to  the  country
    guidance case of EH (Blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 and  set
    out from the headnote those parts which  were  material  to  the  issue
    which they had to resolve.  There was some discussion as to whether the
    panel had considered only the headnote rather than the substance of the
    country guidance but given reference to paragraph 71 at paragraph 20 of
    the statement of reasons any such  submission  would  be  difficult  to
    sustain.  Further I note at paragraph 16 that the panel were careful to
    make clear that they had considered  all  the  evidence  in  the  round
    before making their findings.

15. In the case of VW (Sri Lanka) -v-  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 522 McCoombe said at paragraph 12:

         "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,
         when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given  a  judgment  explaining
         why he has reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow  out
         industriously areas of evidence that have  been  less  fully  dealt
         with than others and then to use this as a basis  for  saying  that
         the judge's decision is legally flawed because it did not deal with
         a particular matter more fully.  In my judgment, with respect, that
         it is no basis on which to sustain a proper challenge to a  judge's
         finding of fact.  ..."

16.  In  McGraddie  (Appellant)  v  McGraddie   (AP)   and   another   (AP)
    (Respondents) (Scotland) [2013] UKSC 58 the Supreme Court reminded  all
    appellate jurisdictions of the care that is to be taken when looking to
    reverse findings of fact made at first instance and that they should do
    so only when satisfied that the findings were  plainly  wrong  and  not
    supported by the evidence.

17.  The  question  for  me  is  whether  despite  the  apparently  careful
    consideration given to the evidence,  the  panel  nevertheless  made  a
    primary finding that was not open to it.

18. It is to be remembered that it is the lower standard  which  is  to  be
    applied in appeals such as this.  I do not find that it was open to the
    panel to find that the incident in Greece, for which  it  found  the  S
    family responsible, albeit fifteen years ago,  and  which  resulted  in
    the First Appellant being hospitalised for  six  months,  or  the  more
    recent incident in  2011,  when  members  of  the  S  family  travelled
    approximately 40 kilometres to find and threaten  the  First  Appellant
    (see question 29 of the substantive interview) entitled  the  panel  to
    find, applying that lower standard, that  evidence  pointed  to  the  S
    family no longer having an interest in pursuing the  Appellant  outside
    of Kukes.  On the contrary the evidence  indicated  that  when  it  was
    possible to trace or find the Appellant he  was  at  significant  risk.
    That the family  in  2011  travelled  40  kilometres  to  do  him  harm
    reinforces not that the Appellant was no longer being pursued  but  the
    contrary.  That the Appellant's father was allowed to stay for the wake
    was consistent  with  the  local  "honour  system",  as  to  which  see
    paragraph 71 of EH (Blood feuds) which makes reference to a besa  which
    might be given for  a  particular  event  such  as  a  family  funeral.
    Further that the S family had not pursued the Appellant and his  family
    in Italy in circumstances where the family kept changing their  address
    again does not lead to the conclusion that this family  could  relocate
    to Tirana and just settle down. It  is  to  be  remembered  that  their
    evidence was accepted as credible. Their history had  been  one  of  an
    almost nomadic existence. It is not surprising therefore that there had
    not been many times when the families had cone into  contact.  That  is
    far removed from concluding that there  was  no  evidence  that  the  S
    family were any longer interested in pursuing  the  Appellants  outside
    their home area.

19. If the Appellant were required with his family to live in Tirana whilst
    fearing leaving their homes then the issue of self-confinement and  the
    principles which emerge from the guidance in HJ (Iran) -v- Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 are relevant.

20. Having found that the premises  upon  which  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellants might internally relocate are not sustainable and amount  to
    a material error of law I have to decide whether the matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard  or  whether  it  is
    possible from the findings already made and the evidence received to re-
    make the decision myself.  I come to the view that  I  am  able  to  do
    that.

The remaking

21. In my judgment the undisputed  facts  demonstrate  that  the  S  family
    remain committed to the feud.  The  panel  made  that  finding  itself.
    Where I depart is that the incident in 1999 and more latterly  in  2011
    did not permit a finding, when applying the lower standard, that the  S
    family would not pursue the First Appellant  in  Tirana  were  they  to
    become aware of his presence there.  That there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for certain individuals is to be seen in the context of  all
    of paragraph 69 and 70 of EH which provides as follows:

         "69. If there is a risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  on  the
             particular facts of an Appellant's appeal, the  next  question
             is  whether  internal  relocation   is   available   affording
             effective  protection,   including   whether   it   would   be
             unreasonable to expect the Appellant to avail himself of  that
             protection.  We remind ourselves how small the  population  of
             Albania is, just over 3,000,000 with  a  land  mass  of  about
             10,000 square miles, roughly fifteen times the size of London,
             much of it mountains.  The Respondent's  current  guidance  on
             internal relocation in Albania is set  out  in  her  May  2012
             Operational Guidance Note as follows:

                  '2.4.2   Very  careful  consideration  must  be  given  to
                        whether internal relocation would be  an  effective
                        way   to   avoid    a    real    risk    of    ill-
                        treatment/persecution at the  hands  of,  tolerated
                        by, or with the connivance of, state agents.  If an
                        applicant  who  faces   a   real   risk   of   ill-
                        treatment/persecution in their home area  would  be
                        able to relocate to a part  of  the  country  where
                        they would not be real risk, whether from state  or
                        non-state actors, and it would not be unduly  harsh
                        to  expect  them  to  do   so,   then   asylum   or
                        humanitarian protection should be refused.

                  2.4.3    Albania covers a  total  area  of  28,748  square
                        kilometres  and  has  an  estimated  population  of
                        3,002,859.   Tirana  is  the  capital   and   other
                        principal  cities  are  Koritsa,  Durazzo,   Berat,
                        Elbasan, Lushnje, Scutari, Kavaje, Valona, Pogradec
                        and Fier.

                  2.4.4.   The constitution and law provide for  freedom  of
                        movement  within  the  country,   foreign   travel,
                        emigration  and  repatriation  and  the  government
                        generally  respected  those  rights  in   practice.
                        Internal  migrants  must   transfer   their   civil
                        registration to their new community of residence to
                        receive government services and must prove they are
                        legally domiciled  through  property  ownership,  a
                        property rental agreement, or utility bills.   Many
                        persons could not provide this proof and  therefore
                        lacked  access  to   essential   services.    Other
                        citizens  lacked   formal   registration   in   the
                        communities in  which  they  resided,  particularly
                        Roma  and  Balkan  Egyptians.   The  law  did   not
                        prohibit  their  registration  but  it  was   often
                        difficult  in  practice  to  complete.    The   law
                        prohibits forced exile and the government  did  not
                        employ it.

                  2.4.5    It  may  be  practical  for  applicants  in  some
                        categories who may  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
                        persecution in one area to relocate to other  parts
                        of Albania where they would not have a well-founded
                        fear  and,  taking  into  account  their   personal
                        circumstances, it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to
                        expect to do so.

         70.  Internal relocation will be effective to protect an  applicant
             only where the risk does not  extend  beyond  the  Appellant's
             local area and he is unlikely to be  traced  in  the  rest  of
             Albania  by  the  aggressor  clan.   A   crucial   factor   in
             establishing whether internal relocation is a real possibility
             is the geographical and political reach of the aggressor clan:
             where that clan has government connections,  locally  or  more
             widely, the requirement to transfer civil  registration  to  a
             new area, as set out at 2.4.4 above, would appear  to  obviate
             the possibility of  'disappearing'  in  another  part  of  the
             country, and would be likely to drive the male  members  of  a
             victim clan  to  self-confinement  in  the  home  area  as  an
             alternative. Whether internal relocation is reasonable in  any
             particular appeal will always be a question of  fact  for  the
             fact-finding Tribunal".

22. In my judgment, despite Mr Mangion's valiant  efforts  to  persuade  me
    otherwise, the evidence points to a determination on the part of the  S
    clan, contrary to the findings  of  the  panel,  to  pursue  the  First
    Appellant whenever his whereabouts comes to their attention.  The panel
    itself accepted that the First Appellant could not return  to  his  own
    area and were he to do so then the question  of  "self-confinement"  in
    the home area would have been an issue.  However self-confinement  must
    also be considered also were the First Appellant to relocate because if
    in going to Tirana, as suggested by the panel, he would  be  unsafe  in
    leaving his home, then it follows that relocation to that life would be
    unduly harsh.

23. Looking to the guidance I come to the view  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect these Appellants, against  the  history  of  this  feud
    which has gone on for so long, with real harm having come to the  First
    Appellant, and who because of the feud has spent many years moving from
    place to place, now to return to Albania where  in  my  judgment  there
    remains a real risk of  harm  coming  to  him  and  where  the  country
    guidance does not suggest that in circumstances such as  his  there  is
    sufficiency of protection.

24. As is said at paragraph 74(k) whether the feud continues, and what  the
    attitude of the aggressor clan to  its  pursuit  may  be,  will  remain
    questions of fact to be determined by the fact-finding Tribunal.  In my
    judgment the evidence points only to a real risk of a continuing danger
    such that this Appellant and his family cannot reasonably  be  expected
    internally to relocate.

Notice of Decision

The appeals of each of the Appellants to the  Upper  Tribunal  are  allowed.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The decisions are re-
made such that each of  the  appeals  are  allowed.  The  First  Appellant's
appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.  The remaining appeals  were  dependant
upon that of the First Appellant and are allowed on that basis. The  appeals
were not advanced on human rights grounds other than an acceptance that  the
human rights aspect of the appeals stood and fall with the asylum claim.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
