
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
AA/07009/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |             Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 27 January 2016                    |             On 16 February 2016      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                     p e
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis of counsel, instructed by Birnberg,
                  Pierce and Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Ms A Fijiwala, a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. An anonymity order was made previously. I continue that order  pursuant
    to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
    2008/269). Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,  no
    report of these proceedings or any form of  publication  thereof  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original Appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blundell, promulgated on 20 October 2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 2
    April 2015 refusing the appellant's claim for asylum.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was  born  on  13  December
    1967.  The appellant arrived in the UK around June  2000.   He  claimed
    asylum on 14 June 2000.  On 30 June 2000  the  appellant  returned  his
    Statement of Evidence Form to the respondent.   On  27  June  2001  the
    appellant signed a notice indicating that he  wanted  to  withdraw  his
    asylum claim.  In October  2001,  however,  he  changed  his  mind  and
    indicated that he wanted to pursue his claim.  It is  accepted  by  the
    respondent that a letter to that effect was sent by his  solicitors  on
    22 October 2001.   On  17  February  2006  further  representations  in
    support of that claim were made by  the  appellant's  solicitors.   The
    appellant wrote to the respondent in May 2007 and March 2011.  In  2012
    the appellant's Member of Parliament, Stephen Timms MP, became involved
    in his case.  He wrote to the respondent on 18 April  2012  seeking  an
    update.  On 16 May 2012 the respondent replied to Mr Timms MP accepting
    that the appellant had an outstanding claim.  On 10 December  2013  the
    respondent  wrote  to  the  appellant's  solicitors  stating  that  the
    appellant's case had been transferred from the case assurance and audit
    unit to the older live cases unit.  Mr Timms MP was involved again when
    he wrote to the respondent on 27 January 2015.  The respondent  replied
    on 17 February 2015 stating that the appellant's asylum claim had  been
    refused on 27 October 2014 and that  he  had  failed  to  appeal.   The
    appellant was invited to leave the UK,  failing  which  the  respondent
    would seek to remove him.  A letter  before  action  was  sent  to  the
    respondent submitting that the appellant had not received the letter of
    27 October 2014 or any refusal.   In  response  to  the  letter  before
    action the respondent provided an amended immigration decision dated  2
    April 2015 enclosing the original refusal letter of October 2014.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed against the decision  of  the  respondent  of  2
    April 2015 to the First-tier Tribunal.  The Tribunal, in dismissing the
    appeal, did not accept the appellant's account of  his  involvement  in
    the LTTE in Sri Lanka.  He did not accept the  appellant's  account  of
    detention, torture and ill-treatment at the hands  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  The Tribunal  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  to  have
    attended a number of demonstrations  and  protests  in  London  thereby
    rejecting the appellant's account of extensive  sur  place  activities.
    The Tribunal accepted the appellant's account that he was  arrested  on
    20 June 2013 at a cricket match in Cardiff.  However, the judge did not
    accept that it was reasonably likely that the authorities in Sri  Lanka
    would have sought the appellant or arrested his wife on account of  his
    activities on 20 June 2013. The Tribunal found that the appellant would
    not be at risk of persecution on account of  his  actual  or  perceived
    political opinion on return to Sri Lanka.  The Tribunal also considered
    that the appellant's mental health was not such that a  return  to  Sri
    Lanka would breach Articles 3 or 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights.





The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  of  appeal
    assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    significance  of  the  appellant's  involvement  with  Tamil   diaspora
    organisations.  The grounds assert that the judge failed to  apply  the
    principles in the case of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 ('HJ (Iran)') to the
    appellant's claim.  The grounds also submit that the  judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for  not  attaching  weight  to  the  appellant's
    wife's witness statement.  On  19  November  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R A Cox granted the appellant permission to appeal.  The grant of
    permission sets out that it is arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge seemed to have rejected the appellant's wife's  statement  rather
    summarily  and  that  counsel's  Article  3  argument  concerning   the
    likelihood of detention and ill-treatment on return was  not  addressed
    by the judge.

Summary of Submissions

The appellant's submissions

 6. Ground 1 of the grounds of appeal assert  that  the  appellant  claimed
    that he had been involved with Tamil diaspora  organisations  including
    the British Tamils Forum ('BTF') and the  Transnational  Government  of
    Tamil Eelam ('TGTE').  It is  asserted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge failed to make reasoned findings as to  whether  the  appellant's
    involvement with these organisations placed the appellant at risk owing
    to the proscription of those organisations by the Sri Lankan government
    as terrorist organisations.  The grounds conceded, at paragraph 6, that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant had not been involved in the extent of activities as  claimed
    by the appellant.  However, it is asserted that it was still  incumbent
    upon the judge to consider whether the particular activities  in  which
    the  appellant  claimed  he  was  involved  placed  him  at   risk   of
    persecution. Reliance is placed  on  the  case  of  UB  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (C5/2015/0753) ('UB')  where
    it was found arguable that the appellant's involvement in the TGTE  was
    significant.  It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal judge should
    have considered this  point,  the  Court  of  Appeal  having  found  it
    arguable that involvement with the TGTE makes an individual at risk  of
    persecution.

 7. Ground 2 of the grounds of appeal assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge appears to have doubted the claimant's claim in  respect  of  the
    possible number of protests and demonstrations that he had attended  in
    the UK but did not reject entirely that the appellant  was  politically
    active in the UK.  It is submitted therefore,  that  the  Judge  should
    have gone on to consider whether the  principles  in  HJ  (Iran)  -were
    relevant to the  appellant's  claim.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    states that he rejected the appellant's account of extensive sur  place
    activities yet accepted his involvement in a protest at Cardiff Cricket
    Stadium on 20 June 2013 opposing the presence of the Sri Lankan cricket
    team in the UK.  In  accepting  the  appellant's  involvement  in  this
    event,  which  the  appellant  described  as  being  motivated  by  the
    opposition to involvement with the Sri Lankan team bearing in mind  the
    genocide against Tamils, the Judge does not dispute why  the  appellant
    attended which, it is submitted, indicates the clear political  opinion
    in opposition to the Sri Lankan government.  It is therefore  submitted
    that notwithstanding the quantity of the events that the  appellant  is
    accepted to have attended in the  UK  he  is  clearly  someone  who  is
    actively critical  of  the  Sri  Lankan  government  in  terms  of  the
    persecution and marginalisation of Tamil people in Sri Lanka.  This  is
    a political opinion that the appellant simply  would  not  be  able  to
    express in Sri Lanka owing to the fear of persecution and on that basis
    the principles in HJ (Iran) should have been considered.

 8. At ground 3 it is asserted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
    give adequate reasons for  not  attaching  weight  to  the  appellant's
    wife's witness statement.  The  appellant's  wife  provided  a  witness
    statement dated 10 September  2015  which  had  been  duly  signed  and
    attested by an attorney-at-law in Sri Lanka.  The appellant's wife gave
    an account of having been detained on 24 July 2013 where she was  shown
    photographs of the appellant attending the protest at  Cardiff  Cricket
    Ground.  It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal judge  failed  to
    give clear reasons  as  to  why  he  rejected  the  appellant's  wife's
    evidence  and  attached  no  weight  on  it  as  corroborative  of  the
    appellant's account.  It submitted that the  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant and her detention in July 2013 is clearly indicative  of  the
    fact that the Sri Lankan authorities perceived the appellant to have  a
    significant role in post-conflict Tamil separatism such that  the  case
    of GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC) ('GJ') should apply.

 9. Ground 4 - It was confirmed at the hearing that  ground  4,  which  was
    that the appellant's removal would amount to a breach of Article 3, was
    no longer being pursued by the appellant.

10. In oral submissions Mr Lewis acknowledged that the judge's decision was
    very comprehensive.  However, he submitted that  it  was  fundamentally
    flawed in the assessment of the activities of the appellant in the  UK.
    He asserted that this was material  because  of  the  anxious  scrutiny
    prevailing in asylum claims.  He relied on the case of GJ in which  the
    panel assessed the risk in Sri Lanka.  He referred to the  headnote  at
    7(a) and the category of  persons  at  real  risk  are  those  who  are
    perceived to be a threat because they have a significant  role  in  the
    post-Tamil separatism.  He submitted that mere detention is  sufficient
    to place an individual at risk on return.  He referred to  paragraph  8
    of the headnote where the panel  also  referred  to  the  sophisticated
    intelligence in Sri Lanka.  He referred  to  paragraph  336  where  the
    Tribunal found that the diaspora is heavily penetrated  and  they  take
    photos of people at demonstrations.  It was noted that the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities may be using face recognition technology. He submitted that
    the attendance at demonstrations alone was sufficient to create a risk.
     In the GJ case the first appellant's appeal was  allowed,  the  factor
    that the Tribunal considered was attendance at pro-Tamil protests.   He
    submitted that it was significant that there is  a  ten-year  delay  in
    determining  the  appellant's  application  by  the  Home  Office.   He
    referred to paragraph 55 of the Tribunal's  decision  where  the  judge
    rejected the appellant's attendance  at  demonstrations.  Although  the
    Judge considers the approach in TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA  Civ  40  ('TK
    (Burundi)')  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  inconsistency   in   the
    appellant's account.  The rejection of the evidence was because  of  no
    corroboration.

11. Mr Lewis submitted that the judge accepted that the  appellant  was  at
    the demonstration and accepted that he took part in the  protest.   The
    panel in the GJ case accepted that the Sri Lankan authorities would  be
    monitoring events.  The judge's rejection of mere attendance would  not
    therefore be sufficient.  The conduct of the  appellant  was  over  and
    above mere participation as  he  was  convicted  of  attacking  someone
    during the demonstration.  This shows that the appellant had a  greater
    role.  His profile would have been heightened.   The  authorities  will
    perceive the protest as part of  an  attempt  to  gain  an  independent
    State.  If the judge accepted that the appellant's  attendance  at  the
    demonstration was covered by the press it was likely  to  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities.  The government of Sri Lanka invest  very
    significant  resources  using   face   recognition   technology.    The
    authorities could have found out about the participants from  a  Google
    search.  If the government  of  Sri  Lanka  is  taking  photographs  to
    identify protestors there was a real risk they would try  to  find  out
    the names of those arrested and convicted because they were involved in
    disorder.

12. Further, there  was  corroboration  as  there  was  evidence  from  the
    appellant's wife who was questioned and assaulted.  The judge makes  no
    reference,  given  the  objective  evidence   would   corroborate   the
    appellant's claim, why he gave  no  weight  to  the  statement  by  the
    appellant's wife.  The judge records it but  no  reason  is  given  for
    rejecting  it.   Failure  to  give  weight  to  the  evidence  of   the
    appellant's wife is a material error given the real risk that he  would
    be detained on return to Sri Lanka.

13. With regards to HJ (Iran) he submitted that it comes back to  the  fact
    that the judge accepted that the appellant attended the  protest.   The
    protests led to disruption of the cricket match between Sri  Lanka  and
    England and it would be monitored by the Sri Lankan authorities as  the
    protest was directed at the attendance of the President of Sri Lanka in
    the UK.  The judge has failed to give anxious  scrutiny  to  the  claim
    given the acceptance that he attended the protest in Cardiff.  There is
    a  risk  that  if  the  appellant  were  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities there would be a serious risk that he would be subjected to
    sexual violence and abuse.

The respondent's submissions

14. Ms Fijiwala submitted that there  were  no  errors  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  It was a  comprehensive  detailed  decision.   With
    regard to the first  ground,  the  diaspora  activities,  although  the
    appellant says he attended London  demonstrations  the  judge  did  not
    accept that.  It was  conceded  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the appellant was not involved in the  London
    demonstrations.  It cannot be argued now that  the  judge  should  have
    accepted the activities in London.  The judge begins his  consideration
    at paragraph 54 stating that there is not a shred of evidence  to  show
    that the appellant attended any events.  The  judge  acknowledged  that
    there is no requirement for corroboration as set out in the case of  TK
    (Burundi).  However, the judge indicated that  evidence  in  this  case
    would have been readily available but nothing had been  provided.   The
    judge,  having   disbelieved   the   LTTE   claims,   highlighted   the
    inconsistencies.    With regard to the cricket ground the  judge  fully
    considered that one article in a local newspaper  where  the  appellant
    was incorrectly named would not give rise to  a  risk  on  return.   At
    paragraph 58 of the decision the judge refers to the  fact  that  there
    are no other articles and no photographs regarding  the  incident.   In
    paragraph 62 there is no reference that the appellant was  involved  in
    any particular activism on the day  of  the  event  in  Cardiff.   Even
    though the act of violence was committed by the appellant this does not
    mean that the appellant will  be  at  risk  on  return.   There  is  no
    evidence of how he was involved.  At paragraph 64 the judge notes  that
    the Sri  Lankan  authorities  use  sophisticated  intelligence.  Having
    thoroughly considered the  background  information  the  judge  had  no
    hesitation in finding that the authorities had  no  interest  following
    the  appellant's  involvement  in  one  single  protest.    The   judge
    considered that the appellant would be perceived as a mere participant.



15. With regard to the case of HJ (Iran) she submitted that it  is  unclear
    how this was relevant.  The judge found only  that  the  appellant  had
    attended one protest.  The case before the First-tier Tribunal was  not
    put on the basis of HJ (Iran).  There was no reference to HJ (Iran)  in
    the skeleton argument.  The findings at paragraph 62 and  64  that  the
    appellant was a mere participant do not indicate  that  he  behaved  in
    such a manner that he would be at risk on return.  The  appellant  does
    not fall within HJ (Iran) categories in any event.

16. With regard to ground 3  she  submitted  that  the  appellant's  wife's
    witness statement should be considered in light of all the evidence  in
    the round.  At paragraph 10 the judge  sets  out  the  claim  that  the
    appellant's wife and children were ill-treated.  It is clear  that  the
    judge had in mind the appellant's statement  that  his  wife  was  ill-
    treated.  At paragraph 24 the appellant's representative accepted  that
    there were no photographs and only one report in  which  the  appellant
    was incorrectly named.  She submitted that the  judge  was  correct  to
    question how the authorities could have shown a photo of the  appellant
    to his wife. She submitted that  there  is  no  shred  of  evidence  of
    previous  attendance  of  demonstrations.   At   paragraph   62   after
    considering the relevant cases it  was  perfectly  reasonable  for  the
    judge to consider that it was not likely  that  the  authorities  would
    have any interest in the appellant.  The judge gave the  appellant  the
    benefit of  the  doubt  regarding  inconsistencies  and  dates  in  the
    appellant's wife's witness statement.  She submitted that it is unclear
    what more the judge could  have  done  having  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant took part in any demonstrations in London  and  having  found
    that the appellant was not credible.  The appellant's wife was  not  in
    the UK; her evidence could  not  be  tested.   There  is  no  error  in
    rejecting the witness statement as corroboration when  looking  at  all
    the evidence in the round.

17. With regard to ground 4 Ms Fijiwala submitted that it  did  not  appear
    that this was being pursued.  This was confirmed by Mr Lewis.

The appellant's reply

18. In reply Mr Lewis submitted that the case came down  to  the  objective
    evidence  and  what  was  known  of  the  conduct  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities who go to the  effort  of  identifying  nameless  faces  in
    crowds.  There must be an inference that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    would attempt to find the names of  those  arrested.  This  information
    would be easily available to them.  It is clearly recorded  that  there
    was a banner saying  that  the  Sri  Lankan  government  is  guilty  of
    genocide.  Those involved were charged with public law offences.  There
    must therefore be an inference that anybody involved would be perceived
    to be a Tamil separatist.   In  that  context  the  appellant's  wife's
    evidence confirms a continuing interest in the  appellant  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities. The judge rejected the evidence on the  basis  that
    the appellant would not be of interest to the authorities.  This is the
    very type of activity that would give interest to the authorities.   Mr
    Lewis referred me to the UNHCR Guidance where it is set  out  that  the
    treatment of relatives is relevant to the risk on return to Sri  Lanka.



Discussion

19. There is no appeal  against  the  adverse  findings  of  the  judge  in
    dismissing  the  appeal  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  claims  of
    detention, torture and involvement in the LTTE in Sri Lanka. As  ground
    4 was not pursued there is no appeal against the  judge's  findings  in
    relation the weight to be placed on the medical report or his  findings
    in relation to the claimed suicide attempt.

20.  I have considered grounds 1 and 3 together as  there  is  considerable
    overlap in terms of the findings of the judge.

Grounds 1 and 3

21. Ground 1 asserted that the judge failed to consider the significance of
    the appellant's  involvement  with  Tamil  diaspora  organisations  and
    ground 3 asserts that the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for not
    attaching weight to the appellant's  wife's  witness  statement.    The
    appellant conceded  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant had not been
    involved in the extent of diaspora activities as  claimed.  During  the
    course of the hearing the appellant's representative requested leave to
    withdraw that concession. I refused leave to withdraw  the  concession.
    The findings made are, however, relevant  to  the  assertion  that  the
    judge  failed  to  consider  the  significance   of   the   appellant's
    involvement with Tamil diaspora activities and I set them out below.

22. The judge found, at paragraph 56, that the appellant could have  placed
    photographs or video footage of  the  protests/demonstrations  that  he
    claimed to have attended before him. He  considered  that  evidence  in
    this case would have  been  readily  available  but  nothing  had  been
    provided. The appellant  could  have  adduced  witness  testimony  from
    others who had attended such protests.  The judge specifically referred
    to the principle that there is  no  requirement  for  corroboration  in
    appeals of this nature but took into account that the Tribunal is  well
    accustomed to receiving photographs and footage of individuals at  such
    protests and witnesses are often called in order to support  the  claim
    of diaspora activity. The judge referred to the case  of  TK  (Burundi)
    where, at paragraph 21, the court held that where a judge in  assessing
    credibility relies on the fact that there is no independent  supporting
    evidence, were there should be supporting evidence,  and  there  is  no
    credible account for its absence commits no error of law when he relies
    on that fact for rejecting the account of an  appellant.   Although  Mr
    Lewis asserted that the only reason for rejection of  the  account  was
    lack of corroboration the judge made his finding on the  basis  of  the
    absence of  any  such  evidence  coupled  with  his  disbelief  of  the
    appellant's account of events in  Sri  Lanka  prior  to  his  departure
    (there has been no appeal against those findings). The judge found that
    he was not able to accept even on the lower standard that the appellant
    had been involved in anything like the extent of diaspora activities he
    claimed in his witness statement. The case of UB  is  not  relevant  in
    light of the findings of the judge.

23. With regard to the one event that the judge accepted that the appellant
    had attended he undertook a detailed analysis of the likelihood of  the
    Sri Lankan authorities having an interest in the appellant arising  out
    of his attendance  and  subsequent  arrest  at  that  event.  Mr  Lewis
    submitted that mere attendance at demonstrations alone  was  sufficient
    to create a risk. That is contrary to the findings at paragraph 336  of
    GJ where the Upper Tribunal held:

         "...We do not consider that attendance  at  demonstrations  in  the
         diaspora alone is sufficient to create a real risk or a  reasonable
         degree of likelihood that a person will attract  adverse  attention
         on return to Sri Lanka".

24. Mr Lewis's submission was that in the case of GJ it was  accepted  that
    the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would   be   monitoring   events   using
    sophisticated techniques that the conduct of the appellant was over and
    above mere participation as he was convicted of attacking  someone  and
    his profile would have been heightened. In GJ the  Upper  Tribunal  set
    out the categories of  those  at  risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  Of
    particular relevance are the following:

         (7) The current categories of persons at real risk  of  persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
         otherwise, are:

         (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka.

         ...

          (8) The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities  know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.  In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,   an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.

         (9)  The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised   intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.



25. I note that the Upper Tribunal in GJ refers to those with a significant
    role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism as  being  at  risk.
    The  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was   involved   in
    demonstrations in London  and  it  was  conceded  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to so conclude.

26. In this case the only incident accepted by the judge  is  that  at  the
    Cardiff stadium. In approaching the  significance  of  the  appellant's
    involvement in diaspora activities and in assessing the  weight  to  be
    attached  to  the  appellant's  wife's  witness  statement  the   judge
    commenced by considering whether or not the  appellant's  participation
    in the protest at the cricket ground in  the  UK  would  be  reasonably
    likely to cause the Sri Lankan authorities to develop  an  interest  in
    him.

27. The judge considered the evidence submitted in support at paragraph  57
    noting that:

          "The appellant's solicitors have located a single article  from  a
         local Cardiff  newspaper  (the  Western  Mail)  in  which  this  is
         described. The short article describes how a 42 year old Tamil man,
         not the appellant, had invaded the pitch  during  an  international
         match because he believed that his father had been murdered by  the
         Sri Lankan government. This individual carried a banner which  bore
         the  words  'for  the  40,000  people  killed  by  the  Sri  Lankan
         government' and a Tamil Eelam flag. The article continued  to  name
         others who had been charged with public order offence arising  from
         the same incident. The part of the article  which  relates  to  the
         appellant is as follows:

             An eighth man was admitted throwing a stone at a  passing  car
             outside the stadium, while  a  ninth  man  accused  of  common
             assault was unable to submit a plea as he could not understand
             the Tamil interpreter provided by the court. PE, of  [       ]
             was told his case would be adjourned until July 23.  [emphasis
             supplied]."

28. At paragraph 58 the judge recorded that it was confirmed that no  other
    articles relating to the incident had been located and that there  were
    no articles that bore the photograph of the appellant.

29. The judge, at paragraph 59, described the question as:

         "Whether the appellant's participation in this protest at a cricket
         ground in the UK would be reasonably likely to cause the Sri Lankan
         authorities to develop an interest in him, to the extent that  they
         would arrest his wife and subject her to  the  appalling  treatment
         which is described in his statement and in the statement  that  has
         been obtained from her."

30. At paragraph 60 the judge set out that he attached no  significance  to
    the error in relation to the dates in the appellant's  wife's'  witness
    statement giving the  appellant  the  benefit  of  the  doubt,  and  he
    proceeded on the basis that that error was merely an  undetected  error
    on the part of the appellant's solicitors who drafted his statement and
    that of his wife.  At paragraph 61 the Judge considered the authorities
    of GJ and Others and MP and Others particularly noting the statement of
    Underhill LJ that the Sri Lankan authorities might regard an  applicant
    as posing a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single State even
    in absence of evidence that he or she has  been  involved  in  diaspora
    activities (paragraph 61).  At paragraph 62 the judge  states  that  he
    has taken into account all of the material (that he had  set  out)  and
    made allowance for the fact that a repressive regime may not act  in  a
    manner considered rational or even explicable in the UK and set out:

         "62...I do not consider it reasonably likely that  the  authorities
         would have sought the appellant, or arrested his wife,  on  account
         of his activities on 20 June 2013.  The  report  from  the  Western
         Mail does not suggest  that  the  appellant  was  involved  in  any
         particular activism on that day.  The appellant  merely  states  at
         [35] of his statement that he was participating in a protest  which
         'urged the UK to severe [sic] all sporting ties for Sri Lanka which
         was  committing  genocide  against  the  Tamils'.   He   gives   no
         indication  of  his  own  role  in  the  protest.   There  are   no
         photographs, and  no  footage,  showing  his  role.   His  criminal
         conviction is said to have arisen from his hitting  a  Sinhala  man
         with a walking stick in self-defence.

         63. I bear in mind, of course, that there may well have been people
         associated with the Sri Lankan authorities in the crowd.   In  that
         sense, the question is not what the authorities might have  learned
         from the Western Mail article but  whether  what  they  might  have
         seen, or being told by  such  informers,  would  be  sufficient  to
         arouse their interest in the appellant.  I recall  what  Sedley  LJ
         said in YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ 360 in that connection:

             Where, as here, the  Tribunal  has  objective  evidence  which
             'paints a  bleak  picture  of  the  suppression  of  political
             opponents' by a named government, it  requires  little  or  no
             evidence or speculation to arrive at a  strong  possibility  -
             and perhaps more - that its foreign legations not only film or
             photograph their nationals who demonstrate in  public  against
             the regime but have informers among  ex-patriot  oppositionist
             organisations who can  name  the  people  who  are  filmed  or
             photographed.   Similarly  it  does  not  require  affirmative
             evidence to establish  a  probability  that  the  intelligence
             services of such States monitor the internet  for  information
             about oppositionist groups.  The real question in  most  cases
             will be what follows for the  individual  claimant.   If,  for
             example, any information reaching the Embassy is likely to  be
             that the claimant identified in a photograph is  a  hanger  on
             with no real commitment to the oppositionist cause  that  will
             go directly to the issue flagged up by Article 4(3)(d) of  the
             Directive.

         64. Approaching the matter thus, and in light of the  sophisticated
         intelligence which is available to the Sri Lankan authorities about
         their nationals in the UK (GJ and Others refers at 87  and  354  in
         particular), I consider whether  the  authorities  would  seek  the
         appellant, and  arrest  his  wife  in  his  stead  because  of  his
         involvement in that  single  protest.   I  have  no  hesitation  in
         concluding that they would not.  I accept Ms Benfield's  submission
         that it is the perception of the authorities which is all important
         but there is nothing in the papers before me  which  would  support
         the view  that  the  authorities  would  perceive  the  appellant's
         actions on 20 June 2013 as justifying an interest.  He was  a  mere
         participant in a protest which turned  violent,  and  he  struck  a
         Sinhalese man with a stick because he was in fear of attack.   Even
         taking the up-to-date background material into account,  I  do  not
         consider that the authorities would take an interest in a man  such
         as the appellant, who has (on my findings)  no  prior  personal  or
         family association with the LTTE (whether in Sri Lanka  or  in  the
         UK), and no history of  difficulties  with  the  authorities  as  a
         result.

         65. In summary, therefore, having considered the  evidence  in  the
         round and as a whole, I do not accept that the appellant  has  ever
         been of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.  I do not  consider
         that he or his family have had any actual or perceived  involvement
         with the LTTE.  I do  not  accept  the  extent  of  the  sur  place
         activities described in his statement, and the single  incident  in
         which he did participate would not be such to generate any interest
         in him on the  part  of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.   On  those
         findings, therefore, I do not consider  that  the  appellant  falls
         within one of the risk profiles set out  in  the  country  guidance
         decision when read alongside the  subsequent  decision  in  MP  and
         Ors."


31. I am mindful of the need for a judge to consider an asylum  claim  with
    the most anxious scrutiny. The judge has set out  clearly  the  reasons
    that led to his  findings  and  took  into  account  the  sophisticated
    methods used by, and the ability of  the,  Sri  Lankan  authorities  to
    obtain information about their nationals in the UK.  The judge did  not
    hear oral evidence from the appellant but  was  able  to  consider  his
    witness statement along with documentary evidence. The  judge  did  not
    find the appellant's witness  evidence  credible  with  regard  to  his
    claimed activities and treatment in Sri Lanka. No appeal against  those
    findings has been made. The issue came down to attendance at one single
    event in circumstances where the appellant has no  previous  'profile'.
    Mr Lewis's submission that the conduct of the appellant  was  over  and
    above mere participation on the basis of his arrest for an  assault  is
    not borne out. The judge found that the appellant gave no indication of
    his own role in the protest and  there  were  no  photographs,  and  no
    footage, showing his role. The report in the paper referred only to the
    appellant as being accused of common assault. On the basis of a  single
    incident and with no detail from the  appellant  as  to  what  role  he
    undertook the findings of the judge are ones that were reasonably  open
    to him. The Sri Lankan authorities in accordance with GJ are interested
    in those who have a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
    separatism.  The significance of the appellant's involvement with Tamil
    diaspora organisations is very limited and there was no  error  in  the
    judge's approach or findings.


32. It is clear that  the  judge's  rejection  of  the  appellant's  wife's
    witness statement was based on the reasons he  set  out  regarding  the
    level of participation  in  the  event  and  of  the  coverage  of  the
    appellant in the press which led to  his  finding  that  the  appellant
    would not be of any interest to the Sri  Lankan  authorities.   On  the
    basis of those findings it was open to the judge to place no weight  on
    the appellant's wife's witness statement.   The  whole  basis  of  that
    statement was to demonstrate that the appellant was of interest to  the
    Sri Lankan authorities as a result of his  attendance  at  the  cricket
    match. The judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  witness
    statement as corroborative evidence.

Ground 2


33. It is asserted that the judge failed to  apply  the  principles  in  HJ
    (Iran) to the appellant's claim. As the respondent pointed out this was
    not referred to before the First-tier Tribunal judge  was  not  in  the
    appellant's skeleton argument.  It has not been pleaded that this is  a
    Robinson[1] obvious point. Mr Lewis submitted  that  the  appellant  is
    clearly someone who is actively critical of the Sri  Lankan  government
    and his attendance at the cricket match indicates his  clear  political
    opinion in opposition to the Sri Lankan government.


34. At paragraph 351 the Upper Tribunal in GJ concluded:




         "Our overall conclusion regarding diaspora activities is  that  the
         GOSL has sophisticated  intelligence  enabling  it  to  distinguish
         those who are actively involved in seeking to  revive  and  re-fund
         the separatist  movement  within  the  diaspora,  with  a  view  to
         destabilising the unitary Sri Lankan state. Attendance  at  one  or
         even several demonstrations  in  the  diaspora  is  not  of  itself
         evidence that a person is a committed  Tamil  activist  seeking  to
         promote Tamil separatism within Sri Lanka. That will be a  question
         of fact in each case, dependent on any diaspora activities  carried
         out by such an individual.

35. There is no presumption that attendance at a demonstration is  evidence
    that a person is a committed Tamil activist. There was  no  finding  by
    the judge that the appellant was politically active in the UK  or  that
    the appellant had a clear political opinion in opposition  to  the  Sri
    Lankan government.  The  finding  of  the  judge  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's participation in the protest at Cardiff Cricket Ground  was
    that he was "a mere participant in a protest which turned  violent  and
    he struck a Sinhalese man with a  stick  because  he  was  in  fear  of
    attack.  (paragraph 64). As set out above the  findings  of  the  judge
    were reasonably open to him. Given such a finding  there  would  be  no
    reason for the judge to consider the appellant's inability  to  express
    his political opinion in Sri Lanka owing to fear of persecution on  the
    basis of the principles in HJ (Iran).

36. In relation to ground 4 Mr Lewis indicated, in  response  to  the  Home
    Office representatives' comment that no submissions had  been  made  by
    him in relation to ground 4, and her  asking  whether  the  ground  was
    still being pursued, that it was not being pursued.

Conclusions

37.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  this  case  is  very
    comprehensive, detailed and it is clear that the judge has  taken  into
    consideration all the evidence that was presented to him.  He has  also
    taken into  consideration  the  relevant  country  guidance  cases  and
    relevant case law.

38. Having considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge bearing
    in mind the anxious scrutiny required when considering an asylum  claim
    I find that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge's decision.  The findings made were reasonably  open  to
    him. He gave adequate reasons for his findings and  took  into  account
    all relevant material.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained no material error of  law.  The
appellant's appeal is dismissed.  The respondent's decision stands.

Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 11 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
-----------------------
[1] R v SSHD ex parte Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162

