
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07114/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1 April 2016                           |On 25 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     AAM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on [ ] 1967.  A  decision  was
    made by the respondent on 2  April  2015  to  remove  him  pursuant  to
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, after the refusal of
    his asylum and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bowler ("the FtJ") on 6 October 2015, whereby the appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.  In the grounds of appeal challenging the
    decision of the FtJ it is argued, in summary, that the FtJ  had  failed
    to take into account material evidence  and  had  otherwise  not  given
    adequate reasons  for  her  conclusions.   In  relation  to  background
    evidence, it is argued that the FtJ had failed  to  take  into  account
    evidence in terms  of  militias  operating  in  Iraq  who  would  be  a
    potential risk to the appellant, and bearing in mind that  he  and  his
    family had variously received threats and harassment, and his uncle had
    been kidnapped.   It  is  also  contended  that  the  FtJ's  Article  8
    assessment was flawed with reference to his private life.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3.  The  FtJ  summarised  the  appellant's  witness  statement   and   his
    interviews.  These are to the effect  that  the  appellant  is  a  Shia
    Muslim who was a member of the Ba'ath Party from  1994  to  1999.   His
    mother is a famous artist in Iraq and  a  high-ranking  member  of  the
    Ba'ath Party.  Her art gallery in their house  was  visited  by  senior
    members of the Ba'ath Party during the regime of Saddam  Hussein.   His
    mother would also set up art galleries for the Ba'ath Party and she was
    a member of the Women's Union.  The appellant had provided evidence  of
    a book showing his mother's  paintings  and  photographs  of  her  with
    senior Ba'ath Party members, including Saddam Hussein.  The  last  time
    important Ba'ath Party members visited their home was around the end of
    2002.

 4. The appellant claimed to have run a coffee shop in a mainly Sunni  area
    of Baghdad, which he opened in 1998.  Between  2005  and  2006  he  was
    harassed and received threats from unknown individuals in his shop  and
    by letter.

 5.  In  late  March  2006  his  maternal  uncle  was  kidnapped  from  the
    appellant's coffee  shop.  However,  the  appellant  believed  that  he
    himself was the target of the kidnappers.  His uncle was released after
    payment of a ransom.  That uncle now lives  in  the  UK,  although  the
    appellant has lost contact with him.  The  uncle  refuses  to  see  the
    appellant or  the  appellant's  close  family  because  he  blames  the
    appellant for the kidnapping.  The appellant closed the coffee shop  on
    the day of the kidnapping and never returned to it.

 6. Two or three weeks later the appellant received  a  threatening  letter
    asking him to leave the neighbourhood, referring to his Shia faith  and
    his membership of the Ba'ath Party.

 7. The appellant left Iraq in 2006 and came to the UK on a visit visa.  He
    then went to Syria where he stayed until the civil war started.   There
    he applied for refugee status, although he was not interviewed  by  the
    UNHCR.  He went to Jordan in  2011  and  again  waited  for  a  refugee
    interview.  However, he has not been officially recognised as a refugee
    by the UNHCR.  He  was  however,  granted  residency  in  Jordan  as  a
    dependant of his parents.

 8. Ultimately, he came to the UK.  Since leaving  Iraq  he  has  not  been
    contacted by those who threatened him, although  he  believes  that  he
    would still be a target because  of  his  previous  membership  of  the
    Ba'ath Party, his mother's senior position in that party, the fact that
    his mother is an artist and militia groups do not permit art  or  music
    and because of the appellant's involvement in arranging exhibitions and
    meetings for Ba'ath Party members with his mother, as well as his  Shia
    faith.  The appellant would also be at risk, it was claimed, because of
    the general state of violence and danger in Iraq.

 9. All the appellant's immediate family are in the UK, his parents  having
    arrived in May 2014 through the UNHCR.   He  has  two  brothers  and  a
    sister who have lived in the UK for some  years  and  are  now  British
    citizens.  He has an aunt in Belgium and an aunt in Iran, an  uncle  in
    Germany, and the uncle in the UK.

10. The appellant said that he would not be able  to  relocate  to  another
    area in Iraq because he does not have anyone there to  support  him  or
    any accommodation.  Furthermore, he would be identified as soon  as  he
    arrived at the airport and targeted by militias or their agents.

11. The FtJ made the following findings.  She found that the appellant is a
    Shia from Baghdad and that relocation  outside  Baghdad  would  not  be
    feasible.  She concluded that because the respondent would only  return
    people to the "Kurdish region" of Iraq  if  they  originate  from  that
    area, the appellant could not be returned there  because  he  does  not
    come from that area.

12. She found that the appellant was a member of the Ba'ath Party from 1994
    to 1999 but that his involvement was at a low level and limited both in
    time and extent.  She found that the  appellant's  mother  was  a  more
    senior member of the Ba'ath Party, having sufficient status  to  enable
    her to be a lecturer at  the  Institute  of  National  Arts.   However,
    whilst her recognition as an artist in  Iraq  meant  that  high-ranking
    members of the government at the time of  Saddam  Hussein  visited  her
    gallery,  she  was  not  herself  a  politician  or  a  member  of  the
    government.

13. She found that the family were not perceived as  prominent  members  of
    the Ba'ath Party because although Saddam Hussein's government  fell  in
    2003, the appellant and his family  did  not  receive  any  threats  or
    demands for money until 2005 at the earliest.  The appellant's mother's
    evidence was clear in  that  they  were  not  blackmailed  until  2006.
    Furthermore, the appellant had said in his witness  statement  that  he
    was harassed and received threats from unknown individuals at his  shop
    and by letter from 2005 to 2006.  The FtJ said that it was a matter  of
    public record that there was considerable unrest and  violence  in  the
    years from 2003 to 2006, yet the  appellant  and  his  family  did  not
    encounter problems until 2005.

14. The FtJ found that the appellant  and  his  family  were  harassed  and
    threatened in 2005-2006 and that the appellant's parents had sufficient
    wealth to be seen as financial targets at that time.   She  noted  that
    the appellant's  mother  had  said  that  they  had  paid  blackmailers
    US$20,000 on two occasions in 2006.  In contrast however, the appellant
    was not blackmailed, despite his family's wealth.  He was harassed  and
    threatened and that that culminated in the kidnapping of his uncle.

15. Notwithstanding that  the  appellant's  uncle  was  not  able  to  give
    evidence despite living in  the  UK,  taking  into  account  the  lower
    standard of proof the  FtJ  found  that  it  was  credible,  given  the
    background of violence and kidnappings in Baghdad at the time, that the
    appellant's uncle was kidnapped and that he no longer has contact  with
    the appellant and his immediate family.  She took into account that the
    appellant's uncle is the half-brother of the appellant's mother and she
    found it credible that given that he was kidnapped from a  coffee  shop
    jointly owned by the appellant, there is family enmity over the  ransom
    being paid by the uncle's half of the family.

16. Nevertheless, she did not find that the evidence established  that  the
    intended victim of the kidnapping was the appellant.   She  noted  that
    the kidnappers took the uncle from the shop which he  operated  jointly
    with the appellant during the hours when the uncle routinely was in the
    shop and the appellant routinely was not.  She concluded  that  if  the
    kidnappers had really intended to kidnap the appellant they could  have
    gone to the coffee shop at a time when the appellant would be  expected
    to be there, or could have found the appellant at his home.  From  late
    March when the kidnapping took place until May 2006 when the  appellant
    left Iraq, there were no attempts made to  kidnap  him.   Although  the
    appellant said that he had received a threatening letter  a  couple  of
    weeks  after  his  uncle  was  kidnapped  asking  him  to   leave   the
    neighbourhood, he was therefore not staying  in  the  neighbourhood  in
    secret.

17. At [55] the FtJ said that she took  into  account  that  the  appellant
    travelled to the UK in 2006 on a visit  visa.   Despite  his  assertion
    that he is now at risk if he returns to Iraq, he did not  claim  asylum
    in the UK in 2006 when  the  kidnappings  and  threats  had  just  been
    experienced.  Although  however,  he  did  not  make  an  asylum  claim
    immediately on entering the UK in 2014, he did make his  claim  a  week
    later and she found therefore, that that delay did little to damage his
    credibility.

18.  In  relation  to  the  UNHCR  documents,  in  particular   a   Refugee
    Certificate, whilst that was issued by the UNHCR in Syria it is not  in
    the appellant's name.  The FtJ did not find  credible  the  appellant's
    claim that that was an error by the UNHCR staff and  that  he  did  not
    feel able to query it.  She noted that the appellant was an intelligent
    man who had been to university and she would have expected him to check
    a document such as that certificate and ensure that it  was  issued  in
    the correct name.  Accordingly, she gave the certificate little weight.
     In any event, she concluded that there were substantial countervailing
    reasons to justify a different conclusion from that of the UNHCR.

19. The document only states that the appellant's claim for refugee  status
    was being examined, not that the appellant had  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee.  The FtJ concluded that it added little weight  to  the  other
    evidence before her.

20. Although it was accepted by the FtJ that the appellant's mother was  an
    artist in Iraq, and that she held exhibitions at  her  galleries  which
    were attended by senior Ba'ath Party  officials,  the  evidence  beyond
    that of her fame is limited and nine years had passed since she and her
    family had left the country.  On the other hand, in 2014 her  paintings
    were displayed in an exhibition sponsored by the Iraqi Business Council
    and the Iraqi ambassador in Amman, and a book about her  and  her  work
    was published.  The FtJ accordingly found that the  appellant's  mother
    is known as an artist "to an extent" in Iraq.

21. However, even taking into account that she could be said to be a famous
    artist in Iraq does not mean that the appellant has a profile  in  Iraq
    which would cause him to be a particular target.  He and his mother  do
    not share the same name.  The evidence showing  pictures  of  her  with
    officials at exhibitions and the evidence from her book relates to  her
    and does not include pictures of, or reference to, the appellant.   She
    found that the appellant is  not  famous  in  his  own  right  and  the
    evidence did not lead her to conclude that he would be known as the son
    of his mother.  Even if it could be said that  the  appellant's  mother
    has a high profile in Iraq, the appellant  does  not.   Notwithstanding
    the background material to which she was  referred,  in  terms  of  the
    treatment of artists in Baghdad and their being targeted, the  evidence
    related to artists currently living and  practising  in  Iraq  and  the
    appellant is not such a person.

22. At [61] the FtJ considered the position  on  the  assumption  that  the
    appellant's mother was a prominent  member  of  the  Ba'ath  Party  and
    taking at its highest the appellant's claims to have been engaged  with
    senior Ba'ath Party officials in organising events, as well as his  own
    membership of the Ba'ath Party before 1999.  She concluded that in  the
    light of the UNHCR's guidelines for determining refugee status in terms
    of the treatment of former Ba'ath Party members, there was no  evidence
    that the appellant or any member  of  his  family  was  involved  as  a
    perpetrator of detention, torture or other violations of  human  rights
    under the Saddam Hussein regime.  There was  insufficient  evidence  to
    establish that there would be a real risk to the appellant on return to
    Iraq as a result of his Ba'ath Party links.   She  concluded  that  the
    appellant is not and was not one of those listed who may  be  at  risk.
    Although the appellant's father was a high-ranking lawyer in  Iraq,  it
    had not been claimed that the appellant was at risk by  virtue  of  his
    relationship to his father.

23. The FtJ also concluded that there was no risk to the appellant in terms
    of Article 15(c).

24. So far as Article 8 is concerned, she concluded that  the  respondent's
    decision would not amount to a disproportionate interference  with  his
    Article 8 rights in terms of his private life, which is the basis  upon
    which the Article 8 argument was advanced.

    Submissions

25. Mr Gilbert referred to the findings  made  by  the  FtJ,  including  in
    particular at [54] that the appellant's uncle was  kidnapped.   It  was
    also found that threats had been directed towards him.   Reference  was
    made to the appellant's asylum interview.  The FtJ  should  have  taken
    into account that the purpose of  the  kidnapping  of  the  appellant's
    uncle was to drive the family away, according  to  what  the  appellant
    said in his interview at questions 55-59.

26. So far as [10] of the grounds is concerned, and the contention that the
    FtJ had failed to consider what the appellant said at  the  hearing  in
    evidence, it was correct that there was no agreed note of the  evidence
    in that respect but nevertheless the  matter  is  referred  to  in  the
    grounds and the respondent was not therefore taken by surprise.

27. At [59] the FtJ had concluded that the appellant was not famous in  his
    own  right.   However,  she  would  have  been  required  to  take  the
    additional step of asking whether the appellant would  be  required  to
    keep his history hidden on return, even if he would not immediately  be
    identified as his mother's son.  He would have to  keep  his  education
    and qualifications hidden, as well as the history of his work  for  his
    mother at art galleries, and even his work in the coffee shop.

28. In that respect the question also arises of whether he  would  come  to
    the adverse attention of the militias in Iraq.  It is also to be  borne
    in mind that the appellant had been threatened previously.  The grounds
    refer  to  the  background  material  in  relation  to  militias  still
    operating in Baghdad.  The FtJ had  not  considered  the  risk  to  the
    appellant on a cumulative basis in the light of her findings.

29. So far as Article 8 is concerned, although the appellant was  now  aged
    49, he had always lived with his parents and had  always  looked  after
    them.  All his family are in the UK, he was granted residency in Jordan
    as a dependant of his parents.  Those aspects of his private  life  had
    been established prior to his entry into the UK, and had therefore  not
    been established whilst his private life was precarious.   His  parents
    are aged 79 and 89 years, respectively.

30. Mr Staunton relied on the 'rule 24' response. He submitted that  it  is
    evident that the FtJ had balanced a consideration of all  the  relevant
    facts, accepting aspects of the appellant's account.  At [54] she  gave
    reasons for concluding that the appellant was not the  intended  victim
    of the kidnap.  The grounds in relation to these aspects of  the  FtJ's
    decision are simply a disagreement with her conclusions.

31. The contention that the appellant would be at risk on return  in  terms
    of his relationship to his mother, relies  on  the  earlier  arguments.
    However, on the FtJ's findings, the appellant would not be  subject  to
    any scrutiny on return, bearing in mind for example, that he  does  not
    have the same name or profile as his mother.

32. The FtJ had considered Article 8 and again the grounds in this  respect
    amount only to a disagreement with the FtJ's decision.

    My conclusions

33. I deal with the three grounds in turn.  Reliance  was  placed,  amongst
    other things, on what the appellant said in  interview  to  the  effect
    that the threats were directed at him in  person  at  his  coffee  shop
    before his step-uncle was kidnapped.  It is said that it  was  arguably
    crucial to the determination as to whether there was a real  risk  that
    it was the appellant who was the target  for  the  kidnapping,  as  the
    appellant said in evidence.  It is argued that this was not the subject
    of any reasoned consideration by the FtJ.

34. It is true that in the  interview  at  questions  55-65  the  appellant
    referred to threats being made  to  him,  by  people  he  described  as
    "criminals" and saying that it may be that they  were  Sunnis,  telling
    the appellant, a Shia, to  leave  the  area.   From  question  125  the
    appellant referred to threatening letters he received.

35. However, the FtJ explicitly referred to this aspect of the  appellant's
    account at [20(g)] in terms of his Shia faith  and  membership  of  the
    Ba'ath Party.  At [30] the FtJ referred to  evidence  given  in  cross-
    examination by the appellant's mother in terms of how she knew that the
    kidnappers  had  meant  to  kidnap  the  appellant  rather   than   the
    appellant's step-uncle. At [27] she had set out  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's mother in terms of the involvement of the appellant in  the
    art galleries and exhibitions and contacts with the  Ba'ath  party.  At
    [51], under the "Findings and Reasons" section,  she  referred  to  the
    appellant's account of having been harassed and receiving threats  from
    unknown individuals at his shop and by letter from 2005 to 2006.  It is
    apparent, including from [52], that the FtJ accepted that aspect of the
    appellant's account.

36. However, the FtJ was entitled to conclude as she did at [54]  that  the
    evidence did not establish that the appellant was the  intended  victim
    of the kidnapping, referring to the kidnappers taking  the  uncle  from
    the coffee shop which he operated jointly with the appellant during the
    hours when the uncle routinely was in the shop and  the  appellant  was
    not.  She concluded that if  the  kidnappers  had  really  intended  to
    kidnap the appellant they could have gone to the shop at  a  time  when
    the appellant would have been expected to be  there,  or  indeed  could
    have found the appellant at his home.  She also referred  to  the  fact
    that the appellant did not leave Iraq for about two  months  after  the
    kidnapping.  She also noted that there were no attempts made to  kidnap
    him between the date of the kidnapping in March 2006 and May 2006  when
    he left.

37. The FtJ was well-aware of what the appellant's and his mother's account
    was in terms of the kidnapping and she rejected the contention that  he
    was the intended target, for reasons which  are  entirely  sustainable.
    There was no challenge on behalf of the respondent  before  me  to  the
    account in the grounds  at  [10]  of  one  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    mother's evidence, and  the  FtJ's  manuscript  record  of  proceedings
    confirms the accuracy of what is in the grounds in that respect, i.e. a
    threat by phone that specifically including the appellant. As indicated
    above however, it is clear from the FtJ's reasons that  she  was  aware
    of, and fully considered,  all  aspects  of  the  appellant's  and  his
    mother's account. The FtJ was not  required  further  to  rehearse  the
    appellant's evidence in all its respects before rejecting  the  account
    of his being the intended target of the kidnapping.

38. Whilst it is said in the grounds that it was material in terms of there
    being no further kidnap  attempts  upon  the  appellant  prior  to  his
    departure, the fact that the family's departure  was  the  aim  of  the
    kidnappers rather than the appellant as  an  individual,  the  FtJ  was
    nevertheless entitled to take into account in terms of the  contention,
    (repeated in the grounds) that the appellant was  the  target  for  the
    kidnap, the fact that there were no  attempts  to  kidnap  him  in  the
    specified period.

39. The second ground in terms of whether the appellant would  be  required
    to hide his identity or personal history in order to avoid persecution,
    relies on the decisions in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2010] UKSC 31, and RT (Zimbabwe) and others v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 38.  However, I consider this
    to be a speculative ground, or more precisely, a ground that relies  on
    speculation.  There would be no reason for the  appellant  to  have  to
    hide  his  identity  or  his  personal  history  in  order   to   avoid
    persecution.  Furthermore, at [59] the FtJ dealt  with  this  point  in
    stating that even viewing the appellant's mother as a famous artist  in
    Iraq does not mean that the appellant has a profile which  would  cause
    him to be a particular target.  She noted that they do  not  share  the
    same name and he is not shown in any pictures of her with officials  at
    exhibitions and so forth.  She noted that the appellant is  not  famous
    in his own right and the evidence did not lead to the  conclusion  that
    he would be known as the son of his mother.  In addition, at  [61]-[62]
    the FtJ considered whether the appellant, as a  former  member  of  the
    Ba'ath  Party  from  1994  to  1999,  comes  within  any  of  the  risk
    categories, concluding that he does not.  She came to  that  conclusion
    even taking at its highest the appellant's claims to have been  engaged
    with senior Ba'ath Party officials in organising events, in addition to
    his own membership of the Ba'ath Party before 1999.  It seems to me  to
    be inherent in the FtJ's conclusions that even  if  the  appellant  was
    known as his mother's  son,  the  evidence,  including  the  background
    evidence, did not establish a risk to him.

40. Notwithstanding what is said about  the  militias  still  operating  in
    Baghdad, and the background evidence in that respect  set  out  in  the
    grounds, on the FtJ's analysis of the appellant's background, he  would
    not be at risk, notwithstanding the FtJ's conclusions as to the  family
    history and the threats that had previously been made.  The FtJ plainly
    took into account those matters.  She concluded that there were no good
    reasons to believe that persecution or serious harm would eventuate  on
    the appellant's return.

41. So far as ground 3 and Article 8 of the ECHR is concerned, it is to  be
    noted that notwithstanding the  arguments  advanced  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's relationship with his  family  in  the  UK,  including  his
    parents, it was not argued before the FtJ that there was any  claim  to
    family life in the UK.  The FtJ accepted that the appellant  will  have
    developed a private life whilst in the UK, although stated  that  there
    was limited evidence of the extent of it, beyond the relationship  with
    his parents and the fact that he has two brothers in the UK.  It is not
    the case, as asserted in the grounds at [13], that  the  FtJ  concluded
    that it was doubtful that the appellant had any private life in the UK.
     She expressly stated that he will have developed a private life in the
    UK but said that it was doubtful as to whether Article 8  was  engaged.
    Nevertheless,  recognising  the  low  threshold  for   engagement   she
    proceeded on the footing that Article 8 was in fact engaged.

42. It is argued that in the proportionality assessment the FtJ  failed  to
    consider relevant matters, namely the appellant's cohabitation with his
    parents in Iraq into adulthood, as well as in Jordan, cohabitation with
    them now, his family members all being present in the  UK  and  settled
    and that no family remained in Iraq.  However, it is evident from  [69]
    that the judge recognised the appellant's relationship with his parents
    and his two brothers here.  Although it was  contended  in  submissions
    before me that the appellant had not established a private life  whilst
    his immigration status was precarious, because that  private  life  was
    established before his entry into the UK, that does not mean  that  the
    FtJ was not bound to give effect to s.117B(5) in terms of little weight
    being given to a private life established at a  time  when  a  person's
    immigration status is precarious, insofar as an element of his  private
    life was established since his arrival in 2014. The FtJ  was  bound  to
    take  into  account  the  statutory  provision.   As  I  have   already
    indicated, the FtJ was aware of and took into account his  relationship
    with his parents.  I do not consider that it was necessary for the  FtJ
    to trace the history of that relationship from the appellant's life  in
    Iraq, Syria and Jordan.  It is also  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
    appellant is now 49 years of age.

43. In addition, other  public  interest  considerations  were  taken  into
    account by the FtJ, as mandated by s.117B of the 2002 Act, namely  that
    the appellant does not speak English and that  he  is  not  financially
    independent.

44. I cannot see that there is any error of law in the FtJ's assessment  of
    the Article 8 ground of appeal, albeit that the  FtJ  dealt  with  this
    aspect of the appeal in less detail than what was  obviously  the  main
    ground of appeal, namely the asylum ground.

45. Although I bear in mind what was said on behalf  of  the  appellant  in
    terms of his father in particular having very poor health, it  was  not
    contended, and it cannot be the case, that that new information informs
    the assessment of whether  the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in  terms  of  her
    consideration of Article 8.

46. In summary, having considered the grounds of appeal with care, I am not
    satisfied that it has been established that there is any error  of  law
    in the FtJ's assessment of  the  appeal  in  any  respect.   The  FtJ's
    decision involves a balanced assessment of all the evidence,  resolving
    various issues in favour of the appellant,  but  ultimately  concluding
    that he would not be at risk on return.  Her reasons for coming to that
    view are free from any error of  law,  as  is  her  assessment  of  the
    Article 8 ground of appeal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal on all  grounds
therefore stands.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            22/07/16
