
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07230/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 25 November 2016                           |On 30 November 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    N T N
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Miss J Todd, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe,  aged  25.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 26  July  2016,  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Murray dismissed  her  appeal  against  refusal  of  recognition  as  a
    refugee.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT, on these grounds:

      The appeal was dismissed largely on credibility  which  then  arguably
      informed  the  assessment  of  internal  relocation  and   ...   state
      protection ... The judge dismissed the appellant's  account  that  she
      was in an abusive relationship with a Zanu  PF  gang  leader  and  was
      later subject to politically motivated rape.

      ... The judge misunderstood the medical evidence of  the  psychologist
      Dr Tagg ... That evidence was relied on to show that the appellant may
      have difficulties in recalling events on information and as a form  of
      corroboration of an account of rape and domestic abuse (no medical  or
      article 3 claim was advanced).

      At paragraph 83 the judge accepted that Dr Tagg was qualified to  make
      a diagnosis of PTSD and was an expert for present  purposes  and  that
      tests were carried out which "convinced" Dr Tagg "that  the  appellant
      was truthful about her mental state". The judge appears to accept that
      the appellant suffered from PTSD

      At paragraph 84 the judge went on to state, "What I have  to  consider
      is whether this mental state is a result of rape  and  domestic  abuse
      ... in Zimbabwe or whether it is because she is now  away  from  home,
      her grandmother ...". The judge presents these in binary fashion  i.e.
      the cause is one or the other.

      ... It is an error of fact to consider that PTSD could  be  caused  by
      the other issues stated by the judge. The report by Dr Tagg states  at
      the appellant "is currently  affected  by  a  complex  form  of  PTSD,
      typically caused by repeated experiences of  violence  and  abuse  and
      major depressive illness, a dual diagnosis...  not  unusual  in  abuse
      survivors".  Events  such  separation  from   family   and   uncertain
      immigration status are undoubtedly stressful  but  do  not  constitute
      violence, abuse or trauma and so cannot reasonably  explain  the  PTSD
      diagnosis.

      If the diagnosis of PTSD had been properly understood and factored  in
      it  is  possible  that  notwithstanding  other  credibility  issues  a
      different assessment could have been made and this would have affected
      the whole of appeal (if the appellant's account were true  this  would
      go to internal relocation, if not also  state  protection,  given  the
      persecutor's ties to the ruling party).

 3. A FtT judge refused permission, observing that this was not a  case  of
    the appellant not remembering but of  her  advancing  positively  false
    evidence; that the judge gave valid reasons for finding her account not
    credible; and the judge had been satisfied that the appellant would  be
    able to resettle  in  any  event,  her  persecutor  having  no  further
    interest in her.

 4. The appellant renewed her application to the UT, relying again  on  the
    grounds above, and  saying  that  Dr  Tagg  explicitly  considered  the
    possibility that the appellant was fabricating her  account;  that  the
    medical evidence had been advanced as relevant not only because it went
    to the issue of recall of detail, but because it  went  to  corroborate
    the claimed account; and that the judge posited alternative causes  for
    PTSD which were "simply not correct".

 5. A UT judge granted  permission,  commenting  that  arguably  the  judge
    "needed to deal with paragraphs 63 to 65 of  Dr  Tagg's  report  before
    rejecting the appellant's account as she did at paragraphs 83 to 85".

 6. Submissions for appellant. Dr Tagg diagnosed the appellant with complex
    PTSD. At paragraphs 63 - 65 of her report Dr Tagg carefully  considered
    the possibility of fabrication. Dr Tagg had  given  oral  evidence  and
    been  subjected  to  considerable  cross-examination.   It   had   been
    submitted to the FtT that the report constituted a robust analysis, and
    was strong evidence to corroborate  the  appellant's  ill-treatment  in
    Zimbabwe. The key passage in the decision was at paragraphs 83  to  85.
    It was acknowledged that the judge gave the report "some  weight",  but
    there were problems with her analysis.  At paragraph 84 the  judge  set
    out a binary "either or" approach, which oversimplified the issue,  and
    in strayed into the area  of  medical  diagnosis,  beyond  the  judge's
    competence. The matters which the judge listed as possible  alternative
    explanations might no doubt be upsetting, but they were not  traumatic,
    and so were not true alternatives. There were  ancillary  errors  which
    added to the misunderstanding of the medical evidence. At paragraph  83
    the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant   was   no   longer   receiving
    antidepressants and had not engaged in counselling, but the appellant's
    recovery was irrelevant, as no case had been put in terms of article 3.
     The judge said that the appellant made "no mention of PTSD",  but  she
    could not be expected to diagnose her own condition. The judge gave  no
    good reasons for discounting the medical evidence. It was accepted that
    the judge gave other reasons for not  accepting  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant, in particular at paragraph 79 - 82, but the medical evidence
    if taken at highest was capable of leading to another result. For  that
    reason, the error was material, and  a  remit  to  the  FtT  for  fresh
    hearing was  required.  The  decision  did  deal  with  sufficiency  of
    protection and with internal relocation but only briefly, and could not
    be sustained for these alternative reasons.

 7. Submissions for respondent. Dr Tagg examined the possibility  that  the
    appellant was fabricating her claims, and accepted her as genuine. That
    might be a medically valid conclusion within the terms of  the  report,
    but the judge had to reach her own decision,  based  not  only  on  the
    medical report but on all the evidence. Dr Tagg did not factor in  that
    the appellant was known to be to some extent a dishonest historian,  at
    the very least about how she came to be in the UK.    The  analysis  of
    why Dr Tagg considered the  appellant  to  be  telling  the  truth  was
    essentially the same as the approach that would  be  taken  by  a  non-
    medical person, but not based on all available materials. The judge was
    in a better position and she had given the medical report some  weight.
    The grounds were essentially only a complaint that the  judge  had  not
    found the report decisive in the appellant's favour. The weight  to  be
    given to a particular item of evidence was  up  to  the  judge,  within
    reason, and it could not be said  that  the  judge's  conclusions  went
    beyond reason. The judge did not find fault with the report, rather she
    evaluated it in the context of the rest of the evidence, including past
    use of deception. In evaluating the report and its  diagnosis  of  PTSD
    and as confirmation of past ill-treatment, it was open to the judge  to
    take into account that the appellant gave  up  the  use  of  prescribed
    antidepressants and declined to take advantage of  counselling  offered
    to her. That did  not  stray  into  the  realm  of  medical  diagnosis.
    Paragraph 84 was not  an  oversimplification,  but  taking  account  of
    factors which was proper for the judge to consider. In any  event,  the
    case would have failed on the basis of internal relocation.  There  was
    no sensible basis on which it might been found that the  reach  of  the
    appellant's persecutor extended throughout Zimbabwe.

 8. Reply for appellant.  The SSHD failed to specify  where  the  appellant
    might choose to relocate, and any  such  requirement  would  be  unduly
    harsh, bearing in mind that the appellant has  two  young  children  to
    care for, so paragraph 87 was not  an  adequate  alternative  basis  on
    which  the  decision  might  stand.  Although  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the judge was correct to limit the weight to be given to
    the medical report, at paragraph 83 of her decision the judge  accepted
    Dr Tagg as a suitably qualified expert, a  finding  the  SSHD  had  not
    sought to challenge.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. The appellant's case has been pressed as strongly as it properly  could
    be in the FtT and again in the UT.  However, I am  not  persuaded  that
    the grounds and submissions in the UT amount to more  than  reassertion
    of the same case, and disagreement with  its  resolution  by  the  FtT.
    They essentially disclose disagreement with the degree  of  weight  the
    judge gave to the medical report (which could not  decide  credibility)
    rather than error of law.

11. The high point of the appellant's challenge was against the "either/or"
    question expressed in the first sentence  of  paragraph  84;  but  that
    should not be wrenched out of context.  The judge was correct to say in
    the next sentence that the appellant has not  always  told  the  truth.
    She gave sensible other reasons for finding the appellant not to  be  a
    generally credible witness,  which  rightly  have  not  been  made  the
    subject of appeal.  The judge did not doubt the mental state  described
    by Dr Tagg, but she evaluated it in a wider context.   Her  point  that
    there could be other reasons for distress is obvious and sensible.

12. The alternative finding on internal relocation was  briefly  expressed;
    but from the evidence it would be difficult to  justify  a  finding  of
    country-wide risk, and equally difficult for the appellant to show that
    readjustment, if she had to move, would involve problems  amounting  to
    undue harshness.  No error is shown in that conclusion either.

13. Broadly, I prefer the submissions for the respondent, for  the  reasons
    given.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. An anonymity direction was  made  in  the  FtT.   The  matter  was  not
    addressed in the UT, so that direction remains in effect.


            [pic]


            29 November 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




