
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07359/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 January 2016                      |On 8 February 2016                 |
|Extempore                               |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     DR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Junior, Counsel instructed by Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Judge Adio promulgated  on  22  October  2015  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  decision  the  respondent
    made on 16 April 2015 to refuse his claim for asylum and to remove  him
    from the United Kingdom.

 2. Judge Adio did not accept the appellant's account  and,  materially  in
    this case, did not  accept  that  there  was  a  warrant  out  for  the
    applicant's arrest in Sri Lanka.  The appellant's case is  set  out  in
    detail in the decision of the respondent and also in  the  decision  of
    Judge Adio.  There is no challenge to the recording  of  the  claim  in
    either case and there is no purpose served by setting  out  in  detail.
    Suffice it to say that the applicant's case that he is a risk on return
    to Sri Lanka on the basis that there is an arrest warrant  out  on  the
    basis that he had or was believed to have assisted the LTTE.

 3. When the matter came before Judge Adio an application was made  on  the
    basis that as set out at paragraph 8 the appellant was about to receive
    documents from a lawyer in Colombo and that these were to  be  received
    within three weeks.   These  documents  were  said  to  relate  to  the
    questioning of the appellant and the delay is put down to the fact that
    there were elections in Sri Lanka.  That  application  was  refused  by
    Judge Adio for reasons given in paragraph 10 of  his  decision.   Judge
    Adio went on to find that the applicant was not credible and that parts
    of his claim were untrue and fabricated.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which was granted on 16 November  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish.  In essence the grounds challenge the decision to  refuse  an
    adjournment on the basis that this was procedurally unfair  and  denied
    the appellant an opportunity to put his claim forward, second that  the
    existence of the warrant was not merely a peripheral issue but  was  of
    significant importance to the case, further that  the  judge  erred  in
    that he had  on  the  basis  of  the  absence  of  the  arrest  warrant
    considered that this aspect of the  case  had  not  been  properly  put
    forward finding that these aspects of the  case  had  been  fabricated.
    These findings  are  primarily  dealt  with  at  paragraph  16  of  the
    decision.

 5. When the matter came before me I heard submissions from  Mr  Junior  on
    behalf of the applicant.  He  submitted  that  the  primary  ground  of
    challenge was the failure to adjourn the matter and accepted  that  the
    other grounds of appeal flow  from  the  failure  to  adjourn  and  the
    consequent inability  of  the  appellant  to  adduce  evidence  in  his
    support.  Mr Junior did, however, accept that he had no translation  of
    the documents [which] were now said to  have  been  received  (and  for
    which the adjournment had been sought) and that  accordingly  this  put
    him in significant difficulty.  The explanation given is that  although
    the documents have been received they have not been translated  as  the
    appellant did not wish to incur further  costs  unless  and  until  his
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal had been granted.

 6. I do not consider that this is a sufficient explanation to explain  the
    failure to adduce documents which on 8 October 2015  were  said  to  be
    likely to be received within three weeks.  The reality is that not even
    the untranslated originals were put before me  and  there  is  thus  no
    basis for showing that the documents or warrants in fact exist.

 7. In considering at the reasons given  by  the  judge  for  refusing  the
    adjournment which are set out at paragraphs 8 to 10 of his decision,  I
    am satisfied that the judge  decided  to  refuse  the  application  for
    reasons which were fair, reasonable and in the  interests  of  justice.
    The judge noted that the refusal letter had been issued in April  2015.
    Nothing had since been presented and  the  applicant  had  applied  for
    asylum in November 2014 and  had  stated  in  his  interview  that  the
    documents were available and he noted: "I am not satisfied  that  if  I
    grant an adjournment the position will be any  different  on  the  next
    hearing date."  It was, I consider, open to the judge to consider  that
    the appellant had had sufficient time to provide the documents.   Thus,
    accordingly in all the circumstances of this case including the duty to
    deal with the case fairly and justly, that the judge did  act  properly
    and fairly in refusing the adjournment application.

 8. In the absence of the arrest warrant I  consider  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach the adverse conclusions as to the  appellant's  claim
    as set out in paragraphs 15 to 16 of the decision.  No challenge  other
    than failure to adjourn in the absence of the  arrest  warrants  (which
    are still not available in a proper form) has been put forward  in  any
    meaningful way to suggest  that  the  decision  was  otherwise  unsafe.
    Viewing the material before me in light of the grounds I consider  that
    the reasons given by Judge Adio for finding that the applicant's claims
    were untrue and that he did not meet the requirements  of  the  Refugee
    Convention are sustainable, properly reasoned and lawful.

 9. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 27 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

