
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07249/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th January 2014                             |On 7th February 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     s t
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Solomon, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Tamil Welfare Association
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 15th April 1991,  appeals
    with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Bryant) who  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  23rd  October  2013
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    to grant further leave to remain as a student and refusal to grant  the
    Appellant asylum under paragraph 336 of HC 395.

 2. This appeal is subject to anonymity direction that no report  or  other
    publication of these proceedings or any part or  parts  of  them  shall
    name or directly or indirectly identify the claimant.  Reference to the
    claimant may be use of her initials but not by name.   Failure  by  any
    person, body or  institution  whether  corporate  or  incorporate  (for
    avoidance of doubt to include either party to this  appeal)  to  comply
    with this direction may lead to a contempt of  court.   This  direction
    shall  continue  in  force  until  the  Upper  Tribunal  (IAC)  or   an
    appropriate court lifts or varies it.

 3. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom using  a  valid  student  visa
    using her own passport on 8th November 2011.  The visa was valid  until
    3rd November 2012 and she applied for further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student which was refused on 13th March 2013.   The  Appellant  made  a
    claim for asylum on 26th June 2013 based on her claim that  whilst  she
    had been in Sri Lanka she had been the subject of arrest, detention and
    ill-treatment at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities on account  of
    imputed political opinion attributed to her through assistance given to
    the LTTE.  The Respondent considered the basis of the  claim  that  was
    made for the Appellant but did not accept her account  and  thus  in  a
    decision made on 14th July 2013 refused to grant her claim for asylum.

 4. The Appellant exercised her right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Bryant)  on  15th
    October 2013.  In a  determination  promulgated  on  23rd  October,  he
    dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's  decision  following  his
    finding that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof  that
    she had been detained or ill-treated  by  the  authorities  or  by  the
    security forces in Sri Lanka.  He further found  that  she  was  of  no
    interest to the authorities if returned to Sri Lanka.

 5.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision,   such
    permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemingway  on  18th
    November 2013.

 6. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Solomon relied upon  the
    comprehensively drafted Grounds of  Appeal.   The  grounds  in  summary
    asserted that the judge erred  in  law  by  failing  to  make  adequate
    findings as to the Appellant and her family's claimed  past  activities
    for the LTTE, by failing to properly address  explanations  offered  by
    the Appellant for her failure to  depart  Sri  Lanka  earlier  and  her
    failure to claim asylum, by the wrong use of Section 8  of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and by  failing
    to consider adequately the medical evidence placed before the Tribunal.

 7.   In his oral submissions Mr Solomon submitted that in respect  of  the
    history of her claim, the judge failed to make any findings  concerning
    the assistance given by she and her family members to  the  LTTE.   The
    factual background  in  support  of  the  submission  are  set  out  at
    paragraph 1 of the grounds.  The judge did not  make  any  findings  in
    respect of the same save for the account given  by  her  of  assistance
    given to friends of her brother in 2009 which  ultimately  led  to  her
    arrest and detention in 2010.  He  submitted  that  there  was  a  weak
    attempt to address these matters at paragraph 63 but failed  to  engage
    with the other factual elements of her claim.

 8. As to corroborative evidence, the  Appellant's  brother  gave  evidence
    before the Tribunal yet the judge discounted that at  paragraph  66  on
    the basis that he has no direct knowledge.  This failed  to  take  into
    account the evidence given by her brother,  recorded  at  paragraph  50
    that he had spoken to the Appellant's mother by telephone who had  told
    him that his sister was detained.  This appeared to be  contemporaneous
    information  and  therefore  the  judge  was  wrong  to  discount   the
    Appellant's brother's evidence as having no weight.

 9. He further submitted that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for
    rejecting her arrest and detention within the determination.  He placed
    weight upon her failure to claim asylum but in this regard, despite the
    Appellant giving a detailed explanation as to why she had  not  claimed
    asylum (see paragraph 3 of the grounds) the judge did not  engage  with
    that explanation.  Similarly in respect of Ground 4, the  judge  placed
    weight upon her failure to leave Sri Lanka earlier.  Whilst this was  a
    period  of  one  year,  the  judge's  findings  at  paragraph  61  were
    unsupported by any evidence.  Similarly  paragraphs  5  and  6  of  the
    grounds demonstrate that the judge did  not  make  proper  or  adequate
    credibility findings from the evidence.

10. Turning to the medical evidence, the judge did not properly  take  into
    account the report of Dr J at paragraph 64 of the  determination.   The
    report demonstrated that the Appellant  had  scarring  consistent  with
    being burned and an injury to  the  side  of  her  breast.   The  judge
    discounted that evidence noting  that  whilst  the  Appellant  gave  an
    account of being burnt on her back, there was no such  injury  seen  by
    the doctor.  Similarly she did not  mention  being  hit  with  a  pipe.
    However the report showed that she had a number  of  scars  which  were
    probative of being burnt by a cigarette and that  was  consistent  with
    her account of ill-treatment.  The reasons given by the judge rejecting
    Dr J's report were inadequate.  Whilst the judge made reference to  the
    fact that the expert did not consider other causes, the decision of the
    Tribunal in RR (Challenging evidence)  Sri  Lanka  [2010]  UKUT  000274
    states that it is incumbent upon  the  Respondent  to  put  their  case
    properly and that if an Appellant or expert chose to give oral evidence
    then the Respondent's cross-examination should fearlessly  and  clearly
    include the suggestion  to  the  Appellant  or  the  expert  that,  for
    example, an injury was not caused in the way alleged by  the  Appellant
    but by a different mechanism.

11.   In the case of the  report  of  Dr  O,  consultant  psychiatrist,  Mr
    Solomon acknowledged that the conclusion of the report did not  support
    any claim made under Articles 3 or 8 concerning a freestanding risk  of
    suicide however it did demonstrate that she had anxiety and  depression
    which was due to her past experiences.

12.  Given the errors in  the  determination  in  respect  of  the  medical
    evidence and the findings of fact,  the  determination  should  be  set
    aside.

13.   Mr Jarvis on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  the
    determination was a  sound  one  and  should  not  be  set  aside.   He
    submitted that the criticisms advanced on behalf of the Appellant  were
    in respect of form and not substance and that the judge had  considered
    the evidence  at  length  including  that  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    explanations for her failure to claim asylum in the United Kingdom  and
    also her failure to leave Sri Lanka in the  light  of  the  experiences
    that she had claimed.  He submitted that the judgment should be read in
    its entirety and whilst paragraph 1 of the grounds submitted that judge
    failed to make findings concerning her past history, it was plain  from
    the determination that the judge was well aware of the past  historical
    matters but dealt with what was the core aspect of her claim which  was
    the interest in her by the authorities as a result of the  incident  in
    2009 relating to the SIM card and her subsequent arrest  and  detention
    in 2010.  He submitted that the judge was not required  to  go  through
    every aspect of the claim but dealt with what was the crux of her  case
    within the determination, looking at all matters in the round.

14. As to findings made relating to her delay in  claiming  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom for a period of nearly two years  after  arrival  and  a
    delay in leaving Sri Lanka following the incidents, he  submitted  that
    the judge in reaching those findings took into account the  Appellant's
    explanations and her evidence, but rejected it for  the  reasons  given
    within the determination.  The grounds were merely a disagreement  with
    the findings reached by the judge in that respect.  The judge has  made
    no errors of fact when reaching his findings of fact and it  could  not
    be said that any of the findings made were perverse.

15. As to paragraph 5 of the grounds, the judge was entitled to  take  into
    account the evidence relating to the assistance given by the JP to  the
    family and the absence of any evidence from the JP.   At  paragraph  46
    the Appellant's own evidence was that corroborative evidence could have
    been available by a form of a letter from the JP but that  he  had  not
    provided one.  The judge was entitled to take that  into  account  when
    making an assessment of her explanation  as  to  why  he  rejected  her
    evidence at paragraph 61.

16. As to the other corroborative evidence in the form of her brother,  the
    judge noted that the Appellant's brother had no firsthand knowledge  of
    the Appellant's history  and  even  if  he  had  focused  on  what  the
    Appellant had said to her mother, that was relayed to  her  brother  by
    her mother and again was not firsthand knowledge.  The judge considered
    that matter in the round at paragraph 67 and  also  took  into  account
    that there had been no arrest warrant despite her claim to have  failed
    to report and there was no evidence from the Appellant's father or from
    the JP despite a suggestion that  such  evidence  was  obtainable  (see
    paragraph 47).

17. As to the medical evidence, whilst Mr Solomon relied on the decision of
    the Tribunal in RR (as  cited),  it  was  not  authority  to  say  that
    alternative causes are always required to be put to an Appellant or  an
    expert if they gave oral evidence.   That  goes  behind  the  essential
    requirement that it is for an Appellant  to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof as noted in the decision of AJ (Cameroon) v the SSHD [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 373 at paragraph 11 that the Tribunal is not obliged  to  look  for
    some different or modified case that might be in his favour to show how
    the Appellant came by his injuries.   The  judge's  assessment  of  the
    psychiatric evidence was sound.  Mr Jarvis relied upon the decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in HH (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2007]  EWCA  Civ  306  and
    paragraph 23 where the court noted that the  judge  in  that  case  was
    entitled to comment upon the diagnosis in the way that he  did  because
    it was very largely dependent on assuming that the account given by the
    Appellant was to be believed.

18. In respect of the report of Dr J, Mr Jarvis relied upon the decision of
    the Tribunal in JL (medical reports - credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT
    145 noting that there was no reference in  that  determination  to  the
    decision of RR.  Based on that determination, the judge was entitled to
    consider and look at evidence not previously given to  the  expert,  in
    this case the admission of an injury by a pipe and  that  the  Istanbul
    Protocol required the author of any expert  evidence  to  consider  the
    consistency of the injuries and the method of causation.   The  judge's
    approach was inline with that of the  description  in  JL  (China)  (as
    cited).  Thus Mr Jarvis submitted  that  there  was  no  error  or  law
    disclosed in the determination of the Immigration Judge.

19. I reserved my determination.

Conclusions:

20.  The  judge's  findings  of  fact  and  analysis  of  the   Appellant's
    credibility are set out at paragraphs 59 -  68  of  the  determination.
    The grounds make a number of criticisms about the findings by reference
    to specific paragraphs and the issue of credibility.  However I  remind
    myself  the  determination  must  be  read  as  a   whole.    In   this
    determination the judge sets out at length  the  evidence  before  him,
    both  documentary  and  oral  (see  paragraphs  18   to   53   of   the
    determination), he summarises the Respondent's case and  also  that  of
    the Appellant relevant to the findings that  he  went  on  to  make  at
    paragraphs 59 to 68.

21. The core of the Appellant's claim related to events occurring  in  2009
    where she had been assisting friends  of  her  brother  who  were  LTTE
    members by helping them find accommodation, food and  medical  supplies
    and by purchasing a SIM card using her national ID card.  On 22nd  June
    2010 it was said that  six  Sri  Lankan  soldiers  came  to  her  home,
    searched it while she and her mother were present  after  checking  her
    identification.  She was detained and taken to a  camp  where  she  was
    questioned  and  subject  to  physical  and  sexual  harm  during  that
    detention.  She was released with the help of a JP and also by way of a
    bribe and was bailed upon conditions of signing at the camp.  Following
    her release, it was asserted that she continued to  suffer  abuse  when
    reporting at the camp for a period of approximately  ten  months.   She
    later left Sri Lanka after applying using  the  usual  channels  for  a
    student visa; entering the UK on 5th June 2011 where she remained as  a
    student.  During her time she made a further application for  leave  to
    remain which was refused and then claimed asylum on 26th June 2013, two
    years after her arrival in the United Kingdom.

22.  The judge's findings are set out at paragraphs 59 to 68.  I  set  them
    out below:-


         "59. Asylum.  The respondent does not accept that the appellant was
             detained and abused as she  claims  or  that  she  is  of  any
             interest to the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  on  any  return.
             Further, even if the appellant's account is the truth  of  the
             matter, she would nevertheless still not have a profile  which
             would bring her into one of  the  risk  categories  identified
             within the country guidance determination of  CG  and  Others.
             The respondent did not have before her the witness  statements
             of the appellant and her brother, their evidence as was  given
             at this appeal, and the medical and psychiatric reports on the
             appellant.  I consider all the evidence which is available  to
             me to determine whether  the  appellant  is  credible  in  her
             account of her history in Sri Lanka.


         60.  The appellant claims to have been detained on one occasion for
             a number of days and during which time she was sexually abused
             and  raped.   She  claims  that  during  subsequent  reporting
             following her release, she was further raped.  She  claims  to
             have suffered injuries which are said to be confirmed  by  the
             medical report and to  have  suffered  psychiatric  trauma  as
             evidenced by the psychiatric report.


         61.  Following her release from  her  brief  period  of  detention,
             there elapsed almost a year before she left the country.   Her
             explanation is that arrangements were being made  for  her  to
             either travel to Germany where  she  has  an  aunt  and  then,
             failing that plan, to obtain a passport and visa to allow  her
             to come to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  student.   The  agent
             instructed clearly had contacts at the airport,  according  to
             the appellant's account, but yet all the efforts were made  to
             ensure her lawful departure from  the  country  with  her  own
             passport in her own name and a student  visa  to  study  at  a
             named college in the United Kingdom.  If the appellant was  so
             traumatised by  her  alleged  detention  as  she  claims,  and
             genuinely feared for her safety in Sri Lanka, I do not find it
             credible that the agent should not  have  been  instructed  to
             arrange her travel to the United Kingdom by any means as  soon
             as possible.  Instead, a year passed, during  which  time  she
             reported to the authorities, as  she  claims,  and  was  again
             raped by  the  same  officer  who  had  raped  her  whilst  in
             detention.  Her father knew of these further alleged rapes  as
             she claims to have told  her  mother  who  in  turn  told  her
             father.  He had arranged for a JP to secure her  release  from
             detention, and subsequently his own release after she had left
             the country on her account, but yet that JP was not ever  used
             to assist her when  she  reported  to  the  authorities  which
             resulted in her further sexual abuse.   Her  evidence  at  the
             appeal is that the JP could not be used every time.  She  also
             said that the JP said he would give a  letter  confirming  his
             actions but there is no such letter before me.   Knowing  that
             his daughter was being abused again whilst reporting, I do not
             find it credible that the appellant's father  would  not  have
             used the JP to ensure her safety when reporting or to have had
             immediate arrangements made for her to leave Sri Lanka.


         62.  The appellant's brother had been in the United  Kingdom  since
             2002 and had claimed asylum and his evidence at the appeal was
             that the family in Sri Lanka had known  that  he  had  claimed
             asylum and therefore this would  have  been  a  process  which
             would  have  been  known  to  the  appellant's  family.    The
             appellant would also have been aware that her brother had been
             granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of
             that asylum claim but yet she did not claim asylum on  arrival
             in the United Kingdom but instead commenced her studies.   She
             did not even claim asylum when that student visa was coming to
             an end but rather applied for an extension of leave.   It  was
             only when that application was refused that  she  subsequently
             claimed asylum.  Whilst her evidence is that  the  agent  told
             her not to claim asylum on  arrival  otherwise  she  would  be
             deported immediately, I do  not  find  it  credible  that  she
             should not have sought the international  protection  of  this
             country if she feared any return to  Sri  Lanka,  particularly
             given the conduct of the United  Kingdom  authorities  towards
             her brother here.  Her evidence is that  she  would  not  have
             claimed asylum at all if her leave  had  been  extended  as  a
             student.  She would always have known that she would  have  no
             permanent leave to remain as a student and I therefore do  not
             find it credible that  she  would  not  have  immediately,  or
             shortly after her arrival, have followed her brother's example
             and claimed asylum with him able to support that  application.
             I find her failure to do  so  goes  directly  to  whether  her
             account of her history in Sri Lanka is as she claims it to be.




         63.  I find that she added to her evidence at the appeal as to what
             she allegedly did for the two LTTE members she  names  and  to
             whom she says she supplied the SIM card.  At the  appeal,  she
             said she also took from them their ID cards as they gave  them
             to her to give to someone else.  It was put to her  in  cross-
             examination that this had not been mentioned by her before but
             she said she was not asked about it and did  not  realise  she
             had to mention it.  Somehow  it  was  missed  in  her  witness
             statement.  I do not find it credible that she should not have
             fully set out all that happened  to  her  in  Sri  Lanka  when
             setting out her claim.


         64.  I note the medical report on the appellant by Dr J who noted a
             pigmented area down two thirds of the back of her left forearm
             and he opines that this injury would have resulted from  blunt
             trauma; that is a blow from a thin hard object.  The appellant
             does not give an account, other than  to  Dr  J,  of  how  she
             suffered any such blow from such a thin hard object.  He found
             a depigmented scar on her right breast which he  opines  would
             have followed a cut with a sharp instrument.  I note that  she
             claims that she was cut on her breast during a rape.  He  also
             finds three scars  on  her  right  leg  which  he  opines  are
             characteristic of being caused by a burning  cigarette  and  a
             scar below the knee which has the appearance of  being  caused
             by a burn consistent with a  burning  cigarette  being  rubbed
             across the tissues.  He also found a vertical  red  mark  near
             the hip joint likely to have been caused by a blunt trauma but
             which did not look particularly old.  He also found a scar  on
             the appellant's left ankle which has the appearance  of  being
             caused by a burn and could  have  resulted  from  rubbing  the
             heated end of the cigarette across the tissue and she has four
             other scars by the knee and top of the  foot.   The  appellant
             was unable to account for these.  I note from question  50  in
             the appellant's asylum interview that she claims that she  was
             burned by a cigarette being rubbed on her  leg  but  was  also
             burned on her back with a cigarette.  I note that there is  no
             reference to any burn  on  the  appellant's  back  in  Dr  J's
             report.  Dr J describes the burn  scars  he  found  as  either
             being characteristic of being caused by a  burning  cigarette,
             being consistent with a burning cigarette being rubbed  across
             the tissues or having the appearance of being caused by a burn
             which could have resulted from rubbing the  heated  end  of  a
             cigarette across the tissues.  I do not find Dr J's report  to
             be helpful in considering the burn marks he  states  he  found
             given  the  varying  descriptions  as  to  how  that  scarring
             occurred and what may have caused that scarring.  He does  not
             consider the likelihood of any other causes.  If the  scarring
             he found was  from  lighted  cigarettes,  I  do  not  find  it
             credible that no such burn  was  found  on  her  back  as  the
             appellant specifically refers to having been burned there with
             a cigarette.  I take the cut on the  appellant's  breast  into
             account and I note that the appellant is unable to account for
             other scars found on her left knee and foot.


         65.  I also note the psychiatric report on the  appellant  prepared
             by Dr O.  There is no  suggestion  in  that  report  that  the
             appellant suffers from PTSD as a result of her  alleged  abuse
             in Sri Lanka and I find that her report does not indicate that
             the appellant was abused and ill-treated as she claims in  Sri
             Lanka.  Dr O opines that her symptoms are  consistent  with  a
             mixed anxiety and depressive disorder and that the most likely
             cause of her presentation is the fear of being deported.  I do
             not find that that fear relates in turn to what the  appellant
             alleges happened in Sri Lanka.  Dr  O  also  opines  that  she
             strongly suspects that  the  appellant  is  likely  to  commit
             suicide if she is deported.  Dr O  gives  no  basis  for  that
             opinion.  I find the whole report to be lacking in detail  and
             I do not find that the report is a basis upon  which  I  could
             find that the appellant is credible  in  her  account  of  her
             history in Sri Lanka or that, indeed, she would commit suicide
             if removed.


         66.  I note the statement and evidence of the  appellant's  brother
             but he has no direct knowledge of the appellant's  history  in
             Sri Lanka after he left in 2002.  His evidence is  based  upon
             what she has allegedly told him although he does refer to  her
             being on the waiting list for counselling and in his statement
             he states "my sister has sometimes met small accidents in  the
             UK that she tried to  cut  her  wrist  with  the  knife".   He
             adopted this witness statement as his evidence and he said  he
             understood its contents.  I do not understand what he means by
             this sentence but I do not find it goes to prove an  attempted
             suicide.


         67.  There is no evidence that there is an arrest warrant  for  the
             appellant which I would have anticipated if the appellant  had
             failed to comply with the reporting conditions of her release.
              There is no evidence from the appellant's father, or from the
             JP, as to his alleged reporting to the authorities instead  of
             the appellant, or of any arrest warrant being issued for  her.
             I would have anticipated  such  evidence  if  the  appellant's
             account of what happened both before and after  her  departure
             from Sri Lanka is true.  I also note the death certificate and
             newspaper report relating to who is said to be the appellant's
             cousin but I do not find it proved from those documents either
             that that person was killed by the army or that the person  is
             indeed the appellant's cousin.  The appellant's brother  gives
             no evidence about that matter.


         68.  Whilst I fully take into account the evidence of  the  medical
             and psychiatric reports on the appellant and the  evidence  of
             the  appellant's  brother,  I  find  the  appellant  to   lack
             credibility to the extent that I do not believe her account of
             her history in Sri Lanka.  I do not find that she proves, even
             to the low standard required, that she was ever detained, ill-
             treated, sexually abused or raped  by  the  authorities  or  a
             member of the security forces in Sri Lanka and that  she  fled
             Sri Lanka through fear of persecution.  I find it more  likely
             that she came to the United Kingdom  to  study  and  made  her
             asylum claim after the respondent had refused her  application
             for further leave to remain as a student.   I  find  that  the
             appellant does not prove that she is of any  interest  to  the
             authorities or any other individual or group in Sri Lanka.  In
             particular, I do not find it proved that she is the subject of
             any arrest warrant or would be on any "stop list" as described
             within the determination of GJ and Others.  I do not  find  it
             proved that the appellant on any return would be identified as
             a Tamil activist or would be perceived to be a threat  to  the
             integrity of Sri Lanka as  a  single  state.   She  is  not  a
             journalist and  there  is  no  evidence  that  she  has  given
             evidence to the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation Commission.
              I do not find it proved that there is any extant court  order
             against her.  I do not find that the appellant proves that she
             comes within any of the risk categories of persons  identified
             within GJ and Others"

23. The grounds submitted challenge the judge's determination as being  one
    that lacks adequate reasoning and also that the judge did not  consider
    explanations given by the Appellant, when reaching  those  findings  of
    fact.  It is further  asserted  that  he  failed  to  give  proper  and
    adequate consideration to the medical evidence submitted on her behalf.



24.  In relation  to  a  "reasons  challenge",  the  correct  approach  was
    summarised in the decision  of  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons;  set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 0085 (IAC) at paragraph [10] as follows:-



         "10.     We would emphasise that although there is a legal duty  to
             give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on  the  central
             issue on which the appeal is determined, such reasons need not
             be extensive if the decision as a whole  makes  sense,  having
             regard to the material accepted  by  the  judge.   Although  a
             decision may contain an error of law where the requirements to
             give adequate reasons are not met,  this  Tribunal  would  not
             normally set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal where
             there has  been  no  misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-finding
             process cannot be criticised and the relevant country guidance
             is taken into account, unless the conclusions that  the  judge
             draws from the primary data before  him  were  not  reasonably
             open to him."

25. It is plain from the findings of fact reached by the judge and  recited
    above that the  assessment  was  made  after  considering  all  of  the
    evidence, both  documentary  and  oral  and  that  having  done  so  he
    comprehensively disbelieved the core  of  the  Appellant's  account  of
    being arrested, detained and ill-treated and found that she was  of  no
    interest to the authorities or the army in Sri Lanka.

26. The judge dealt with the core aspect of the claim in  the  findings  of
    facts reached after  considering  all  the  evidence  "in  the  round".
    Contrary to the assertion in the grounds, the judge was  aware  of  the
    account given by the Appellant of family involvement in the  LTTE.   He
    recorded within the determination that the  account  of  her  brother's
    assistance to the LTTE and that he had left Sri Lanka in 2002 when  the
    Appellant was 12 years of age.  Her own  evidence  in  respect  of  her
    activities were set out at paragraph 6 of the determination namely that
    she did not know anything about the activities of her brother  who  was
    in the United Kingdom with the LTTE and she was very young at the time.
     As regards her second brother, she believed him to have gone to  India
    in 2006 after her cousin was shot by  the  army.   She  could  give  no
    further details of this and at paragraph 67 the judge took into account
    the death certificate and  newspaper  report  said  to  relate  to  the
    Appellant's cousin's death but gave those documents no  weight  finding
    that they did not demonstrate that the Appellant's cousin was killed by
    the army nor that the person named was the Appellant's  cousin  in  any
    event.  He also recorded that the Appellant's brother gave no  evidence
    about this issue either.  Thus the judge did deal with aspects  of  the
    Appellant's past historical claim.

27. As to her parent's activities at paragraph 5 her evidence was  recorded
    as "her parents were never involved with the LTTE" and  her  activities
    at paragraph 7 referred to her dancing at some events but that "she was
    not involved in any other  activities  as  she  was  too  young."   Her
    principal involvement with the LTTE related to  events  in  2009  which
    led, she claimed to her arrest and detention in  2010.   This  was  the
    core aspect of her claim which the judge clearly considered and reached
    findings of fact upon in the body of the determination.   The  evidence
    before the judge was that both she and her parents  had  not  been  the
    subject of any interest by the Sri Lankan authorities arising from  her
    brother's involvement in the LTTE given that he had left  in  2002  and
    her brother leaving in 2006 until she had provided assistance in  2009.
    Thus the judge did not err in  law  in  considering  the  evidence  and
    reaching conclusions on what were the core issues in  this  case  which
    the Appellant relied upon  as  evidence  of  persecution  and  risk  on
    return.

28. The grounds advanced at paragraphs 2 and 5 amount to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the conclusions reached by the  judge.   The  grounds
    assert at paragraph 2 that the judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons
    for reaching his findings and that  he  erred  in  law  by  erroneously
    treating Section 8 of the 2004 Act and her failure to claim  asylum  as
    the starting point of his assessment of credibility at paragraph 62  of
    the determination.  I do not consider that such a criticism is merited.
     By reason of the provisions of Section 8 of the 2004  Act,  the  judge
    was required to consider this as an issue but in any event, the refusal
    letter at paragraph 17 raised her failure to claim asylum and thus  was
    required to be determined.  As the Court  of  Appeal  has  held  in  JT
    (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 878 at paragraph 21, Section 8  is  no  more
    than a reminder to fact-finding Tribunals that  conduct  coming  within
    the category stated in Section 8 of the 2004 Act should be  taken  into
    account when assessing credibility.  However, what  is  required  is  a
    global assessment of credibility (see R (Sivakumar) v the  SSHD  [2003]
    UKHL 14.  Furthermore, such  findings  are  not  determinative  of  the
    claim.  It is clear from reading  the  determination  that  the  judge,
    contrary  to  the  grounds  submitted,  did  not  treat   this   as   a
    determinative factor nor as the  starting  point  to  his  findings  on
    credibility. Even ignoring the issue of delay in claiming  asylum,  the
    judge made a number of adverse credibility findings  which  dealt  with
    the core of the Appellant's account.

29. Contrary  to  Ground  3,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  give
    consideration to the explanation proffered by the Appellant as  to  her
    failure to claim asylum.  The judge recorded  her  evidence  upon  this
    issue in the determination at paragraphs 41 and 62  and  made  specific
    findings in relation to it at paragraph 62.  The judge was entitled  to
    place weight on the Appellant's brother's  past  conduct  and  evidence
    concerning his claim for asylum and that this was a  process  known  to
    the Appellant's family in Sri Lanka. Further, that  the  Appellant  was
    aware that her brother had been granted leave to remain  based  on  his
    asylum claim but that she  did  not  claim  asylum  after  arrival  but
    commenced studying.  As the judge noted, despite her claim to have been
    suffering ill-treatment at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities  she
    did not claim asylum when the student visa was coming  to  an  end  but
    applied for an extension.  It is plain that he took  into  account  her
    evidence that she did not claim on arrival because the agent  had  told
    her that if she did  so  she  would  face  deportation.   He  expressly
    referred to this at paragraph 62 but rejected her explanation based  on
    her own knowledge concerning the experiences of  her  brother  who  had
    been given protection in the United Kingdom and had not been  deported.
    Thus there is no merit in that ground.

30. As to Ground 4, the judge took into account the Appellant's conduct  in
    remaining in Sri Lanka for a significant period following her claim  to
    have been arrested, detained and ill-treated.  As the  judge  noted  at
    paragraph 61,  following  the  release  from  detention  the  Appellant
    remained in Sri Lanka for approximately a year.   Her  explanation  for
    not leaving sooner was that arrangements were being  made  for  her  to
    travel to Germany where she had an aunt or failing that,  to  obtain  a
    student visa using proper channels  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    However the judge noted that on the evidence given  by  the  Appellant,
    the agent who had been instructed was someone who had contacts  at  the
    airport which could be used to leave by means other than  lawfully  but
    that the efforts made for her departure were all lawfully done using  a
    properly obtained student visa and passport in her name  which  took  a
    process of a number of months. The judge considered that:-


         "If the appellant was so traumatised by her  alleged  detention  as
         she claims, and genuinely feared for her safety in Sri Lanka, I  do
         not find it credible that the agent should not have been instructed
         to arrange her travel to the United Kingdom by any means as soon as
         possible.  Instead, a year passed, during which time  she  reported
         to the authorities ..."

31. He further took into account the evidence before him  that  the  family
    had used a JP to secure not only her release from  detention  but  also
    her father's release after she had left Sri Lanka but that the  JP  had
    not been used to assist her at a time when she was a subject of further
    sustained and consistent abuse during a reporting  period.   The  judge
    went on to consider the explanation for this lack of  help  by  the  JP
    that he could "not be used every time".   In  this  respect  the  judge
    noted that there had been  no  evidence  from  the  JP  confirming  his
    actions (see paragraph 61 of the determination).  Mr Solomon criticises
    the approach of  the  judge  as  requiring  the  Appellant  to  provide
    corroboration of her claim.  Whilst it would be a misdirection to imply
    that corroboration is necessary in an  asylum  appeal,  the  fact  that
    corroboration is not required does not mean that a judge is required to
    leave out of account the absence of documentary  evidence  which  could
    reasonably be expected.  It was entirely open to the judge to take into
    account that there had been  no  letter  from  the  JP  confirming  his
    actions (see paragraph 61) as this  was firmly based  on  the  evidence
    set out at paragraph 46 where it was recorded that the  JP  could  have
    provided a letter but had not done so.

32.   Similarly in the determination at paragraph 67 it  was  open  to  the
    judge to note that there was no arrest warrant for the Appellant  which
    he would have anticipated if the Appellant had failed  to  comply  with
    the reporting conditions of her release nor was there any evidence from
    her father or from the JP.  He concluded "I do  not  find  it  credible
    that the Appellant's father would not have used the JP  to  ensure  her
    safety when reporting or to have had immediate  arrangements  made  for
    her to leave Sri Lanka."

33. Contrary to the assertions in the grounds at paragraphs 4  and  5,  the
    judge's findings at paragraph 61 were supported by  evidence  and  were
    findings reasonably open to him on that evidence.  The grounds  are  no
    more than a disagreement with the conclusions reached.

34.  At Ground 6 it is asserted that the judge directed himself  concerning
    the case of Chiver that some inconsistencies/omissions  are  inevitable
    but failed to apply that to his findings at paragraph  63  but  in  any
    event, that did not materially advance her claim and  was  insufficient
    to detract from her credibility.  At paragraph 63, the judge found that
    the Appellant  had  in  essence  embellished  her  account  during  her
    evidence and reached the conclusion that he did not  find  it  credible
    that "she should not have fully set out all that had happened to her in
    Sri Lanka when setting out her claim."  The amount of weight  given  to
    issues of credibility and questions of discrepancy or  disagreement  on
    the evidence, is a matter for the trial judge.  There is no  rule  that
    an issue of credibility does not matter if it does not go  to  material
    issue or core of the claim as  Mr  Solomon  has  argued.   This  was  a
    finding open to the judge on the evidence and in any event,  could  not
    have said to be a finding or one upon which the case  turned  upon  and
    was only one finding of a number considered cumulatively that were made
    by the judge, which he found to undermine the core of her claim.

35. I do not find any merit in the argument that the judge failed  to  take
    proper account  of  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  brother.   The
    evidence is specifically  recorded  at  paragraphs  49  to  52  of  the
    determination.   At  paragraph  66,  he  correctly   noted   that   the
    Appellant's brother had no direct knowledge of the Appellant's  history
    in Sri Lanka after he left in 2002 when the Appellant was 12  years  of
    age.  Her evidence before the Tribunal was recorded at paragraph 6 that
    she did not know of his activities in the UK as she was very  young  at
    the time which is borne out by the chronology and that his evidence was
    based on what she had told him.  Whilst Mr Solomon  submits  the  judge
    ignored evidence recorded at paragraph 50, that he had  spoken  to  his
    mother by telephone and that she had told him that  the  Appellant  had
    been detained, does not in my judgment take  the  matter  any  further.
    The judge was entitled to reach the conclusion that given the length of
    time that he had been out of Sri Lanka, her age at  the  time  that  he
    last saw his sister and her lack of knowledge  of  his  activities  and
    that he had no firsthand knowledge of events in Sri Lanka was  evidence
    not capable of being afforded any  weight.   The  judge  balanced  this
    against findings at paragraph 67 that  there  was  no  evidence  of  an
    arrest warrant which was reasonably likely if she had failed to  comply
    with reporting conditions, there was no evidence from  the  Appellant's
    father or the JP which the judge noted that he would have  "anticipated
    such evidence if the Appellant's account of what happened  both  before
    and after her departure from Sri Lanka is true."   He  also  took  into
    account the contents of a newspaper report.  I find no error of law  in
    the judges approach to this issue.

36. I now turn to the medical evidence.  The criticisms advanced on  behalf
    of the Appellant relate to the medical evidence on the basis  that  the
    judge failed to have adequate regard to that evidence  and  insofar  as
    the evidence was rejected, the judge gave inadequate reasons for  doing
    so.

37. It is not disputed that the judge correctly summarised the contents  of
    the report of Dr J at paragraphs 32 to 35 of the determination and  the
    relevant parts relating to the scars that the doctor  has  noted.   The
    judge set out his findings in respect of the  report  at  paragraph  64
    which has been set out earlier.  The judge was not bound to accept  the
    report of Dr J.  The position is summarised by Stanley Burton LJ in the
    case of SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155 at  paragraph  21  of
    his judgment where he said:

         "21. Generally speaking, the weight, if any, to be given to  expert
             (or indeed any) evidence is a matter for the trial  judge.   A
             judge's decision  not  to  accept  expert  evidence  does  not
             involve an error of law on his part,  provided  he  approached
             that evidence with appropriate care and gives good reasons for
             his decision. Ultimately, therefore, there are only two issues
             as to the Senior Immigration Judge's treatment of the  medical
             evidence: did he address that evidence with  appropriate  care
             and did he give good reasons for his  conclusion?   Those  two
             questions are interrelated.  It is difficult to conceive of  a
             case  in  which  a  judge  gives  adequate  reasons  for   his
             conclusions  on  expert  evidence  yet  he  is  held  to  have
             exercised insufficient  care.   His  reasons  demonstrate  his
             care."

38. Whilst the judge noted evidence of scarring, he gave a number of cogent
    reasons as to why he placed little or no weight upon the  report  which
    related to consideration of the evidence as a whole.  In respect of the
    pigmented area (on the back of  her  left  forearm)  where  the  doctor
    opined the injury would have resulted from blunt  trauma  from  a  thin
    hard object, the Appellant did not  give  an  account  as  to  how  had
    suffered such a blow other than to Dr J.  There  were  scars  that  the
    Appellant could not account for (knee and top of foot), there was  also
    no scarring by way of a burn to her back.  The judge recorded that  the
    Appellant had given a specific account concerning an injury to her back
    (see question 50 of interview) which  was  as  a  result  of  burns  by
    cigarettes but there was no reference to such a burn on her back.   The
    judge, when considering the evidence, found that when  considering  the
    scars said to be caused by such a method of burning, he  did  not  find
    the evidence of Dr J helpful given the varying descriptions as  to  how
    that scarring had occurred and what might  have  caused  the  scarring.
    The judge  also  considered  that  the  doctor  did  not  consider  the
    likelihood of other causes  and  that  of  the  scars  identified  from
    lighted cigarettes, he did not find credible "that  no  such  burn  was
    found on her back as the Appellant specifically refers to  having  been
    burnt there with a cigarette."  This was a case where the Appellant had
    not claimed asylum upon arrival and did not  do  so  for  a  period  of
    nearly two years despite the account of ill-treatment  when  the  scars
    would have been more recent for the doctor to assess.

39. Mr Solomon relies upon the decision of the Tribunal in  RR  (as  cited)
    which he submits is authority for the proposition that  if  challenging
    evidence of causation it is therefore incumbent on  the  judge  or  the
    parties to put  such  competing  explanations  to  the  Appellant.  The
    Tribunal in that case did not make any reference to the Court of Appeal
    authority dealing with medical reports nor did it make any reference to
    the Istanbul Protocol.  RR was a case very much on its own facts.   The
    decision relied upon by Mr Jarvis was that of AJ (Cameroon) (as  cited)
    which makes it clear that the burden of  proof  is  squarely  upon  the
    Appellant ( see paragraph 11of AJ(Cameroon). A more recent decision  of
    the Tribunal relied upon by the  Secretary  of  State  is  JL  (medical
    reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC) which considered the
    issue of medical evidence and causation further,  where  it  stated  at
    paragraph 29:-

         "29. From leading cases dealing with medical  evidence  in  asylum-
             related cases it is clear that those writing  medical  reports
             are expected to keep within  certain  parameters.   As  expert
             witnesses they have duties under Practice Direction 10 of  the
             Practice Directions of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers  of
             the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  They  are  to
             follow the guidance given in the Istanbul Protocol, especially
             [186-187] dealing with different degrees  of  consistency  and
             [162] dealing with objectivity and impartiality.  SA (Somalia)
             [2006] EWCA Civ 1302, when considering causation  of  injuries
             said to have been inflicted by torture or other forms  of  ill
             treatment,  they  are   to   consider   possible   alternative
             explanations.  As stated in SA (Somalia) [28]:

                  'It is also desirable that, in the case of marks of injury
                  which  are  inherently  susceptible   of   a   number   of
                  alternative or "everyday" explanations,  reference  should
                  be made to such fact, together with any physical  features
                  or  "pointers"  found  which  may  make   the   particular
                  explanation for the injury  advanced  by  the  complainant
                  more or less likely.'   (See  also  RT  (medical  reports,
                  causation of scarring) Sri Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00009).

    The decision goes on to say at paragraph 30 that:


         "Those writing medical reports  must  ensure  where  possible  that
         before forming their opinions they study any assessments that  have
         been  made  of  the  Appellant's  credibility  by  the  immigration
         authorities  and/or a Tribunal Judge and  that  those  who  provide
         expert reports, medical or otherwise, are provided  with  documents
         relevant to the matters that they are asked to consider."

40. As submitted by Mr Jarvis, Dr J did not  follow  the  guidance  in  the
    Istanbul Protocol  relating  to  degrees  of  consistency  nor  did  he
    consider alternative explanations (see SA (Somalia)) which was a  point
    made by the judge.   Further,  he  did  not  consider  when  making  an
    assessment of the scarring the consistency of her account that she  had
    given a specific account of a burn being made to her back yet  no  scar
    had been found on the site identified by her in her evidence.

41. The judge also considered a report from Dr O,  consultant  psychiatrist
    based on  an  hourly  meeting.   The  report  recited  the  Appellant's
    account.  The judge made his findings about the report at paragraph  65
    (see earlier).  It is plain that the judge gave adequate  and  evidence
    based reasons for reaching the conclusion  that  little  or  no  weight
    should be  attached  to  that  report.   He  made  specific  criticisms
    concerning the report; that it contained no analysis or any  basis  for
    the opinion reached. Whilst the report made reference  to  symptoms  of
    anxiety and distress, it did not state  that  the  reason  for  such  a
    presentation was a result of any past experiences and in so far  as  it
    gave any reason, it was said to relate to her fear of deportation. Dr O
    specifically stated that there  had  been  no  attempts  made  to  harm
    herself (see paragraphs 30 and 38) and the judge  considered  that  the
    doctor had not given any basis for his opinion that she would be likely
    to do so in the future. The report did not make any  reference  to  any
    previous history of the Appellant nor to any treatment  sought  by  her
    from a GP or otherwise.  As conceded by Mr Solomon  the  report  as  it
    stood could not have reasonably been  one  to  support  a  freestanding
    claim under Article 3 or 8.

42. Having considered the judge's treatment of the medical evidence,  I  do
    not find that it has been demonstrated that  the  judge's  approach  to
    that evidence was flawed.  In the decision of Y and Z v the SSHD [2009]
    EWCA Civ 362, it was held that no  judge  is  bound  simply  to  accept
    everything that an expert says but that a judge must give  reasons  for
    rejecting such evidence. It further acknowledged that the factuality of
    an account might be so controverted by the Tribunal's own  findings  as
    to undermine that evidence. Furthermore it  cannot  be  said  that  the
    judge fell into error in the way set out in the decision of  Mibanga  v
    the SSHD [2005] INLR 377 where the process of arriving  at  an  adverse
    credibility finding was based on the Tribunal's view of the Appellant's
    evidence and then  as  a  separate  exercise  considered  whether  that
    finding might be shifted by the expert medical evidence.  As  the  case
    law indicates, the evidence must be  considered  as  a  whole  and  any
    reports relevant to credibility must be assessed  during  the  process.
    Contrary to the assertions made in the grounds, the judge did  consider
    all the evidence together in this way, including the  medical  evidence
    and  reached  conclusions  when  considering  it  as  a  whole,  before
    rejecting the central core of her claim as set out at in the summary at
    paragraph 68.

43. I remind myself that I can only interfere with a judge's  determination
    if an error of law has been made out and in this respect I  have  given
    careful  consideration  to  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant by Mr Solomon, both written and oral.  However in conclusion,
    when considering the determination as a whole, I do not  consider  that
    it has been demonstrated that the judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
    reaching the overall conclusions that he set out  at  paragraph  68  in
    respect of her  account.   In  reaching  his  conclusions  he  properly
    assessed the evidence before  him  and  the  conclusions  reached  were
    adequately reasoned and were fully open to the Judge  on  the  evidence
    before him.   I consider that any submission  based  on  irrationality,
    that is to say, that no reasonable judge, would have concluded  as  the
    Immigration Judge did on the evidence placed before him, could  not  be
    successfully advanced in this case.   The  question  which  I  have  to
    answer is not whether another Immigration Judge or I myself would  have
    reached the same conclusion as the Immigration Judge in this  case  but
    whether no Immigration Judge  could  properly  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion.  In my view it is impossible to say that  the  findings  of
    the Immigration Judge were perverse or irrational and I find  that  the
    conclusions were fully open to him on the evidence before him and  that
    the decision was sufficiently reasoned.  The grounds are a disagreement
    with those findings reached and consequently no error of law  has  been
    demonstrated in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
    those circumstances should stand.

Decision

The making of the previous decision did not involve the making of  an  error
on the point of law.  The decision shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal make an order  pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.   I  continue  that
order (pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
2008.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
