
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07904/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 June 2016                          |On 26 September 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     KS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Khan, instructed by Ison Harrison Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, KS, is a female citizen of Nepal who was born  in  1969.
    The appellant had appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Saffer)
    against a decision of the respondent dated 29 April 2015 to remove  her
    from  the  United  Kingdom  as  an  illegal  entrant.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 13 August  2015,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision should be set  aside.   I  have  reached  that
    decision  for  the  following  reasons.   At  [35]  Judge  Saffer  (who
    generally did not believe the appellant's account  of  past  events  in
    Nepal) stated that he did "accept that the  appellant  has  established
    that it is reasonably likely that she was raped."  That finding  should
    have alerted Judge Saffer to view  the  appellant's  evidence  and,  in
    particular, to assess her credibility with particular care.  The  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note Number 2 of 2010 (Child, Vulnerable Adult or
    Sensitive Appellant Guidance) urges judges to:

         'Record whether the Tribunal has concluded that the  appellant  ...
         is ... vulnerable or sensitive.  The effect the Tribunal considered
         the identified vulnerability had in assessing the  evidence  before
         it and thus whether the Tribunal was satisfied that  the  appellant
         established his or her case to the  relevant  standard  of  proof.'
         [15]

    However, Judge Saffer did not make any reference to the  guidance  note
    (which is, of course, not in itself an error of law) but  nor  does  he
    appear to have applied the principles contained in the  note  including
    that which I have set out above.  Instead, at [29] the judge wrote:

         "The appellant's account as stated in her  interview  was  littered
         with confusing and incoherent information.  Parts of  her  evidence
         were equally incoherent  and  confusing.   The  concession  at  the
         outset of her interview was reconsidered by  the  respondent  after
         that interview.  The respondent was entitled to do so.  It was  not
         for me to speculate as to  her  [the  appellant's]  mental  health.
         There has been ample opportunity to obtain medical evidence  rather
         than just produce appointment letters or medical records.  There is
         no medical evidence to suggest that the  appellant's  confusion  or
         inconsistencies are related to her claim to have been raped."

 3. As Miss Khan, for the appellant, pointed out  there  are  a  number  of
    instances in the  appellant's  Asylum  Interview  Record  where  it  is
    recorded that  she  appeared  "traumatised"  and  became  "distressed."
    Those instances are not referred to by the judge.  The judge appears to
    have taken  a  somewhat  binary  approach  to  the  assessment  of  the
    evidence;  either  the  appellant  could  produce  independent  medical
    evidence which might show that her memory or cognitive ability had been
    impaired by her experiences or she could  not.    If  the  latter,  the
    judge appears to have considered it correct to ignore the fact that she
    had been raped as claimed and the effect that rape might have upon  her
    mental condition.

 4. Miss Khan relied upon JL (Medical Reports - Credibility)  China  [2013]
    UKUT 00145 (IAC) in particular at [26] where the Tribunal noted that it
    was

         "Of particular importance to see what findings, if any,  the  judge
         made about the possible relevance to these of the appellant being a
         vulnerable person.  In the  case  of  a  vulnerable  person  it  is
         incumbent upon the Tribunal Judge to apply the  guidance  given  in
         the Joint Presidential Guidance Note Number 2 2010 ..."

    I repeat the failure of the judge to refer  to  the  guidance  note  in
    terms is not an error of law; however, his failure to depart  from  the
    principles contained in the note, to  ignore  the  evidence  of  stress
    which the appellant had experienced during her asylum interview and, in
    effect, to ignore entirely her distressing experiences because she  had
    not produced medical  evidence  to  show  that  those  experiences  had
    affected her mental state did lead the judge into legal error.  I  find
    that the decision should be set aside and the matter  returned  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal where fresh findings of fact may be made.  None  of
    the  findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   shall   stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  13  August  2015  is
set aside.  None of the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Saffer) for that Tribunal  to
re-make the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
