
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07578/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 February 2016                      |On 24 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                            master florian straka
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Masih of Counsel instructed by Turpin &
Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Anthony promulgated on 14 September 2015, brought with  the  permission
    of Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted on 6 November 2015.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 13  September  1997.  His
    immigration history is a matter of record in the documents on file  and
    I do not propose to go into any great detail in  that  regard  save  to
    note that he arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 January  2013.   It  is
    said that he claimed asylum on 15 May 2013, but in fact this appears to
    be the  date  of  the  screening  interview.   An  age  assessment  was
    commenced in February 2013 which  is  suggestive  of  an  asylum  claim
    having been made sometime prior to the date of the screening interview.
     Be that as it may, in  due  course  the  Appellant's  application  for
    asylum was refused for reasons set  out  in  a  'reasons  for  refusal'
    letter ('RFRL') dated 17 April 2015 and a decision was taken  that  the
    Appellant should be removed from the United Kingdom in consequence.


3.   The essential bases of  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  are  helpfully
    summarised at paragraph 3 of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in the following terms:

         "His protection claim is  based  on  his  fear  of  persecution  in
         Albania because he is a victim of domestic  violence  who  suffered
         mistreatment at the hands of his mother and her partner  Tahir.  It
         is his claim that he fears retribution by Tahir and/or his  brother
         whom the appellant claims  is  well-connected  and  have  influence
         including amongst state agents namely corrupt police. The appellant
         claims that on return, he will  have  no  support  as  he  will  be
         destitute. He fears that if he were to relocate to another part  of
         Albania, he will be under scrutiny and will be located by Tahir."


4.   The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed for reasons set out in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Anthony.   The  Appellant  thereupon  sought   application   for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which, as  indicated  above,
    was in due course granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, following an
    initial refusal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 8 October  2015.




5.   The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  find  the  Appellant  to  be
    credible in respect of the account that he had given in support of  his
    asylum claim.  At paragraphs  33-36  of  her  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge identifies matters of  discrepancy  in  the  Appellant's
    account  as  between  its  various  re-tellings  across  the  screening
    interview, the substantive asylum interview, and his  evidence  to  the
    Tribunal.


6.   In this regard I note that at  paragraph  34  the  Judge  considered  a
    discrepancy that had been identified  in  the  RFRL,  but  reached  the
    conclusion that in her judgment such a discrepancy did  not  provide  a
    reliable or appropriate signifier of a lack of credibility; accordingly
    the Judge rejected that aspect of the Respondent's decision-making, and
    did  not  herself  place  any  adverse  reliance  on   the   particular
    discrepancy.  The Judge nonetheless considered that other discrepancies
    were such that it was appropriate to place adverse  reliance  on  them.
    In my respectful observation these circumstances demonstrate a  nuanced
    and balanced approach to the matters and issues that  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, and a diligence in approaching those matters
    carefully  in  forming  an  overall  conclusion  of   the   Appellant's
    credibility.


7.   The Judge stated her conclusions in respect of the credibility  of  the
    Appellant's refugee claim at paragraphs 37-40 in the following terms:

         "37. Having considered all the evidence  provided,  which  includes
             the oral testimony of the appellant, I  reach  the  conclusion
             that the appellant should not be regarded as  having  given  a
             truthful account  about  what  happened  to  him  in  Albania.
             Taking each point of paragraph 339L of the  immigration  rules
             in turn, I am not satisfied that the appellant has not given a
             coherent and  plausible  account  and  that  his  account  run
             counter to  the  available  general  or  specific  information
             relevant to his case.


         38.  I have found that the core of the appellant's account contains
             inconsistencies and as such his account is unreliable.   I  do
             not accept that Tahir has any links to the police or agents of
             the state.  I do not accept that the  Appellant  was  homeless
             and that he went to the passport office without his mother.


         39.  I find that the appellant  on  return  to  Albania  would  not
             suffer serious harm because he  has  not  established  to  the
             lower standard of proof that  he  would  suffer  ill-treatment
             from Tahir or any agents of the state.


         40.  Because I do not accept that the appellant has given a  wholly
             truthful account about what he fears in Albania, I do not find
             that he would return other than as a failed asylum seeker.  Of
             itself that would not put him  in  any  risk  category  and  I
             conclude that he would not face a  risk  of  serious  harm  in
             Albania."


8.   The Appellant's challenge to the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    inevitably seeks to impugn the Judge's assessment  of  his  credibility
    and her findings in respect of the core  elements  of  his  claim.   In
    granting  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Rintoul  made  the   following
    observation:

         "It is arguable that, having  found  that  the  appellant  was  not
         wholly truthful, it was  incumbent  on  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Anthony to set out what facts she did accept, and in  that  context
         the failure to make findings  on  the  matters  identified  in  the
         grounds at [1] is arguably material."

     Judge Rintoul continued,

         "While there is less merit in the other grounds, I grant permission
    on all grounds".


9.   In her submissions before me Ms Masih has recognised the cautious  note
    sounded by Judge  Rintoul  in  respect  of  the  'other  grounds',  and
    accordingly placed primary emphasis on the first ground in the  grounds
    in support of the application for permission to  appeal.   That  ground
    identifies a number of features of the  Appellant's  core  account  and
    argues that the Judge failed to make any relevant findings  in  respect
    of such matters.  The 'features' are set out  in  these  terms  in  the
    Grounds:

         "These include: whether Tahir  attacked  the  appellant's  sisters;
         whether the appellant was pursued by Tahir's brother and others  in
         the market following news of Tahir's arrest; Tahir's  release;  the
         proximity/nexus between these events  and  the  incident  when  the
         appellant says he is picked up [by] policemen  who  he  states  are
         linked to Tahir/Tahir's brother..., and the Appellant's  subsequent
         escape from the police."


10.  For my own part I fail to see how the Judge's conclusion  at  paragraph
    37 that the Appellant should not be regarded as having given a truthful
    account about what happened to him in Albania does not  encompass  each
    and every one of those elements that were core to his asylum claim.  It
    seems to me  wholly  clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    rejecting the Appellant's core account in its entirety.  In my judgment
    it was not necessary for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  thereafter  to
    descend to, as it were, a line-by-line or  element-by-element  analysis
    or finding in respect of each of those elements.


11.  It seems to me in fact that the basis upon which  permission  has  been
    granted is because of the focus on the use  of  the  word  "wholly"  at
    paragraph 40 - "I do not accept that the Appellant has given  a  wholly
    truthful account about what he fears in Albania".  I accept that  taken
    in isolation the word 'wholly' there might  have  given  an  indication
    that the Judge in fact thought that some elements of the  account  were
    true; indeed it seems likely that I was such a possibility  that  Judge
    Rintoul had in mind in  granting  permission  to  appeal,  particularly
    given that he expressly  refers  to  Judge  Anthony  having  found  the
    Appellant to be "not wholly truthful".


12.  The use of the word "wholly" at paragraph 40 is unfortunate and  casual
    in circumstances where, in my  judgment,  it  is  absolutely  clear  at
    paragraph 37 that the Judge finds the Appellant to be  not  offering  a
    truthful account about anything that had happened  to  him  in  Albania
    that was relevant to his asylum claim.  This is echoed by  the  Judge's
    finding at paragraph 38 that the Appellant's account was  "unreliable".
    In all of those circumstances, in my judgment there is no substance  to
    the ground of challenge that the  Judge  failed  to  set  out  adequate
    reasons for her decision on credibility, and more particularly that she
    failed to make findings in respect of core elements of the  Appellant's
    account.  The Judge's reasons were adequate: her key and  core  finding
    was that she did not believe the Appellant in any material  respect  as
    to the elements of his claim for asylum.


13.  Ms Masih did not particularly seek to develop any other aspects of  the
    grounds of appeal until  I  prompted  some  assistance  in  respect  of
    clarification as to the references  in  the  grounds  to  the  'tracing
    duty'.  This arises in circumstances where the Secretary of  State  had
    contacted  the  Albanian  Ministry  of  the  Interior  pursuant  to   a
    UK/Albania  Memorandum  of  Understanding  signed  on  13  March  2013.
    Certain information was obtained as  set  out  in  a  letter  from  the
    British Embassy in Tirana dated 8 April 2015 (to be found at Annex D of
    the Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal).  It  is  clear
    that the Respondent through the British Embassy, and  in  turn  through
    the Albanian Ministry of the Interior, was able to run  certain  checks
    on  the  Appellant's  background.   These  checks  for  the  most  part
    confirmed what the Appellant had told the Respondent in respect of  his
    age and his family background, and  the  date  of  his  departure  from
    Albania.  The Respondent however, having made that enquiry  as  to  the
    Appellant's background, did not make any specific further attempt as it
    were to 'trace' the Appellant by way of direct contact with his mother.
     The RFRL in this context at paragraph 83 states:


         "It is noted that you fear individuals connected to your mother  in
         Albania.  As such, it was considered not to be appropriate to  make
         contact with your family in Albania.   However  it  is  noted  that
         records indicated that your father, whom you claim left your family
         many years ago is  still  registered  at  your  family  address  in
         Albania".




    It seems to me that the decision not to make direct  contact  with  the
    Appellant's mother in Albania during  the  process  of  evaluating  the
    Appellant's  claim  for  protection  was  entirely  understandable   in
    circumstances where the Appellant's fear  was  essentially  based  upon
    domestic violence within his home.




14.  In any event, so far as the notion of tracing is concerned, it was  not
    the Appellant's case that he did not know the whereabouts of his mother
    or her address: indeed it was his election not to have  any  particular
    contact with his mother, and, on his  case,  to  leave  her  behind  by
    fleeing Albania to come to the United Kingdom.   This  is  not  a  case
    where the duty to trace seems to be obviously in play.  Be that  as  it
    may I can find nothing in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    to suggest that any consideration of the issues surrounding the  letter
    from the British Embassy in Tirana or otherwise surrounding  the  issue
    of  tracing  was  relevant  to  her  evaluation  of   the   Appellant's
    credibility.


15.  The 'tracing' issue is addressed at paragraph 42  in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I acknowledge that  there  appears  to  be  a
    factual error: the Judge states, "The tracing enquiry revealed that his
    father whom he said had left the family home years ago was still living
    with his mother and sisters"; whereas the enquiry revealed no  more  in
    this regard than that his father was still  registered  at  the  family
    address - as is reflected at paragraph  83  of  the  RFRL.  It  is  not
    asserted in terms that the father was still living with the mother  and
    sisters.  However, notwithstanding that factual error, it seems  to  me
    absolutely clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  rely  upon
    her  misconception  in  this  regard  in  considering  the  Appellant's
    credibility - which is addressed  at  the  paragraphs  I  have  already
    cited,  and  which  come  before  paragraph   42   and   are   reasoned
    independently of the analysis in paragraph  42,  such  analysis  itself
    being seemingly confined to the tracing issue.


16.  In such circumstances I  find  nothing  in  the  circumstances  of  the
    enquiries made of the British  Embassy,  the  references  made  in  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  the  letter  from  the
    British Embassy or otherwise in  relation  to  the  so-called  duty  to
    trace, such as to impugn the  overall  conclusions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.


17.  For the avoidance of  doubt  in  this  regard  I  note  that  Ms  Masih
    directed my attention to the following sentence that appears within the
    body of paragraph 42:  "The  appellant  has  provided  no  evidence  to
    contradict the results of the tracing enquiry".  It seems  to  me  that
    that is essentially a statement of uncontroversial fact.  It does not -
    as appears to be contended in the grounds of appeal and pursued, albeit
    with little vigour, before me  today  -  constitute  a  sentence  which
    demonstrates that the Judge had entirely reversed the usual burden  and
    standard of  proof  which  she  had  otherwise  appropriately  directed
    herself to at paragraph 18 of the decision.


18.  The only other matter that the Appellant has sought  to  rely  upon  in
    argument today is in relation to Article 8 and the delay in determining
    the Appellant's application for asylum.  As noted above it appears that
    the Appellant made his application for asylum in  early  2013  and  was
    subjected to a screening interview  on  15  May  2013.   Thereafter,  a
    substantive asylum interview was conducted on 24 July 2013.  There does
    indeed then seem to have been some delay between July  2013  and  March
    2015 (which on the face of  the  British  Embassy  letter  at  Annex  D
    appears to be the time at which the Albanian Ministry of  the  Interior
    was contacted).  It is unclear exactly what the train  of  events  were
    between the interview and the British Embassy being instructed to  make
    contact with the Albanian Ministry of the Interior and to that  end  it
    is unclear as to what, if anything, may have occasioned the delay.


19.   Ms  Masih  makes  the  submission  that  the  decision  made  in   the
    Appellant's case in April 2015 came approximately two years  after  the
    date of his application and in  those  circumstances  she  argues  that
    delay should have featured  as  an  element  of  the  consideration  of
    Article 8, both in the context of its relevance  to  the  private  life
    established in the United Kingdom during that period  and  also  as  an
    aspect of the effectiveness of  immigration  control,  the  element  of
    delay undermining the weight to be  attached  to  that  aspect  of  the
    public interest.


20.  Ms Fijiwala identifies in the determination in  respect  of  Article  8
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had due and proper regard to aspects
    of the Appellant's private life and in particular the central aspect of
    that private life that was  advanced  before  her  in  respect  of  his
    relationship with his girlfriend.  In my judgment it is unrealistic  to
    assume, because of the absence of any express reference that the  Judge
    did not have well in mind the total period of time that  the  Appellant
    had been present in the United Kingdom when considering Article  8.   I
    acknowledge that there is no  express  reference  to  delay  under  the
    consideration of Article 8. However, even if the adverse  decision  had
    been made at an earlier stage it would at best only  have  resulted  in
    the Appellant being granted a short period of leave up until his  17�th
    birthday. It is  difficult  to  see  how  this  would  have  materially
    improved the substance of his Article 8 case which would have continued
    to be  founded  on  the  length  of  time  spent  in  the  UK  and  his
    relationship with his girlfriend. In any event in my judgment the delay
    in this case, whilst regrettable, cannot  be  said  to  be  inordinate.
    Accordingly, in all the circumstances, ultimately it seems to  me  that
    the 'delay' feature is  immaterial  to  the  overall  consideration  of
    Article 8 which the Judge has soundly based on the particular facts  of
    the Appellant's private life, and with  reference  to  the  appropriate
    considerations  by  reference  to  both  the  Immigration  Rules,   the
    requirements of Razgar, and sections 117B-D of the 2002 Act.


21.  Accordingly, for all these reasons I find that  there  is  no  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and  the
    decision stands.


Notice of Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  material  errors
and stands.


23.  The appeal is dismissed.


24.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 7 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
