
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07047/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th November 2015                |On 11th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     SNM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with
    permission, in respect of a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Turnock) promulgated on 20th July 2015, dismissing her  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision of 9th  April  2015  refusing  to  grant  her
    asylum or any other form of international protection  and  deciding  to
    remove her from the UK.

 2. The Appellant entered the UK on a date in  July  2004  having  obtained
    entry clearance as a student.  She subsequently  received  further  in-
    country grants of leave to  remain,  on  the  same  basis,  until  31st
    October 2009.  Subsequent applications for further leave to remain as a
    student were refused and, on 10th October 2014,  having  been  arrested
    under immigration provisions, she claimed  asylum.   This  was  on  the
    basis that if she were to be returned to her home country of Malawi she
    would be persecuted as a consequence of her membership of a  particular
    social group being that of "lesbian women in Malawi".  In this context,
    she claimed that lesbians were persecuted in Malawi and  that  she  was
    known to be a lesbian because she had had a relationship with  a  woman
    called Alice whilst living in Malawi, that the  relationship  had  been
    kept secret but that  the  two  had  been  discovered  together,  in  a
    compromising situation, by her cousin H at a time in 2008 when she  had
    returned to Malawi for a break from her studies.  She said that  H  had
    been aggressive towards her and had informed her parents and  that  her
    father had said he would kill her.  As a consequence of  that  she  had
    returned to the UK where she had, until her leave expired, resumed  her
    studies.  She said that, since the incident in 2008, she had  disclosed
    her sexuality to a UK based nurse, whom I shall simply refer to TM, who
    is also from Malawi, that she had joined  a  group  called  the  Equity
    Partnership (an organisation which  supported  the  local  lesbian  gay
    bisexual and transsexual communities) that she had attended Pride  days
    and marches and that she had sometimes attended clubs which catered for
    the lesbian community.

 3. Judge Turnock (hereinafter "the judge" heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and was provided with documentary  evidence  which  included,
    amongst other things, a letter written by TM and a letter  provided  by
    the Equity Partnership.

 4. The judge accepted that lesbian women in Malawi did form  a  particular
    social group.  However, he decided that the Appellant was not a lesbian
    and that, even if she was, and even if the whole of her account were to
    be true, she would only face discrimination, as opposed to persecution,
    in Malawi and that she would be able to safely relocate away  from  her
    family members whom she had claimed would wish to harm her.

 5. The judge, in his credibility assessment, set out, from  paragraphs  30
    to 38 of his determination the detail  of  the  Appellant's  claim  and
    certain of the evidence which she had provided.  He then said this;

         "40. The letter provided from the Equity Partnership  is  a  letter
             addressed  to  'Dear  Member'   and   contains   no   specific
             information  at  all  about  the  Appellant.   There   is   no
             confirmation that she has attended any events and there was no
             one at the hearing to confirm that she had participated in any
             of the organisation's activities.  Her own  evidence  is  that
             she did not join the organisation until the beginning of 2015,
             a time after she had applied for asylum.

         41.  Although there is the statement from [TM] the comments to  her
             were made only shortly after her claim for asylum.

         42.  The weight to be given to the evidence provided by the letters
             from [TM] and the Equity  Partnership  must,  necessarily,  be
             limited in the absence of the attendance  at  the  hearing  of
             either author who could not, therefore, be  cross-examined  on
             behalf of the Respondent.

         43.  The Appellant makes reference to having taken  part  in  Pride
             days at both York and Bradford but again there is no  evidence
             from anyone who can confirm that is the case.  Similarly  with
             regard to claimed activity in Wakefield or Chelmsford there is
             no evidence written or oral to support her claims.

         44.  The Appellant claims that after returning to the  UK  she  had
             several casual relationships  with  women,  which  included  a
             brief relationship with a woman from Malawi who she knew  from
             school.  There is no supportive evidence produced  to  support
             that assertion.

         45.  There is no evidence  from  Alice  nor  any  evidence  of  the
             efforts the Appellant claims to have made to contact her.

         46.  The Appellant came to the UK after the  alleged  discovery  of
             her relationship with Alice in 2008 but did not  claim  asylum
             on arrival.  At that time she had leave to remain as a student
             and it may be the  case  that  her  legal  status  in  the  UK
             provided  her  with  a  degree  of  security.    However   her
             applications for leave to remain were subsequently refused and
             she was served with notice  as  an  overstayer  and  was  then
             arrested on 21st September 2014.  She  did  not  claim  asylum
             until 10th October 2014.  That  is  not  consistent  with  her
             claim that she faced persecution and serious harm if  returned
             to Malawi.

         47.  The Appellant claims that she did not claim asylum because she
             did not know about asylum until she had received legal  advice
             following her arrest.  She claims that  she  had  not  worried
             about her immigration status because she had  not  received  a
             decision on her application so she had presumed that  she  was
             in the United Kingdom legally.

         48.  I find that the repeated failure on the part of the  Appellant
             to pursue a claim for asylum until 10th October  2014  damages
             her credibility.

         49.  I have, however, taken into account the decision in  the  case
             of SM (Section 8: Judge's process)  Iran  [2005]  UKAIT  00116
             that even where Section 8 applies, an Immigration Judge should
             look at the evidence as a whole and  decide  which  parts  are
             more important and which less.  Section 8 does not require the
             behaviour to which it applies to be treated  as  the  starting
             point of the assessment of credibility.

         50.  The Appellant was arrested at home on 9th September  2014  and
             was asked whether she was working.  She stated  that  she  was
             not working  but  was  helping  out  covering  a  shift.   The
             Respondent stated that it was later  confirmed  that  she  had
             been working at  the  establishment  for  ten  years  and  her
             employer  had  also  provided  her  with  accommodation.   The
             Respondent considered that her protestation that she  had  not
             been working in the UK was an attempt to conceal  information.
             The Appellant, in response, says that she was  not  asked  how
             long she had been working at the care home and the answer  she
             gave regarding covering for a shift was true and she  was  not
             trying to mislead.  Nevertheless she accepts that she had been
             working for a considerable period of time, and latterly whilst
             having no leave in the UK.  The Appellant  states  that  after
             completing her studies she began to  work  at  [a  residential
             home] on a part-time basis  throughout  her  studies  and  she
             increased her hours following her graduation.

         51.  The Appellant claimed asylum on 10th  October  2014  following
             her arrest on 9th September 2014.  When asked why she had  not
             made a claim prior to her arrest she stated that  she  thought
             she needed a lawyer first and  that  she  was  afraid  (asylum
             interview question 131).

         52.  I accept that the Appellant has been internally consistent, as
             found by  the  Respondent,  which  clearly  has  significance.
             However that is only one  aspect  of  the  assessment  of  her
             credibility.  Assessing  the  evidence  overall  and  for  the
             reasons set out above I do not  find  her  to  be  a  credible
             witness.  I  am  not  satisfied,  even  to  the  low  standard
             required in cases of  this  nature,  that  the  Appellant  has
             established that she is a lesbian."

 6. The judge then went on to consider  some  background  country  material
    concerning Malawi  and  to  conclude  that  such  information  did  not
    indicate that lesbians in  Malawi  were  subjected  to  persecution  as
    opposed to discrimination.  He also made  the  point  that  whilst  the
    background material contained reports of family members  taking  action
    against lesbian women, the Appellant would be "able  to  relocate  away
    from her family".

 7. The very extensive Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal were drafted
    by an organisation known as the Manuel Bravo  Project.   Those  grounds
    took various points with respect to the assessment of  credibility  and
    the assessment as to the risk to lesbians in Malawi.   Certain  of  the
    points made,  though,  were  mere  matters  of  disagreement  with  the
    outcome.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the salient part of the grant reads as follows;

         "2.  It is arguable that Judge Turnock may have materially erred in
             law  in  failing  to  set  out  with  sufficient  clarity   or
             particularity the reasons why, despite internal consistency in
             her account, the  Appellant  was  found  not  to  be  credible
             (paragraph 52 refers).

         3.   It is arguable that Judge Turnock may  have  made  a  material
             error of law in the assessment of risk for lesbians in  Malawi
             in general and the Appellant in particular."

 9. Permission having been granted there  followed  a  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, in fact before me, in order  to  consider  whether  the
    decision should be set aside for error  of  law.   At  that  hearing  I
    received   careful   and   helpful   oral   submissions    from    both
    representatives.  I am grateful for those submissions and I have  taken
    them fully into account.  I have, in fact, concluded, for  the  reasons
    which I will explain below, that  the  decision  did  contain  material
    errors of law and that, accordingly, it should be set aside despite the
    obvious care the judge has taken.

10. First of all, I turn to the adverse credibility finding.  The judge, as
    indeed had the Respondent, accepted that the  account  offered  by  the
    Appellant was internally consistent.  Of course, as he himself  pointed
    out, that, of itself, will not be determinative as to an assessment  of
    credibility.  Nevertheless, it was a factor of some force.  In  stating
    why, despite that finding as to internal consistency, the Appellant was
    to be disbelieved, the judge  relied  upon  the  Appellant's  delay  in
    claiming asylum together with, it seems, dishonesty as evidenced by her
    having worked in the UK without permission to do so.   The  Appellant's
    inability to produce  further  evidence  as  to  matters  such  as  her
    attendance on Pride days do  not  seem  to  have  counted  against  the
    Appellant as such but, on my reading, the lack of  persuasive  evidence
    as to such matters merely meant, in the view of the judge,  that  these
    could not be treated as positive factors weighing in her favour.

11. I  do  not  accept  Ms  Patel's  submission  to  the  effect  that  the
    credibility assessment is necessarily unsafe simply because  the  judge
    relied exclusively upon factors which might be felt to fall within  the
    scope of  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.   I  have,  though,  concluded  that  the
    credibility assessment is incomplete such that the judge has failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for his disbelief as to her sexuality and  her
    account of events.  In this context, the judge notes that the Appellant
    gave oral evidence before him.  Since there was  a  Presenting  Officer
    representing the Respondent at the hearing, it is reasonable to suppose
    that she was cross-examined.  However,  there  is  no  mention  in  the
    determination of the degree to which  the  Appellant  did  or  did  not
    withstand   cross-examination.    Presumably,   given    the    judge's
    acknowledgement that her evidence had been internally  consistent,  her
    oral evidence was consistent with that of  her  evidence  as  given  in
    interview and in any other sources seen by the Respondent and which had
    led the Respondent to conclude that she had been internally consistent.
     So, it appears that she had  been  able  to  maintain  that  level  of
    consistency even under challenge.  The judge does  not,  in  fact,  say
    whether that was so or not but, since it appears to have  been  so,  it
    seems to me that he ought  to  have  expressly  referred  to  that  and
    weighed it in the balance when considering her credibility on the basis
    that there  is  a  difference  between  being  consistent  in  such  as
    statements and interviews and in being consistent  in  the  face  of  a
    specific challenge.

12. Further, the Appellant was asked a number of questions,  in  interview,
    concerning how she came to realise that  she  was  attracted  to  other
    women.  There is a relevant passage of questions running from  question
    45 to 50.  The Appellant appears to have answered those questions in  a
    direct manner which lacked any form  of  evasiveness.   She  also  gave
    quite significant detail in  answering  interview  questions  regarding
    Alice, the relationship she claims  to  have  had  with  her  and  what
    happened when the two were discovered together.  There  is  a  relevant
    passage of questions running from question 55 to 85.  It  seems  to  me
    that it was incumbent upon the judge to have regard to  these  elements
    of detail in the Appellant's claim to a greater degree that he had  and
    it was not giving her sufficient credit to simply say that her evidence
    had been "internally consistent".  I do not say that he had  to  accept
    the account because of the level of detail contained in it but  he  had
    to take account of that level of detail when weighing  matters  in  the
    balance.

13.  In  the  above  circumstances,  therefore,  I  do  consider  that  the
    credibility assessment is unsafe and that, in consequence, the decision
    has to be set aside.

14. I have gone on to consider how matters should proceed  from  here.   Ms
    Patel urged  me  to  remit  to  a  differently  constituted  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis that that would be the most appropriate course of
    action where the question of credibility has to be looked  at  entirely
    afresh.  Mrs Pettersen did not express a view.  I have decided,  taking
    into account what the representatives had to say, bearing in mind  that
    a consequence of my decision is that credibility will have to be looked
    at afresh and bearing in mind that it may be thought there might  be  a
    degree of unfairness in the Appellant losing her  second  stage  appeal
    rights (other than an appeal to the Court of  Appeal)  if  matters  are
    retained within the Upper Tribunal, that  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is the appropriate  course  of  action.   I  have,  therefore,
    decided to remit with directions which are set out below.

15. Finally, an anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and  I
    have concluded it is appropriate for me to make a similar order.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  I set  aside  the  decision.   The  case  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with  the  directions  set
out below and on the basis that it be heard by another Judge of  the  First-
tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Directions for the Rehearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

1.   The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a  judge
    other than Judge Turnock.

2.   The new hearing shall take place at the  Bradford  hearing  centre  and
    the time estimate for the  new  hearing  shall  be  three  hours.   The
    Appellant's representatives are to advise the  First-tier  Tribunal  of
    any interpreter requirements forthwith.

3.   If either party is  to  rely  upon  further  documentary  evidence  not
    already filed then that evidence should be produced in the  form  of  a
    paginated and indexed bundle and sent to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the other party so that it is received at least five working days prior
    to the date of hearing.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

