


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/07840/2014

                                                   AA/07843/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         | Decision & Reasons promulgated  |
|on 8 June 2017                            | on 7 July 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AL
                                     JL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:               Mrs G Patel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:            Mrs Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Shimmin ('the Judge') promulgated on 28 October 2015 in  which  the
        Judge dismissed both appeals on asylum, humanitarian protection and
        human rights grounds.


     2. The appellants applied for permission to appeal which was initially
        refused by a Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  19  November
        2015 on the basis the pleaded grounds merely expressed disagreement
        with the decision.
     3. The application for permission to appeal was renewed to  the  Upper
        Tribunal resulting in a grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge
        Freeman on 6 January 2016 in the following terms:


             "Arguably the judge did not give full consideration to what is
             described as the 'plethora of country evidence' about the risk
             faced  by  some  Christians  in  Sri  Lanka;  but  it  is  not
             satisfactory  that  individual  first-tier  judges  should  be
             required to evaluate evidence presented in that form, and  the
             Upper Tribunal may wish to do so in a country  guidance  case,
             after considering any submissions from the parties."


     4. The grant of permission is opposed by the Secretary of State who in
        a Rule 24 reply dated 29 January 2016 wrote:


        2.   The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal. In summary, the
             respondent will submit inter alia that the judge of the First-
             tier  Tribunal  directed  himself   appropriately   and   made
             reasonable sustainable findings squarely based upon a thorough
             evaluation of the subjective  and  objective  evidence  before
             him.


        3.   The respondent will submit that the grounds  advanced  by  the
             appellant failed to establish a  material  arguable  error  of
             that would be considered capable of having a  material  impact
             upon the outcome of the appeal and it was properly open to him
             to find that the objective evidence "does  not  indicate  that
             evangelical Christians are at real risk on return to Sri Lanka
             as a religious minority" [paragraph 53 determination]. The FTJ
             has provided reasonable sustainable  reasons  to  support  his
             findings that there  is  a  sufficiency  of  State  protection
             available  to  the  Appellants  in  Sri  Lanka  [paragraph  56
             determination].


        4.   The grounds advanced  amount  to  nothing  more  than  a  mere
             disagreement with  the  negative  outcome  of  the  Appellants
             Appeal.


     5. On 24th of March 2017 Resident Upper Tribunal Judge  Dawson  issued
        the following direction:


        2.   Without there having been a decision, whether  the  First-tier
             Tribunal erred in law, it is  premature  to  consider  whether
             these  appeals  might  ultimately  be  suitable  for   Country
             Guidance in the issues engaged. Accordingly, the appeals  will
             be listed for  hearing  at  the  request  of  the  appellants'
             representatives in Bradford for determination of the issue  of
             error of law. If the decision as a consequence  is  set  aside
             and  is  to  be  remade  in   the   Upper   Tribunal   further
             consideration will be given whether the issues warrant to  the
             case being treated as one for Country Guidance.


     6. The scope of this hearing  is  therefore  limited  to  establishing
        whether the Judge made an error of law material to the decision  to
        dismiss the appeals.


Background

     7. The appellants, citizens of Sri Lanka, are a father  and  daughter.
        The first appellant was born on 5  December  1955  and  the  second
        appellant on 25 July 1986. The first appellant attended the hearing
        with Miss Patel, the  second  appellant  not  attending  but  being
        excused.
     8. The appellants arrived in the United Kingdom  on  14  July  and  23
        August 2013 respectively and both applied for asylum  and/or  leave
        to remain on human rights grounds on 7 January 2014.
     9. The Judge reviewed the evidence and sets out the core of the  claim
        from [14] - [26] in the following terms:


             14.  As Tamils wherever they lived in Sri Lanka  they  had  to
                  get a police report and the police used to come and  check
                  their house. The first appellant told the  police  he  was
                  working in the Church and he did  not  have  any  problems
                  with them because of this.


             15.  The first appellant was working as a cashier in  a  hotel
                  before becoming a full-time minister in 2006.  He  studied
                  for three years and was put into employment as a Christian
                  minister in Thirukovile. In 2010  he  became  a  full-time
                  evangelical Christian pastor in Colombo in  the  Maranatha
                  Prophetic Ministry.


             16.  The first appellant started to have problems in Sri Lanka
                  in January 2013. He commenced the conversion from Buddhism
                  to Christianity of a man named M. His family were  members
                  of the Jathigal Urumaya party,  a  Buddhist  organisation.
                  The family and other members of the party were against M's
                  conversion and would threaten him.


             17.  On 2 June, 2013 a group  of  people  came  to  the  first
                  appellant's house and tried to break the door  down.  When
                  he lets them in they threatened him and told him  to  stop
                  trying to convert people to  Christianity  in  a  Buddhist
                  country. They threatened him with death and a  beating  in
                  front of his family.


             18.  The next day the family moved to  the  first  appellant's
                  wife's sister's house approximately 2 km away in Colombo.


             19.   Later  in  the  same  month  the  first  appellant   was
                  threatened on his way to church and he was strangled  with
                  his shirt collar.


             20.  In another incident the first appellant  was  stopped  in
                  front of the church by two people  who  told  him  it  was
                  their church and he was not allowed to go  there  anymore.
                  The first  appellant  to  continue  to  carry  out  church
                  services in houses up until coming to the UK  on  a  visit
                  visa on 14 July, 2013.  He travelled with his wife and son
                  aged 16.


             21.   The  second  appellant  converted  from  Catholicism  to
                  Pentecostalism at the age of 11 or 12 years.


             22.  She was present in the family home on 2 June, 2013 when a
                  group  of  people  pushed  their  way  into   the   house,
                  threatened her father and threatened to take her brother.


             23.  After her family left Sri Lanka  on  14  July,  2013  she
                  applied for a visa as she was living with her aunt as  she
                  was frightened of living alone. She was also frightened to
                  travel in public.


             24.  The first appellant's  colleague,  Pastor  H  S,  was  in
                  contact with the first  appellant  and  told  him  not  to
                  return to Sri Lanka as there were people looking  for  him
                  and there were problems  there.  As  a  result  the  first
                  appellant to make the decision for  all  his  family  that
                  they would not return to Sri Lanka and would claim  asylum
                  in the UK.


             25.  The second appellant believes that  the  people  who  are
                  looking for their father will  come  looking  for  her  as
                  well.


             26.   Both  appellants  fear  persecution  because  of   their
                  religion and because of the first appellant's position  as
                  a pastor. They also  fear  persecution  because  of  their
                  Tamil ethnicity.


    10. It is not suggested the Judge failed to understand the basis of the
        claim or the evidence relied upon within the appeal.


    11. In relation to the evidence, which is the subject of  criticism  by
        Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman in relation to the  way  it  has  been
        presented, the Judge confirms at [33] that he  has  considered  all
        the evidence and submissions with  the  required  degree  of  care.
        Having done so, the Judge sets out his findings and reasons between
        [34]  to  [59]  of  the  decision  under  challenge  which  can  be
        summarised in the following terms:


   i. Nationality and Tamil ethnicity are not in dispute [34].
  ii. The appellant's credibility in relation to their account  is  accepted
      as they gave a generally consistent account without  embellishment  or
      exaggeration [37].
 iii. The first appellant provided reasons for  his  fear  of  the  Jathigal
      Urumaya Party, namely that one of their numbers who is a member  of  a
      family involved with the party was being converted to Christianity and
      that Buddhist parties are concerned with the number of members leaving
      to join Christianity [43].
  iv. An email from Rev H corroborates the first appellant's claim regarding
      problems faced and that first appellant would face on  return  to  Sri
      Lanka. The email was considered  in  the  round  together  with  other
      evidence submitted by the appellants [44].
   v. Second appellant's evidence is consistent with and  supports  that  of
      the first appellant [47].
  vi. At [48] it is written "weighing all the evidence for what it is  worth
      and considering it cumulatively in the light of the challenges  to  it
      by the respondent I find  that  the  appellants  have  proved  to  the
      required standard of reasonable likelihood that the facts they  allege
      are true".
 vii. The first appellant has a particular problem with a man  named  M  who
      was in the process of conversion to Christianity  together  with  this
      person's family and the section of the  party  with  whom  this  man's
      family were associated [50].
viii. The evidence  of  the  first  appellant  and  Rev  B  that  the  first
      appellant has practised as a pastor in Sri Lanka and that he  actively
      evangelises is accepted as  is  the  fact  that  it  is  part  of  his
      religious beliefs and  general  make  up  that  he  will  continue  to
      evangelise where ever he lives. The  first  appellant  would  actively
      evangelise if he were returned to Sri Lanka [51].
  ix. The Judge accepted the first appellant's evidence that his supervising
      pastor, Rev H, advised him not to bring M to  church  because  of  the
      aggressive problems associated with that person. It was  accepted  the
      first appellant could continue to evangelise  to  M  provided  he  was
      discreet in the way he proceeded in terms of this person  and  persons
      who are resistant to evangelising [52].
   x. The first appellant's  problems  arise  almost  exclusively  from  his
      contact with M and his family. There is no evidence of substance which
      indicates the  first  appellant  is  at  particular  risk  from  other
      Buddhists. There is no evidence that the first appellant would  be  at
      real risk of serious harm if he continued to evangelise  to  Buddhists
      in Sri Lanka [52].
  xi. The country information does not indicate that evangelical  Christians
      face a real risk on return to Sri Lanka as a religious minority [52].
 xii. The claim of the second appellant is much  weaker  than  that  of  the
      first appellant. The substance of her claim relates to her association
      with her father.  There  is  no  evidence  the  second  appellant  has
      evangelised or been directly subject to  threats  independent  of  her
      father [54].
xiii. Even if the appellants will be at some risk in their home  area,  such
      risk was not "sufficiently real and serious to amount to  persecution"
      [55].
 xiv. The appellants had not established that they  could  [not]  internally
      relocate within Sri Lanka, perhaps to another  area  of  Colombo  away
      from M and the particular members of the party who are  interested  in
      the first appellant [55].
  xv. At [56] the Judge writes: "I also find, on the facts  as  established,
      that the  appellants  have  failed  to  demonstrate  to  the  required
      standard of reasonable likelihood that  there  is  no  sufficiency  of
      protection available to them in Sri Lanka. The  first  appellant  gave
      evidence that some members of the 5000 Assembly of God congregation in
      Colombo were employed in the police service. The appellants  have  not
      attempted to approach the police. I appreciate  that  Tamils  are  not
      well regarded by the  police  and  that  the  above  quoted  US  State
      Department Report also says that, 'in  practice,  however,  the  local
      authorities  failed  to  respond  effectively  to  communal  violence,
      including  attacks  on  members  of  minority  religious  groups   and
      perpetrators were not brought to justice'.  This  is  balanced  by  an
      Internet report from www.indicatholicnews.com which is copied  in  the
      respondent's bundle at  E2.   It  reports  that  violence  followed  a
      demonstration by Christians and those arrested included five  Buddhist
      monks. Thus, the authorities  are  taking  action  against  those  who
      perpetrate  violence   against   Christians.   Furthermore,   in   the
      appellant's evidence at page 12 there  is  an  Internet  report  which
      includes mention of a magistrate reprimanding the police and  ordering
      them to arrest Buddhist perpetrators of attacks against Christians. In
      conclusion, I find there is a sufficiency of protection  available  to
      the appellants".
 xvi. In relation to the alleged fear-based upon their Tamil ethnicity,  the
      Judge  finds  the  appellants  have  given  no  evidence   of   having
      experienced problems personally because of their ethnicity and nor  is
      it found they come within any of the risk categories identified in the
      country guidance case of GJ (Sri Lanka).
xvii. The Judge finds taking all matters into account, that  the  appellants
      are not entitled to a grant of international protection [58 - 59].


    12. The appellants' grounds assert, as  identified  by  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge Freeman, that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  country
        evidence as a whole which  shows  attacks  cannot  be  said  to  be
        isolated and are not insignificant. It is also asserted  the  Judge
        failed to consider the respondent's own evidence in response  to  a
        country  of  information  request  regarding   the   treatment   of
        Christians in Sri Lanka, and especially the treatment of  Christian
        pastors, and the government's hesitancy  to  arrest  and  prosecute
        Buddhist monks involved in numerous  attacks  against  Muslims  and
        Christians, indicating they generally operate under the  protection
        of the government.   It  is  also  asserted  the  Judge  failed  to
        consider reports  citing  a  number  of  recorded  incidents  where
        pastors have been attacked which is said  to  be  relevant  as  the
        first appellant has been accepted  as  being  a  pastor  who  would
        evangelise  on  return.  In  relation  to  the  issue  of  internal
        relocation, it is asserted the Judge failed  to  consider  specific
        country evidence relating to the treatment of  evangelical  pastors
        and whether it will be unduly harsh for the first appellant and his
        family to relocate to a different area.  In relation to the Judge's
        finding that the first appellant had not spoken to the  police,  it
        is asserted that in a reply to a question his asylum interview  the
        first appellant stated that if  he  had  reported  the  matter  the
        police would say it is a religious problem and that he had to  talk
        to the Buddhist monks, but if you reported the matter to the police
        most police Buddhists will inform the people concerned he had  made
        the report which would increase his problems. It is  also  asserted
        the Judge failed to consider  the  risk  to  the  second  appellant
        through her association with her father.



The evidence and submissions


    13. In her oral submissions,  Mrs  Patel  relied  on  the  grounds  and
        evidence provided, developing her  arguments  in  relation  to  the
        findings and  country  material  in  accordance  with  the  pleaded
        errors.


    14. Within the Secretary of State's appeal bundle at C3-C14 are several
        articles that were considered by the Judge. In  relation  to  faith
        -related issues,  there  is  an  article  dated  21  February  2008
        reporting the killing of a Sri Lankan pastor. The report shows  the
        authorities immediately formed a special police team to investigate
        the murders and arrested at least four people  said  to  have  been
        confirmed to be members of the Home Guards. It is said that initial
        evidence indicated the murder was a contract killing  connected  to
        the pastor's ministry in Ampara.  The  report  refers  to  Buddhist
        monks in the area contracting the killers as the accumulation of  a
        long-standing intimidation campaign against the pastor  and  others
        complaining about inflammatory anti-Christian posters in the  local
        Buddhist temple.



    15. The article also refers to the matter  being  taken  to  the  local
        senior superintendent of police and finally  to  President  Mahinda
        Rajapakse in December of the relevant year and that the police,  at
        the President's request, advised a prominent named Buddhist monk in
        the area to cease  his  campaign  against  the  church  and  remove
        inflammatory posters.


    16. It is stated Ampara became  divided  over  the  issue  as  Buddhist
        loyalists, including three monks from a named organisation, accused
        Christian converts of rejecting Buddhist  traditions.  The  article
        contains a quote from a pastor from Colombo accusing the Sri Lankan
        government of trying to hide the truth by blaming the LTTE for  the
        killings as it would be bad for Sri Lanka  if  it  was  known  that
        Buddhist monks were behind the violence. A further paragraph within
        the article states "religious conflict is  also  a  serious  issue,
        with senior Buddhist clergy launching a propaganda campaign against
        Christians in  2002,  sparking  a  series  of  violent  attacks  on
        churches nationwide. A Buddhist political party, the  Jathika  Hela
        Urumaya (Buddhist heritage party) was formed  in  2004  to  promote
        anti-conversion legislation  that  would  effectively  prevent  any
        Buddhist from converting to Christianity".



    17. A further article dated 24 June 2008 records an Evangelical  pastor
        in eastern Sri Lanka being hospitalised  after  being  attacked  by
        militant government forces. The pastor was from a Methodist  church
        in Ampara. The article records that the attackers were believed  to
        be from the Home Guards and occurred four months  after  the  first
        attack referred to above.


    18. The third article refers to an  attack  on  26  June  2013  when  a
        Christian pastor and his congregation were violently assaulted by a
        Buddhist monk and his associates during a Sunday service. This  was
        said to have occurred in Colombo where the monk  began  to  assault
        and attack the pastor with a tree branch. The pastor  fled  to  his
        church but was ambushed by 20 young men who beat  him  and  accused
        him of attacking the monk. The article records that when the police
        arrived  to  disperse  the  mob  that  attacked  the  church,  five
        Christians including the  pastor  were  taken  to  a  local  police
        station for interview along with the monk and  some  of  the  other
        assailants and that the pastor was able to register a case  against
        the attackers.



    19. A fourth article from  Compass  Direct  (USA),  who  published  the
        article relating to  the  February  2008  incident,  reported  that
        assaults by local  mobs  including  Buddhist  monks  had  increased
        following the defeat of the LTTE in May  2009.  It  is  noted  that
        attacks were reported in a  number  of  districts  and  included  a
        church being set on fire in  Puttlam  district,  which  mirrored  a
        similar attack a year previously that destroyed the original church
        on that site. The article records that church members registered  a
        complaint with the police but that at the date of  the  article  no
        arrests had been made.


    20. The article refers to another  pastor,  of  the  Foursquare  Gospel
        Church, and his wife visiting church members when a mob gathered at
        their door shouting they would not tolerate Christian  activity  in
        the village, a disturbance that continued for two hours before  the
        police finally arrived arresting three people who it is  said  were
        later released. Earlier a mob of some 100 people including Buddhist
        monks surrounded the home of a female pastor of the same church  in
        the village, but she and her husband were away. The mob is said  to
        have broken  into  the  pastor's  house  and  shouted  insults  and
        destroyed chairs and other furniture. The police  were  called  and
        attended but the mob dispersed. The police called the pastor to the
        police station for questioning  later  but  on  a  second  occasion
        protesters surrounded her and other  pastors  who  accompanied  her
        spitting on them and initially preventing them  from  entering  the
        police station. The article states that later, in the  presence  of
        Buddhist monks and other protesters, the pastor was forced to  sign
        a document promising not to host worship  services  for  non-family
        members.


    21. The article refers to other incidents of property being  destroyed,
        one set of villagers launching a  smear  campaign  against  another
        person who invited the pastor and other  Christians  to  bless  the
        consecration of his home.



    22. The article refers to a more serious incident on 12 July 2009  when
        seven men wielding swords attacked  a  caretaker  and  three  other
        members of the Vineyard Community Church  some  of  which  required
        hospital treatment. A complaint was filed  with  the  police  which
        resulted in a man who was identified being arrested but released on
        bail.


    23. The article refers to attacks on other churches, a number involving
        Buddhist monks  warning  church  members  to  cease  all  Christian
        worship in that area, claiming any form of Christian worship  in  a
        church in Matara district was completely prohibited.


    24. The article records a pattern of  attacks  upon  churches  at  this
        time, reports to the police, arrests, and in relation to the attack
        in Matara district, a case being filed with a local court.


    25. An article  dated  24  June  2008  refers  to  an  attack  upon  an
        Evangelical pastor but this appears to  be  a  duplication  of  the
        assault referred to above on this date.



    26. A report dated 26 June 2013 refers to attack on a Christian  pastor
        which, again, appears to repeat the assault reported at [19] above.


    27. A further article published by Barnabas Aid  (UK),  dated  26  July
        2011, refers to a number of other incidents around this time  which
        records the following information "Sri Lanka is about 70  per  cent
        Buddhist, with  Christians  comprising  some  8  per  cent  of  the
        population. Although Buddhism has a reputation for being  peaceable
        and non-violent, Sri Lanka has a strong Sinhalese Buddhist movement
        that wants to impose its identity on the whole country, and some of
        its members are prepared to use force. Sri  Lankan  Christians  are
        therefore subject to attacks by Buddhist  extremists,  as  well  as
        facing incidents of persecution from Hindus and  Muslims.  Buddhist
        extremism in Sri Lanka is expressed in organised opposition to some
        churches, especially in rural areas and  places  seen  as  Buddhist
        preserves. Christian buildings and  church  leaders  are  sometimes
        attacked".



    28. An article from Christian Solidarity Worldwide (UK) dated 24  April
        2013 note Sri Lanka is seeing a significant rise in violent attacks
        carried out by extremist  groups  against  Buddhist,  Muslims,  and
        Christians. It states that  the  violence  can  be  traced  to  two
        organisations who it is said appear to have the  patronage  of  the
        authorities and who are able to act with impunity. A press  release
        from the National Christian Evangelical Alliance of Sri Lanka dated
        3 April 2013 is published in the following terms:


         The National Christian Evangelical Alliance of Sri  Lanka  (NCEASL)
         is deeply concerned regarding the prevalence in  Sri  Lanka  of  an
         organised campaign of  hatred  against  adherence  of  non-majority
         faiths.


         In recent months Muslims and Christians alike have  faced  numerous
         attacks and violence against their practice  worship.  Additionally
         Muslim owned business establishments  and  Muslim  women  in  their
         religious attire have faced attack and assault.


         These attacks have occurred with impunity. In most instances  there
         have been no arrests or punitive action taken, so the attacks  have
         occurred openly with eyewitnesses, video and photographic  evidence
         available. The law  enforcement  authorities  have  been  generally
         passive onlookers in the outrageous assault on basic  human  rights
         and liberties, including religious freedom, economic  and  cultural
         rights of minority religious communities.


         Ongoing social violence against ethnic and religious minorities  is
         a phenomenon that Sri Lanka can ill  afford,  as  it  struggles  to
         reconcile  after  close  upon   three   decades   of   civil   war.
         Internationally,  Sri  Lanka's  request  for  time  and  space   to
         reconcile, subsequent to two  resolutions  at  the  United  Nations
         Human Rights Council (UNHRC), sound hollow and lack credibility  in
         the face of ongoing intimidation and violence  against  ethnic  and
         religious minorities.


         There are two alarming factors about  the  current  situation.  The
         first is that the violence seems to be organised  and  orchestrated
         by two organisations. Hence the violence has sustainability. Second
         and  most  alarmingly  both  the  extremist  violent  organisations
         seemingly have patronage and support from authorities and hence the
         impunity with which they operate.


         The NCEASL  in  this  period  right  after  Easter  Sunday  reminds
         Christians that just as Jesus Christ before his accusers was silent
         like a lamb as He was led to the cross, so we must not and will not
         retaliate against those that perpetrate violence against us,  while
         we strive to enjoy our fundamental constitutional human rights.


         However, the NCEASL calls upon the Government of Sri Lanka to  make
         clear its commitment to equality in the context of our multi-ethnic
         and  multi-religious  society,  desist  from  actions,  words   and
         political signals that provide patronage to extremist organisations
         and to instruct its law enforcement  and  security  authorities  to
         stop majoritarian vigilantism,  enforce  the  law  and  ensure  the
         peace.


    29. A further article from Barnabas Aid dated 15 August 2013 names  the
        two prominent Buddhist nationalist groups as  the  Bodu  Bala  Sena
        (Buddhist Power Force or BBS) and Sinhala  Ravaya  (Sinhala  Echo),
        who along with others lead  hate  campaign  against  Christian  and
        Muslim groups. The article also recalls that in May 2013 a Buddhist
        monk set himself alight as a  protest  against  the  conversion  of
        Buddhists by Christians and other minority groups and of the  halal
        slaughter of cattle by  Muslims.  It  is  said  supporters  of  the
        Sinhalese Ravaya praised the actions of the monk whilst members  of
        the  Buddhist  political  party  Jathika  Hela  Urumaya  (JHU)  had
        promised to "transform his demands into reality" through a new law.


    30. The article also noted that 20 mosques and  30  churches  had  been
        targeted by Buddhist monks with a rise in attacks upon  Christians,
        there being 52 in 2012 and 49 having been recorded up to July  2013
        including physical assaults on church leaders  and  members,  death
        threats, forced  displacement,  and  destruction  of  churches  and
        damage to property.

    31. The response to the Country of  Origin  Information  (COI)  Request
        provided in the respondent's bundle at section D was  published  in
        response to a  request  for  information  about  the  treatment  of
        Christians in Sri Lanka and specifically the treatment of Christian
        pastors.



    32. The Report refers to the US Department of State 2013  International
        religious freedom report together with earlier reports, and set out
        details of some  violent  attacks  upon  Christian  groups  led  by
        Buddhist  monks  together  with  attacks  on  Muslims  Hindus   and
        Christians  by  extremist  groups,  a  number   of   which   repeat
        information provided in the earlier articles.


    33. At [4] of the COI is a quote from an article by the World Socialist
        Web Site in January  2014  reporting  that  extremist  groups  have
        attacked 200 Christian and Muslim religious places in recent years,
        targeted Muslim owned businesses, but  asserting  that  nobody  had
        been prosecuted over any of the assaults.



    34. At [5] it is written "the government was  hesitant  to  arrest  and
        prosecute Buddhist monks involved in numerous attacks upon  Muslims
        and  Christians.  Buddhist  monks  generally  operate   under   the
        protection of the  government.  Some  monks,  particularly  outside
        Colombo, operate with impunity in trying to eliminate Christian and
        Muslim places of worship".


    35. In relation to pastors, it is written at [7 and 8] of the COI:


         7. The US - IRFR  report  cited  a  number  of  recorded  incidents
         towards pastors, including:


               'On  September  2  [2013],  when  a  group  of   unidentified
         individuals threw plastic bags filled with kerosene at the home  of
         the pastor of the Assemblies of  God  Church  in  Agunukolapalassa,
         Hambanthola District. The attackers fled when the pastor awoke  and
         came out of the house. Police found evidence of lit matches outside
         the premises. The pastor filed a police complaint,  but  there  had
         been no progress reported on the investigation by the  end  of  the
         year.


         'On December 21, unidentified assailants threw two  gasoline  bombs
         at the Samaritan Church premises occupied by  the  pastor  and  his
         family in Ahangana, Galle District.  On  December  10,  an  unknown
         gunman shot at the home of  the  pastor  in  Western  Province.  No
         injuries were reported in either case. The police stated they  were
         investigating but had made no arrests by the year's end.


         'Several churches were attacked on Christmas  Eve.  Buddhist  monks
         were among the mob of over 300 villagers who surrounded the  pastor
         of the Assemblies of God Church in  Angunukplapalassa,  Hambanthola
         District, demanding he stop  all  worship  activities  planned  for
         Christmas. The villagers alleged that a Buddhist monk had  filed  a
         police complaint against the  pastor's  religious  activities.  The
         pastor cited his right  to  hold  services  and  was  given  police
         protection. At 11:30 p.m. the same night, a group  of  unidentified
         assailants threw stones at the Light  House  Church  in  Hikkaduwa,
         Galle District, shattering windows and causing  minor  damage.  The
         pastor lodged police complaints, but no progress  was  reported  on
         the investigation at the year's end.


         8. The US - IRFR further recorded that:


         'On March 18  [2013],  a  mob  reportedly  led  by  Buddhist  monks
         attacked the wife, two children, and residence of the pastor of the
         Jeevana  Alokaya  church  in  Weeraketiya,  Hambanthota   District,
         causing serious injury to the  pastor's  wife  and  damage  to  the
         property. The pastor was in  Colombo  at  the  time  attending  the
         Supreme Court hearing on a petition he  filed  following  an  early
         attack on the  church  in  December  2012.  During  the  three-hour
         attack, shattered glass  struck  the  pastor's  wife  in  the  eye,
         requiring surgery. Police were present during the attack, in  which
         the pastor's home was vandalised and some Bibles burnt, but took no
         action. Following the  attack,  police  reportedly  instructed  the
         pastor's family to relocate outside  the  district  for  their  own
         safety. The next day police made several arrests in connection with
         the attack, but the perpetrators were later released  from  custody
         after a protesting mob led by Buddhist monks hurled stones  at  the
         police station and politicians intervened to demand their release.


    36. In addition to the witness statements of the  two  appellants,  the
        country material provided on their  behalf  included  a  number  of
        items by Barnabas Aid (UK) and other  organisations.  These  repeat
        examples of attacks referred to in earlier articles  but  also  the
        nature of the attacks upon  religious  minorities  carried  out  by
        Buddhist extremist groups.


    37. In an article published by Release International (UK) entitled 'Sri
        Lanka: a growing hate campaign against Christians,  11/03/2014'  it
        is claimed a number of churches  have  been  forced  to  close  and
        Christians have been forbidden  from  holding  prayer  meetings  or
        Bible studies in their homes and  that  religious  intolerance  has
        been building  in  Sri  Lanka  for  a  decade.  It  refers  to  450
        documented attacks of violence against Christians  including  arson
        and murder and the burning and demolition of  churches  "in  recent
        years".



    38. An article from Barnabas Aid, dated 28 January 2014,  refers  to  a
        letter published in the Sri Lankan  Guardian  on  23  January  2014
        expressing outrage over the spate of attacks on  Christian,  Muslim
        and Hindu places  of  worship,  signed  by  108  organisations  and
        individuals including NCEASL and the Muslim Council of  Sri  Lanka.
        It is said that letter complains about the failure of the police to
        use even minimal force to dispel mobs, and a senior police  officer
        on one occasion instead giving an assurance to the  mobs  that  the
        churches will be closed  within  two  weeks  while  the  issue  was
        resolved. The letter is said to have highlighted the  role  of  the
        Ministry of Buddha Sasana  (Buddhist)  and  Religious  affairs,  to
        which the police handed have handed over  investigations  regarding
        religious protests.  In 2008 the Ministry issued  an  order  saying
        that it's written permission was required for  all  new  places  of
        worship.


    39. An article from World Watch Monitor (USA), dated 28  January  2014,
        noted that an Anglican bishop has asked for religious  freedom  and
        an end to 'hate mongering' and that  2000  Christians  gathered  in
        Colombo on 26 January 2014 to protest against a perceived  lack  of
        religious freedoms in Sri  Lanka  following  attacks  on  Christian
        places of worship by Buddhist extremists.



    40. A number of the articles provided by  the  appellant  mirror  those
        relied upon by the Secretary of State in relation to the percentage
        of minority religious groups and incidents of attacks against these
        groups.


    41. At  [33]  is  an  article  written  by  the  Islamic  Human  Rights
        Commission  (UK)  dated  11  March  2013  urging  the  Sri   Lankan
        government to fulfil its commitment to promote  and  protect  human
        rights of all citizens by ensuring that the  Muslim  and  Christian
        communities are safeguarded and the spreading religious  hatred  is
        stopped.



    42. In light of the element of duplication it  may  have  assisted  the
        Judge if a schedule had been provided of the individual  incidents,
        although the Judge was able to glean from the material provided the
        nature of the objection, the perpetrators, the nature of  assaults,
        and the assertion in  the  articles  regarding  the  activities  of
        Buddhist extremists and the activities of the authorities.


    43. It was submitted on the  appellant's  behalf  that  the  weight  of
        material had not been considered by the Judge and that even  though
        those causing the problem  amounted  to  a  small  group  this  was
        irrelevant as it still raised an HJ (Iran) point. It was  submitted
        that the Judge failed to consider the HJ (Iran) issue.



Error of law


    44. The issue was clearly identified by the Judge who took into account
        the country material provided by both parties.  There  is  specific
        reference, for example, to the US State Department report for 2013.


    45. An important finding by the Judge was that  the  first  appellant's
        problems arose solely as a result of his contact  with  M  and  his
        family. If the family had contacts or associations with one of  the
        Buddhist political groups referred to above that is not surprising.
        The  appellant  in  his  witness  statement  refers  to  the   only
        difficulties he experienced being as  a  result  of  this  specific
        issue in January -  mid  2013.  This  appears  to  be  despite  the
        assertion by the appellant that he was now at real risk as a result
        of his Christian  faith  and  activities.  There  was  insufficient
        evidence of such individual  risk,  notwithstanding  the  fact  the
        first appellant became a full-time Minister in 2006 and in  2010  a
        full-time evangelical Christian pastor in  Colombo.  The  appellant
        does not indicate or provide  evidence  of  any  specific  problems
        experienced as a result of his activities on any other occasion.



    46. The Judge also accepted at [51] that the first  appellant  actively
        evangelised yet, apart from  the  one  incident  complained  about,
        there was no evidence of persecution as a result of  his  religious
        activities, in his home area or otherwise. The finding by the Judge
        that the appellant could continue to evangelise, that his  problems
        arose almost exclusively from his contact with M  and  his  family,
        and that there was no evidence of  substance  which  indicates  the
        first appellant faces a particular risk from other Buddhists, is  a
        finding within those reasonably available to the Judge on the facts
        of this case and evidence provided.


    47. The material made available to the Judge clearly shows the specific
        date of its publication which was  considered  in  relation  to  an
        appeal heard in October 2015. It is not suggested by the  Secretary
        of State that there has been a substantial material change  in  the
        country situation, which means there will be throughout  Sri  Lanka
        examples of extremist  activities  targeting  Christian  and  other
        minority religious groups by  Buddhist  extremists.  This  was  not
        doubted by the Judge.



    48. In relation to the sufficiency of protection point, the Judge noted
        the appellants had failed to contact the police. Their  explanation
        was noted but the country material indicates  there  are  occasions
        when the police have investigated and even cases  being  considered
        by the Supreme Court in Sri Lanka. It is an  established  principle
        that a sufficiency  of  protection  does  not  mean  protection  in
        relation  to  each   and   every   matter   complained   of   being
        investigations by the police leading to conviction, for as is often
        the case in the UK, there may be insufficient evidence  to  support
        the same. The appellant's own articles refer to unknown  assailants
        and perpetrators of criminal damage.
    49.  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International   Protection
        (Qualification) Regulations 2006.  Regulation 4 (2) states:


        "(2) Protection shall be regarded as generally  provided  when  the
        actors mentioned in paragraph  (1)(a)  and  (b)  (see  above)  take
        reasonable steps to prevent the persecution or suffering of serious
        harm by operating an effective  legal  system  for  the  detection,
        prosecution and punishment  of  acts  constituting  persecution  or
        serious harm, and the person mentioned in paragraph (1) has  access
        to such protection".


    50. The duty imposed on states to take "reasonable steps"  imports  the
        concepts  of  margin  of  appreciation  and  proportionality.   The
        appellant's own evidence shows that  Sri  Lanka  operates  a  legal
        system for  the  detection,  prosecution  and  punishment  of  acts
        constituting persecution,  although  there  may  be  incidents,  as
        outlined in the country material, where  certain  individuals  have
        failed to act as required. The Judge noted this  in  [56]  although
        also noted action taken by other members  of  the  police  and  the
        judiciary including a Magistrate ordering police to arrest Buddhist
        perpetrators of attacks against Christians which falls  within  the
        definition of "reasonable steps".


    51. The specific finding of the  Judge  was  that  the  appellants  had
        failed to demonstrate that there  was  no  sufficiency  protection,
        meaning  they  failed  to  discharge  the  burden  upon   them   to
        substantiate their allegation they  would  not  receive  protection
        from the authorities. This is a  finding  reasonably  open  to  the
        Judge on the material made available. The Judge also noted  members
        of the Christian church are employed within the police service.



    52. The issue of internal protection arose as the Judge found that even
        if the appellants were at some risk in their home area it would not
        be sufficient to amount to persecution, which on  the  facts  as  a
        finding reasonably open to the Judge, but that if  they  could  not
        return to their home are, the appellants had not  established  they
        could not internally relocate within Sri Lanka away from the family
        who had caused them difficulties.


    53. The issue of internal relocation was raised  by  the  Secretary  of
        State in the reasons for refusal letter for both appellants. In AMM
        and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM)  Somalia
        CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) the Tribunal held that there is no legal
        burden on the Secretary of State to prove that there is a  part  of
        the  country  of  nationality  etc.  of  an  appellant,   who   has
        established a well-founded fear in their home area,  to  which  the
        appellant  could  reasonably  be  expected  to  go  and  live.  The
        appellant  bears  the  legal  burden  of  proving  entitlement   to
        international protection; but what  that  entails  will  very  much
        depend upon the circumstances of the particular case. In  practice,
        the issue  of  internal  relocation  needs  to  be  raised  by  the
        Secretary of  State  in  the  letter  of  refusal  or  (subject  to
        procedural fairness) during the appellate proceedings. It will then
        be  for  the  appellant   to   make   good   an   assertion   that,
        notwithstanding the general conditions in  the  proposed  place  of
        relocation, it would not be reasonable to  relocate  there.  In  an
        Article 3 claim, a similar position pertains, in that, although the
        test of reasonableness/undue harshness  does  not  formally  apply,
        unduly  harsh  living  conditions  etc.  -  albeit  not  themselves
        amounting to a breach of Article 3 - may nevertheless be reasonably
        likely to lead to a person returning to their home area, where such
        a breach is reasonably likely.


    54. The finding of the Judge is that there was no  evidence  the  first
        appellant would be at real risk of serious harm if he continued  to
        evangelise to Buddhists in Sri Lanka. There  is  no  finding  based
        upon the available evidence that the appellants could not return to
        their home area. As stated, even if they could not, the Judge found
        the appellants had not established that they could  not  internally
        relocate  within  Sri  Lanka.  The  burden  of   proving   internal
        relocation was not available or a reasonable option fell  upon  the
        appellants in accordance with  the  case  law  which  the  evidence
        failed to establish. The fact there is an availability of  internal
        flight is a finding fully open to the Judge on  the  evidence  made
        available. There are areas of Sri Lanka,  such  as  the  North  and
        North-West, which have a higher number of Christian residents.



    55. The evidenced provided does not support the claim that even if  the
        first appellant returned and evangelised as he had in the  past  he
        would face a real risk of harm throughout the whole of Sri Lanka.


    56. The finding of lack  of  risk  based  upon  the  appellant's  Tamil
        ethnicity has not been shown  to  be  infected  by  arguable  legal
        error.



    57. I do  not  find  on  the  basis  the  material  provided  that  the
        appellants have established the Judge erred  in  law  in  a  manner
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeals. Although  specific
        issues were raised in relation to the  second  appellant  and  risk
        associated with her father, the father's claim  was  not  found  to
        establish  a  real  risk  sufficient  to   warrant   a   grant   of
        international protection. The Judge was  entitled  to  find,  based
        upon the available evidence, that  the  second  appellant  had  not
        established  a  real  risk  sufficient  to  warrant  a   grant   of
        international protection either.


Decision

    58. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.




   Anonymity.


    59. The anonymity order made by the Upper Tribunal  on  24  March  2017
        shall continue until further order.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6 July 2017


