
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07495/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 21 June 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     AW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr N. Weiniger, Counsel instructed by Palis Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant, whose date of birth is 1 April 1990, arrived  in  the
       UK from Kenya on 23 January 2005, aged 14 years. Her entitlement  to
       citizenship of Kenya is in issue but it appears that  Kenya  is  the
       country of her former habitual  residence  and  is  the  country  of
       proposed removal.

    2. She was granted discretionary leave from 5 June 2006 until 31  March
       2008. She made an in-time application on 28 March 2008  for  further
       leave to remain on the  grounds  of  asylum.  That  application  was
       refused and it is against the immigration decision to refuse to vary
       leave to remain that she appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. Her appeal was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S.  Taylor
       after a hearing on 10 September 2012. Permission to  appeal  against
       that decision having been granted, the appeal first came  before  me
       on 8 February 2013 when it was adjourned after I had started to hear
       submissions on behalf of the appellant.  A  new  point  was  raised,
       namely whether the respondent's failure to consider the  appellant's
       case under the 'legacy' process meant that the immigration  decision
       was not in accordance with the law. I  granted  permission  for  the
       grounds of appeal to be amended to add that ground. On 21 June  2013
       I heard submissions from the parties on that and the other  grounds,
       the parties relying on their skeleton arguments filed and served  in
       accordance with directions I gave after the hearing in February.

    4. Part of the background to the appellant's immigration history is, as
       confirmed in Ms Isherwood's  skeleton  argument  at  [7],  that  the
       appellant's case was identified as a  legacy  case  and  was  to  be
       considered under that process. With the skeleton argument are copies
       of relevant correspondence. On  16  November  2009  the  appellant's
       representatives were written to, effectively stating that  hers  was
       identified as a 'legacy'  case.  The  letter  of  11  November  2010
       indicates that the Case  Resolution  Directorate  ("CRD")  would  be
       responsible for her case.

    5. In this context, I referred the parties to the decision of the Upper
       Tribunal in  AZ  (Asylum-'legacy'  cases)  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT
       00270(IAC).

The appellant's claim and the First-tier judge's determination

    6. The appellant's claim as put to the First-tier Tribunal, in  summary
       was as follows. She was born in Somalia to a Muslim father who was a
       Somalian  national.  Her  mother  was  a   Kenyan   Christian.   The
       appellant's father was killed because he was married to a Christian.

    7. The appellant's pregnant mother was raped by four men  in  front  of
       her. Her mother died as a result of the attack and the appellant and
       her brother went into hiding  and  then  lived  on  the  streets  of
       Mogadishu until they stowed away on a truck  going  to  Kenya.  They
       lived on the streets in Nairobi. The appellant was raped at the  age
       of five and needed hospital treatment.

    8. She was able to go to school free and worked in the  evening  for  a
       woman selling illegal  beer  to  men.  However,  she  was  regularly
       sexually abused because she was from Somalia, and her brother  would
       be beaten. She was repeatedly raped.  The  appellant's  brother  was
       killed when the appellant was 13 years old, he  having  reported  to
       the police the abuse they were suffering. Some men came and took him
       away and she never saw him again.

    9. The same men told the appellant that she had to get married but that
       she must be circumcised first. She was helped to leave  Kenya  by  a
       man who knew her brother.

   10. The appellant arrived in the UK using a false passport stating  that
       she was 24 years of age. She was told by the agent that she  had  to
       find a job and she started work as a carer. She was detained by  the
       UKBA in February 2006.

   11. Judge Taylor found at [17] that, in relation to  section  8  of  the
       Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc)  Act  2004  the
       appellant had followed an arranged plan to work in  the  UK,  having
       been provided with a NI number, two  birth  certificates  and  fifty
       pounds.  She failed to claim asylum until  arrested  as  an  illegal
       entrant. She was able to  fend  for  herself,  travel  around,  find
       accommodation and employment, these being factors which contradicted
       her claim to have been unaware of being able to claim asylum. In the
       same paragraph he found that she is an intelligent  and  resourceful
       person, having obtained A levels and a law degree in the UK.

   12. At [18] he concluded that she had  given  inconsistent  evidence  in
       relation to a person, Steve, who is said to  have  helped  her.  Her
       account of Steve's involvement in  bringing  her  to  the  UK  lacks
       credibility.

   13. Judge Taylor concluded at [19] that the appellant's claim  that  she
       was sexually abused and repeatedly raped lacked credibility, bearing
       in  mind  that  she  had  not   provided   any   medical   evidence,
       gynaecologists report, or psychiatric report or evidence in relation
       to any counselling.

   14. In relation to her account of her brother being missing or dead, her
       account was also inconsistent [19]. At [20] it  was  concluded  that
       there was no reliable evidence that the appellant was either born in
       Somalia, that her father was a Somali citizen or that the  appellant
       is a Somali citizen.  She  had  not  given  a  credible  account  of
       assistance having been  sought  from  the  Kenyan  police  and  that
       assistance having been refused [21]. Her claim in  that  respect  is
       undermined by what she said about having received free education for
       eight years at a school  for  street  children  and  receiving  free
       meals. In addition, the fact that she  received  hospital  treatment
       showed that she was not discriminated  against  on  account  of  her
       claimed mixed parentage.

   15. Her claim that she would be recognised by  her  abusers  on  return,
       after ten years, was not credible [22]. She would not be at risk  of
       FGM [24].

   16. In relation to Article 8, it was concluded that  the  appellant  did
       not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  her  removal
       would not breach her rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Submissions

   17. I summarise the parties' respective submissions made to me  on  both
       hearing dates.  Mr Weiniger relied on the grounds of appeal  to  the
       Upper Tribunal and the skeleton arguments.  It  was  submitted  that
       notwithstanding the decision in  AZ,  the  legacy  point  was  still
       relied on, although it was no longer suggested that the  immigration
       decision was flawed on the basis that the decision was not taken  by
       the appropriate officer of the CRD or the Case Assurance  and  Audit
       Unit ("CAAU"). In this  context  Ms  Isherwood's  skeleton  argument
       refers to the CRD instructions appended to the skeleton argument.

   18. For the appellant it  was  contended  that  there  are  two  factual
       matters that underpin the legacy argument. The first is that  by  10
       March 2011 there had been a three year delay from the  date  of  the
       appellant's application for further leave to remain  made  in  March
       2008. The second is the length of time that she has lived in the  UK
       with leave prior to the date of decision, a period of six  years.  I
       was referred to the decision in Mohammed [2012] EWHC  3091  (Admin),
       in particular at [34].

   19. It was submitted that in AZ the matter of delay was not a factor and
       thus AZ can be distinguished on the facts. It is clear from Mohammed
       at [37] that delay need not  be  culpable.  The  bare  fact  of  the
       passage of time was sufficient.

   20. Referring to the letter from the UKBA dated  16  November  2009,  Mr
       Weiniger referred to the fact that it states  that  the  appellant's
       "immigration status and entitlements  will  remain  unchanged  until
       such time as the UK Border Agency has considered the case." She  had
       an entitlement to be considered under the legacy  policy.  That  was
       more than a matter simply of legitimate expectation. The  correction
       of an injustice as identified in Mohammed applied  in  the  case  of
       this appellant even though paragraph 353B of  HC  395  (as  amended)
       applied.

   21. The refusal letter in relation to  the  immigration  decision  under
       appeal did not consider the legacy issues, for example the length of
       residence.

   22. Ms Isherwood submitted that the arguments advanced on behalf of  the
       appellant were simply disagreements with the  decision  in  AZ.  The
       appellant had been sent a letter dated 11 November 2010 (Appendix  B
       to the skeleton argument) asking for further information but as  far
       as she was aware none had been forthcoming.

   23. At [202]-[203] of the refusal letter the delay in dealing  with  the
       appellant's case had been accepted. The  refusal  letter  took  into
       account  the  appellant's  history,  her  discretionary  leave,  the
       country situation and the delay. There was nothing more that  needed
       to be taken into account. The  "entitlements"  referred  to  in  the
       letter of 16  November  2009  was  a  reference  to  employment  and
       education.

   24. In reply Mr Weiniger repeated that there is no hint in  the  refusal
       letter that legacy factors were taken into account.  The  fact  that
       the appellant had six years discretionary leave was not referred  to
       in the refusal letter.

   25. The other grounds of appeal aside from the legacy point were  relied
       on. Ms Isherwood conceded that initially she had had  some  concerns
       because of the judge's reference to the lack of medical evidence  in
       relation to the alleged sexual  assaults.  However,  the  First-tier
       judge had noted the lack of evidence of any  counselling,  which  he
       was entitled to do. In any event, the issue of medical evidence  was
       not material given the other credibility issues.

   26. Although the judge had not expressly referred to the  delay  in  the
       decision making, he had taken into account the length of  time  that
       the appellant had been here and the time she had spent in education.



   27. In relation to the grounds alleging that the appellant's age was not
       given appropriate consideration in terms of  assessing  credibility,
       the judge had set  out  her  history  and  it  is  evident  that  he
       recognised her age at relevant  times.  Other  negative  credibility
       findings were referred to and it was submitted that  the  judge  had
       been entitled to make those findings.  Any  error  of  law  was  not
       material to the outcome of the appeal.

   28. I was addressed by both parties  on  the  question  of  the  judge's
       assessment of the appellant's nationality.

Error of law-assessment

   29. At the hearing on 8 February 2013 it was conceded on behalf  of  the
       respondent that in the light of recent authorities, the decision  to
       remove the appellant under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and
       Nationality Act 2006 ("the 2006 Act") was not in accordance with the
       law, being made as it was at the same time as the decision to refuse
       to vary leave to remain.

   30. So far as the 'legacy'  issue  is  concerned,  it  seems  to  me  on
       reflection that I  was  perhaps  over  generous  in  permitting  the
       grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal to be varied to add that  as
       a ground. It was not in the original grounds of appeal to the First-
       tier Tribunal, in any skeleton argument at that  time  and  was  not
       advanced at that hearing. Nor was it  in  the  original  or  renewed
       grounds of  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal. It is difficult, if not impossible, to see how it could be
       said to have been an error of law for the First-tier judge  to  have
       failed to consider it when it was never advanced before him.  If  it
       is suggested that it was a matter that was obvious in the 'Robinson'
       sense, the answer is that if  it  was  so  obvious  one  would  have
       expected it to have been raised before the hearing before the  Upper
       Tribunal. I do not consider that the point is at all an obvious one.

   31. Putting aside the question of whether the judge  could  be  said  to
       have erred law in failing to consider the  point  when  it  was  not
       taken, I am in any event not persuaded that there is  any  merit  in
       the legacy argument, notwithstanding  the  very  careful  and  lucid
       submissions made by Mr Weiniger.

   32. It does appear from  the  information  in  the  correspondence  very
       helpfully provided by Ms Isherwood that  the  appellant's  case  was
       identified as one of those that was to be dealt with as part of  the
       backlog of older  asylum  claims.  The  background  to  the  process
       whereby those older claims were to be considered is explained in the
       judgements in Hakemi [2012] EWHC 1967 (Admin) and Mohammed.

   33. However, as explained in AZ, the fact  that  an  appellant's  asylum
       claim has been identified  as  a  legacy  case  does  not  render  a
       subsequent  appealable  immigration  decision  unlawful   where   no
       decision  under  the  legacy  process  had  been  made  before   the
       immigration decision.

   34. I cannot see that AZ can be distinguished for the  reasons  advanced
       by Mr Weiniger. The circumstances of all cases  will  inevitably  be
       different. What legacy cases will  inevitably  have  in  common  are
       periods of delay of one  sort  or  another,  and  residence  for  an
       appreciable  period.  I  do  not  see  that  the  reference  to  the
       appellant's "entitlements" in the 16 November 2009  letter  advances
       the argument. The letter indicated that the  appellant's  claim  was
       being  considered  as  a  legacy  case.  The  statement   that   her
       immigration status and entitlements  would  remain  unchanged  until
       such time as the UKBA had considered her case is clearly a reference
       to something other than the  legacy  'entitlement',  if  it  can  be
       described as such.

   35. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is any error  of  law  in
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis of the 'legacy'
       issue.

   36. However, as much as I am not persuaded that there is  any  merit  in
       the legacy argument, I am persuaded that the decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal contains errors of law in three other respects.

   37. At [19] the judge noted the appellant's claim that she was seriously
       sexually abused and  raped  repeatedly  from  the  age  of  five  to
       fifteen. One of the reasons he gave for rejecting the credibility of
       her account was that she had not submitted any  medical  report  "in
       support of her initial  claim  or  her  current  claim  for  further
       leave." The judge  made  the  point  that  the  appellant  had  been
       represented. He went on to reinforce the point  about  the  lack  of
       medical  evidence  by  stating  that  she  had  not  submitted   any
       "supporting gynaecologist's [report]"  and  had  not  explained  the
       absence of such a report.

   38. Several points are made about this in the  grounds  of  appeal,  not
       least in terms of whether medical evidence  could  prove  the  abuse
       that the appellant claims occurred. It is also suggested that at the
       age of 15 years,  (she  was  three  months  short  of  15  when  she
       arrived), it was not reasonable to expect her to have  undergone  an
       intimate examination to establish the veracity of her claims.

   39. Ms Isherwood indicated that this is a matter that had, initially  at
       least, caused her concern. Although it was accepted that  the  judge
       was wrong to reject the credibility of that aspect  of  her  account
       because of the lack of medical evidence, Ms Isherwood contended that
       any error of law in that regard was not  material  given  the  other
       adverse credibility points. She suggested,  for  example,  that  the
       judge was entitled to take into account that there  was  a  lack  of
       evidence of any counselling in the form of any report.  However,  at
       [11] it is recorded that the appellant said in evidence that she had
       not sought professional counselling but  had  a  close  relationship
       with her pastor. Even if the judge was entitled to take into account
       the lack of evidence from the pastor, I am not persuaded that  that,
       or the other adverse credibility findings, renders the error of  law
       in relation to medical evidence immaterial to  the  outcome  of  the
       appeal.

   40. In any event, the adverse credibility assessment suffers from what I
       regard  as  another  fundamental  flaw.  The  judge   made   adverse
       credibility findings with reference  to  the  appellant  not  having
       applied for asylum until she had been in the UK for about 15 months.
       At [18] he referred to the appellant having  claimed  that  she  was
       unaware of asylum or protection when she arrived yet, he  concluded,
       she was nevertheless able to fend for herself, travel  around,  find
       accommodation and find stable employment. He found that it  was  not
       credible that the appellant was unable to seek advice if she  wished
       to do so. He then referred to the appellant having obtained A levels
       and then a degree, having come through the UK education system.

   41. The grounds assert, and  I  agree,  that  the  judge  did  not  give
       appropriate consideration to the appellant's age at material  times.
       She arrived when she  was  almost  15.  Whilst  the  appellant  has,
       according to the refusal letter, used different dates of birth,  the
       refusal letter refers at [43] to a Merton compliant  age  assessment
       which gave her date of birth as 1 April 1990, which is what she  now
       claims it to be. The refusal letter accepts at [45] that that is her
       age. The judge did  make  reference  in  the  determination  to  the
       appellant's age on arrival and referred to the  appellant's  ability
       to have 'survived' as it were, after her arrival. However, I do  not
       consider that in finding against the appellant in terms of when  she
       made her claim, the judge gave any, or any  adequate,  consideration
       to the fact of her age at that time in terms of her appreciation  of
       the need to seek international protection in the UK.

   42. Perhaps more importantly,  although  there  are  references  in  the
       determination to the appellant's age, in one context or another, the
       adverse credibility findings overall do not reveal  an  appreciation
       of the significance of the appellant's age at the time of the events
       that the appellant  was  recounting.  At  [18]  the  judge  made  an
       assessment of the appellant's claim that she was helped to  come  to
       the UK by a person called Steve. There is reference to the screening
       interview and apparent  inconsistency  between  that  and  her  oral
       evidence as  to  payment  to  Steve.  However,  when  the  screening
       interview took place the appellant was just short  of  16  years  of
       age.

   43. A consideration in  the  adverse  credibility  assessment  was  also
       apparent inconsistency between the screening interview  and  written
       evidence, and the oral evidence in terms  of  her  brother.  In  the
       screening interview it is recorded that he is deceased, and  in  her
       "written evidence" that he was presumed dead. At  the  time  of  her
       first witness statement in 2006 she was  aged  15.  In  the  witness
       statement she said that he was killed, but that was in  the  context
       of his having been taken away and not seen  again,  and  being  told
       that she would be killed like her brother.

   44. A further example of the failure to consider her age is to be  found
       at [21]. The judge took into account that in Kenya,  notwithstanding
       repeated abuse, the appellant did not  report  the  abusers  to  the
       police. She did not do so after the 'death' of her brother  in  2003
       (by which time the appellant was 13 years  old).  The  judge  stated
       that the appellant had two years after the death or disappearance of
       her brother but took no action.  That  lack  of  action  was  to  be
       contrasted with her having, on her account, received free  education
       and free meals as a street child, as well as hospital treatment.

   45. Before finding against the appellant in terms of her failure to have
       sought the protection of the police, it was encumbent on him to give
       consideration to her age at the time the events  are  said  to  have
       taken place.

   46. The third respect in which I am satisfied that there is an error  of
       law  in  the  determination  is  in  terms  of  a  failure  in   the
       proportionality assessment under Article 8, to have  regard  to  the
       issue of delay. The application for further leave to remain was made
       in March 2008 but not decided until August 2012.  The  date  at  the
       foot of the notice of decision  to  refuse  to  vary  her  leave  to
       remain, gives a date of April 2012 but the refusal letter is dated 1
       August 2012 and that date is given earlier in the notice of decision
       under the signature of the Secretary of State.

   47. The refusal letter itself at [202] makes express  reference  to  the
       delay of four years (in fact it was almost four and a  half  years).
       The renewed grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  state  at  [19]
       that the issue of delay  was  raised  in  the  appellant's  skeleton
       argument before the First-tier Tribunal. So it was, albeit that  the
       point was not emphasised. Nevertheless,  in  Article  8  claims  the
       question of delay is an obvious point to be considered  but  in  any
       event, as I have said,  it  was  specifically  referred  to  in  the
       refusal letter. Whilst the First-tier judge did note the  length  of
       time that the appellant has been in the UK, that  does  not  address
       the  question  of  delay  and  there  is  no   indication   in   the
       proportionality assessment that it was taken into  account.   Whilst
       Ms Isherwood was right to refer to the  fact  that  the  matter  was
       dealt with in the refusal letter, it was for the judge  to  make  an
       assessment, in line with authority, as to the extent to  which  that
       significant delay affected the proportionality of  the  decision  to
       remove the appellant.

   48. I bear in mind that a number of adverse  credibility  findings  were
       made in the determination. I do not need to set them all out.  There
       are matters which, to a greater or lesser extent, have the potential
       to undermine the appellant's credibility. Any new assessment of  the
       appellant's claim will have to consider whether  the  basis  of  the
       claimed fear of return is objectively well-founded. Nevertheless,  I
       am satisfied that the errors of law to which  I  have  referred  are
       such as to require the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  be  set
       aside in its entirety. It could not be said that the outcome of  the
       appeal could not have been any different but  for  those  errors  of
       law. The question of internal relocation needs to be  considered  in
       the context of an appropriate credibility assessment.

   49. In these circumstances, it is not necessary to  consider  the  other
       grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  in  terms  of  the  judge's
       understanding of, or appreciation of, the facts and evidence.

   50. Both parties agreed that in the event that I decided  to  set  aside
       the decision for error of law, the appeal should be remitted to  the
       First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing.  Having  regard  to  the
       Practice Statement paragraph 7.2, this is what I have decided to  do
       given the extent of the judicial fact-finding required.  The  appeal
       will therefore be remitted to be heard de  novo  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. None of the adverse credibility findings of the First-tier
       Tribunal are to stand. That includes the judge's findings in respect
       of nationality. All issues will require a reassessment by the First-
       tier Tribunal.

   51. It was accepted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the  removal
       decision under section 47 of the 2006 Act is not in accordance  with
       the law and I make a finding to that effect. That is  not  a  matter
       that will need to be revisited but the determination of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal will need  to  record  that  the  section  47  removal
       decision is not in accordance with the law.

   52. So far as the 'legacy' point is concerned, the  First-tier  Tribunal
       should consider that matter as settled by this determination. It  is
       not open to the appellant to re-argue that point before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal in the absence of any further reported decision of the
       Upper Tribunal or higher authority.

Decision

   53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
       reconsideration.

                   DIRECTIONS

    1. This appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  accordance
       with Practice Statement paragraph 7.2 to be heard  de  novo  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal. None of the adverse credibility findings of the
       First-tier Tribunal in its determination are to stand.

    2. The appeal is to be heard by a judge other than First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge S. Taylor.

    3. Further directions as to listing may be left to  the  discretion  of
       the First-tier Tribunal.







Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008) and consequently, this  determination  identifies  the
appellant by initials only.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 20/07/13
