


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07242/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 12 November 2015                    |               On 24 November 2015    |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     AJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Ms Johnrose, Broudie Jackson & Canter
For the SSHD:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised the appellant because  he  has  made  an  asylum
          claim.  The appellant is a citizen of Iran who claimed  asylum  in
          the United Kingdom on 8 October 2014.   This claim was refused  by
          the SSHD and he appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   At  this
          hearing the  appellant  relied  upon  three  reasons  for  fearing
          serious harm in Iran: he was  at  risk  from  his  uncle  and  the
          authorities for reasons relating to his family business and  Bahai
          faith; he had converted to Christianity whilst in the UK;  he  was
          at risk as  he  would  be  returning  as  an  undocumented  asylum
          seeker.   In a detailed decision dated 3  August  2015  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Brookfield dismissed the appellant's appeal  having
          comprehensively disbelieved the vast majority of his evidence.


       2. At the hearing before me Ms  Johnrose  focused  upon  the  judge's
          findings regarding the  evidence  of  Canon  White.   Canon  White
          attended the hearing and gave evidence regarding  the  appellant's
          conversion to Christianity.  In a letter dated 1 June  2015  Canon
          White explained that he was ordained into the Anglican  Church  in
          2003 having worked as  a  Christian  missionary  since  1988.   He
          described himself as having significant experience  of  evangelism
          over 26 years.  He was appointed Residentiary Canon  at  Liverpool
          Cathedral with particular oversight of mission and evangelism  and
          he remains in this post.  He described the appellant's  activities
          with the Church and his belief that  he  was  genuinely  committed
          Christian.  Canon White went on to explain that he  deals  with  a
          number  of  asylum  seekers  in  a  very  busy  Cathedral  and  is
          therefore unable to attend the Tribunal in person for most  claims
          but stated:

                 "However where an individual has had prolonged  involvement
                 at the cathedral we consider  [attending  the  Tribunal]  a
                 high priority, as in the case with [the appellant]".

       3. Judge Brookfield regarded Canon White to  be  a  truthful  witness
          who genuinely believed that the appellant was  a  genuine  convert
          to  Christianity  [10(xxiii)]  but  felt  unable  to  accept  this
          assessment [10(xxv)].  Ms Johnrose submitted that the  judge  gave
          inadequate reasons for rejecting the  Canon's  assessment  of  the
          genuineness of the  appellant's  conversion,  and  approached  his
          evidence in an unfair manner.  Mr Harrison asked me to  find  that
          the  judge  provided  detailed  and  comprehensive  reasons,   and
          approached the evidence fairly.

       4. At the end of submissions I reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
          provide with reasons.

       5. Both parties accepted that the record of proceedings  demonstrates
          that  Canon  White  was  asked  only  two  questions   in   cross-
          examination and two questions from the judge.  It was also  agreed
          that this evidence was entirely supportive of the  genuineness  of
          the appellant's conversion to Christianity.  The SSHD  asked  what
          persuaded the Canon to baptise the appellant  and  who  introduced
          the appellant to Christianity.  The judge asked  the  Canon  about
          the number of Iranian asylum seekers he was involved with and  why
          he believed this appellant was a  genuine  convert.   The  Canon's
          response  to  the  last  question  is  set  out  in  the  decision
          [10(xxi)].  There were no follow up  questions  to  this  evidence
          from the SSHD's representative or the judge.

       6. It is clear from the decision that  the  judge  had  a  number  of
          concerns  regarding  matters  she  considered  relevant   to   the
          appellant's conversion and she sets these out within the  decision
          [10(xx) to (xxv)].  These can be summarised in the following  way:



                  a) there was a discrepancy between the evidence  provided
                     by the appellant and  that  provided  by  Canon  White
                     regarding the length of time the  appellant  has  been
                     attending worship at Liverpool Cathedral (xx);


                  b) the appellant's claimed introduction  to  Christianity
                     was unsupported (xxii);

                  c) whether Canon White had sufficient  time  to  properly
                     assess the genuineness of the appellant as he only had
                     personal involvement with him for five months (xxiii);



                  d) the extent  to  which  other  members  of  the  clergy
                     offered their input to Canon White (xxiii);

                  e) whether or not the  appellant  could  be  said  to  be
                     genuinely committed to Christianity when  he  did  not
                     take  steps  to  research  the  various  denominations
                     (xxiv);

                  f) the fact that the appellant sought baptism only  three
                     months after he attended services (xxiv).

       7. All of the above matters at (a) to (f) are  directly  relevant  to
          Canon White's assessment, yet he was provided with no  opportunity
          to address these.  These issues of concern were  not  the  subject
          of any questions or clarification from the SSHD or the judge.   In
          this  case,  a  busy  senior  Church   member   with   substantial
          experience  in  assessing  the  genuineness   of   conversion   to
          Christianity has attended a hearing on  an  exceptional  basis  to
          provide  evidence  to  assist  the  judge   in   determining   the
          genuineness   of   the   appellant's    conversion.     In    such
          circumstances, it is a matter of basic  procedural  fairness  that
          key matters of concern relevant to that assessment should  be  put
          to the witness.   They were not put in this case.  That  left  the
          judge to speculate  on  what  may  or  may  not  be  important  or
          relevant without evidentiary foundation.  For  example  the  judge
          said  at  [10(xxiv)]  "it  seems  to  me  that  someone   who   is
          considering taking  such  a  big  step  to  convert  to  or  adopt
          Christianity as  their  religion  and  way  of  life,  would  have
          undertaken considerable research  into  the  various  branches  of
          Christianity before deciding  which  branch  of  Christianity  was
          appropriate to him".   The  judge  has  not  had  the  benefit  of
          evidence as to whether such investigation is  actually  considered
          relevant  or  appropriate  to  those   wishing   to   convert   to
          Christianity.    Canon  White  would  have  been  well-placed   to
          address  this  but  was  not  given  an  opportunity  to  do   so.
          Similarly Canon White has not had an opportunity  to  address  the
          credibility of the conversion in  light  of  the  judge's  concern
          that baptism followed only three months after initial interest.

       8. In addition to this each of the reasons offered by the  judge  for
          rejecting the assessment of Canon White  is  flawed  and  is  such
          that it cannot be said that she has provided adequate reasons  for
          her finding.  Flawed  findings  are  more  likely  to  occur  when
          clarification  is  not   sought   from   the   relevant   witness,
          particularly where as in this case that witness is accepted to  be
          a credible expert in his field.  I now deal with  each  reason  in
          turn.

       9. I accept Ms Johnrose's submission  that  the  discrepancy  at  (a)
          above is more apparent than real.  The evidence before  the  judge
          regarding  the  appellant's  attendance  at  Church  was   broadly
          consistent.  He started attending  with  his  friend  in  November
          2014 when he acted as  an  interpreter  but  only  started  really
          attending worship in February 2015.

      10. The judge's finding that the appellant's claimed  introduction  to
          the church was unsupported at (b) fails to take into account  that
          Canon White (who the judge accepted to  be  a  credible  evidence)
          supported the appellant's account that he began  attending  Church
          in order to act as an interpreter for his friend.

      11. The judge implies that Canon White has only  known  the  appellant
          for five months and this  renders  his  assessment  less  reliable
          ((c) above) but has failed  to  balance  this  against  the  clear
          evidence from Canon White that the  appellant  has  had  extensive
          personal contact with him and other Church activities and  he  was
          prepared to make a clear assessment because he had five months  of
          personal interaction.

      12. The judge appears to  question  the  reliability  of  the  Canon's
          assessment for an additional reason at (d): no one else  from  the
          Church who  provided  'input'  regarding  the  appellant  provided
          written evidence about this.  It is  difficult  to  see  why  such
          written evidence was necessary when Canon White was accepted as  a
          truthful witness.

      13. Mr Harrison accepted that if contrary to his submissions, I  found
          that the judge had erred in law regarding the  evidence  of  Canon
          White then the correct course  would  be  for  the  matter  to  be
          remade de novo by the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge clearly  had
          an adverse view regarding the appellant's conversion  in  the  UK.
          This was considered alongside and as part of  her  view  that  the
          appellant was prepared to do and say things  in  order  to  secure
          advantages  for  himself  [10(vi),  (vii),   (xxv)].    In   these
          circumstances it is difficult to separate her  findings  regarding
          this aspect of the appellant's claim from the remaining aspects.

      14. In any event it is concerning that the judge was prepared to  find
          that the appellant attended the Mosque when  he  was  18  and  was
          willing to  undergo  a  religious  conversion  ceremony  [10(vi)].
          This is perhaps the only important matter the judge has  accepted.
           The acceptance of this was used  by  the  judge  to  support  her
          adverse  credibility  findings   because   she   considered   that
          conversion to  be  disingenuous  and  for  no  reason  other  than
          financial advantage.  This finding is difficult to reconcile  with
          the judge's rejection of the claim that  the  appellant  was  born
          into a Bahai family [10(ii), (iv) (xviii)].   The  judge  has  not
          considered  why  the  appellant  needed  to  attend  a  conversion
          ceremony (which she accepted) when on her own findings  there  was
          nothing to convert from.

      15. In addition, the judge was not satisfied  there  was  evidence  to
          support the appellant's claim that  he  left  Iran  illegally  and
          entered the UK clandestinely [10(xxvi)].  The judge has failed  to
          take into account the evidence in  the  screening  interview  that
          the appellant was arrested and  fingerprinted  shortly  after  his
          arrival.  In addition the judge speculated that the appellant  was
          probably able to leave Iran lawfully on  the  basis  that  he  was
          going to study abroad when there was no evidence to support this.

      16. Both representatives agreed that the decision needed to be  remade
          completely  and  that  given  the  nature  and  extent  of   those
          findings, this should be done in the First-tier Tribunal.  I  have
          had  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided
          that this is an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.

Decision

      17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.


      18. The decision shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge             of             the             Upper              Tribunal
             Date: 13 November 2015






