
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: AA/07658/2012
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Date Sent                  |
|On 29 October 2013                              |On 5 November 2013         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between


                                     vk

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati,  instructed by KTM Legal Consultants
(OISC regulated)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity:  Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008, the  appellant  has  been  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
proceedings. No  report  of  these  proceedings  (in  whatever  form)  shall
directly or indirectly identify the appellant. Failure to comply  with  this
order could lead to a contempt of court".
                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appeals with permission  against
    the First-tier Tribunal decision  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    setting of removal directions to Sri Lanka  after  refusal  of  refugee
    status, humanitarian protection or leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The grounds of appeal argued  that  the  reasoning  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination (FTJ  Chowdhury)  was  inadequate  and  entirely
    failed to record and deal with the oral evidence of his brother, who at
    the time was in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 migrant, studying at  UK
    Education Professional.

 3. That leave has since been curtailed because  the  sponsoring  college's
    licence was revoked.  Documents produced at the  hearing  today  record
    that curtailment.  There is no evidence that the brother made  a  fresh
    application within the 60 days granted him (which expired on 13  August
    2013).  It is unclear whether he remains in the United Kingdom.

 4. In November 2012, permission to appeal was granted on all grounds,  but
    in particular on grounds 1, 4 and 5.

 5. It is agreed between the parties, and the Tribunal considers, that  the
    reasoning in the First-tier Tribunal determination is insufficient  for
    the reasons given, and that the decision must be set aside and  remade.
    Given the lapse of time and the omission of the brother's  evidence  in
    the  original  First-tier  Tribunal  determination,  nothing  of   that
    decision can be preserved and it  is  therefore  appropriate  that  the
    decision be made again in the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of  law.   I  set  aside  the  decision.   The
decision in the appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

   a) By agreement, this appeal is listed for hearing at Hatton Cross on  24
      December 2013, with a time estimate of two hours.

   b) A Tamil interpreter will be required.

   c) All  other  necessary  directions  will  be  made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

