
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07184/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Sent           |
|on 4th June 2014                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD AMIR HUSSAIN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Sadiq of Adam Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Harrison - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Gladstone, promulgated following a hearing at  Manchester  on
        12th March 2014, in which he dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds
        against the removal direction to Pakistan which was made  following
        the rejection of the Appellants claim for asylum or any other  form
        of international protection.


     2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on  15th  March  1967.
        Having considered the oral and documentary evidence, which  is  set
        out in some detail in the determination, the  Judge  sets  out  his
        findings  from  paragraph  129  of  the  determination.  The  Judge
        considered section 8 of the 2004 Act and found  the  Appellant  had
        had a reasonable opportunity to claim asylum before being  arrested
        under immigration provisions and that the claim did not rely wholly
        on matters arising after the arrest [133].  In relation to the core
        of the claim to be at risk on return, the Judge  found  there  were
        inconsistencies, some of which  were  dealt  with  in  the  refusal
        letter but which had not been  dealt  with  satisfactorily  in  the
        evidence. Others arose during the  course  of  the  evidence  given
        before the First-tier Tribunal and it was  found  there  are  clear
        contradictions throughout the various forms of evidence.  The Judge
        therefore doubted the Appellant's credibility in  relation  to  the
        whole of his account for the reasons  given  in  the  determination
        [para 135 to 162].  As a  result  of  such  discrepancy  the  Judge
        states in paragraph 163:


     "For all the above reasons, I find that the appellant's credibility has
   been   fatally damaged. I do not accept any part of his  claim,  which  I
   consider has   been fabricated in an effort to establish an asylum  claim
   after arrest for    overstaying and working".


     3. No reference was made to Article  8  in  the  Appellant's  skeleton
        argument or in submissions and on that basis  it  was  accepted  as
        being conceded that the Appellant could not meet  the  requirements
        of the Rules relating to Article 8.


     4. The application for permission to appeal is commendably  brief  and
        focuses on  the  issues  the  Appellant  seeks  to  rely  upon.  It
        acknowledges there are various  credibility  findings  but  submits
        that while some are made against  the  Appellant  by  reference  to
        inconsistencies a significant majority relate to  the  plausibility
        of the account. It is also asserted there  is  a  key  omission  in
        relation to the consideration of credibility by  reference  to  the
        evidence of the Appellant's  witness  recounted  by  the  Judge  at
        paragraphs  133  to  136  of  the  determination.   The  Judge   is
        criticised for making only what is described as  an  'exceptionally
        brief comment' at paragraph  158  in  relation  to  this  witnesses
        evidence,  whereas  it  is  claimed  this  person  has   first-hand
        knowledge  of  certain  important  aspects   of   the   Appellant's
        experiences. The grounds assert such evidence was highly  pertinent
        to the issue of credibility and the failure to take  such  evidence
        into account or to consider it appropriately must  amount  arguable
        legal error.



Error of law


     5. The Appellant seeks to classify certain adverse  findings  made  by
        the Judge as relating to "plausibility type concerns"  as  if  this
        somehow devalues the value of such an analysis.  It is not a  legal
        error to find an account implausible.  In  MM  (DRC)  [2005]  UKIAT
        00019  (Ouseley)  the  Tribunal  said  that   the   assessment   of
        credibility may involve  an  assessment  of  the  plausibility,  or
        apparent reasonableness or truthfulness of  what  was  being  said.
        This could involve a judgment on the likelihood of something having
        happened, based on evidence  or  inferences.   Background  evidence
        could assist with that process, revealing the  likelihood  of  what
        was said having occurred.  Background evidence  could  reveal  that
        adverse inferences which were apparently reasonable when  based  on
        an understanding of life in this country, were less reasonable when
        the circumstances of life in the country of  origin  were  exposed.
        Plausibility was  an  aspect  in  the  process  of  arriving  at  a
        decision, which might vary from case to case, and  not  a  separate
        stage in  it.  A  story  could  be  implausible  yet  credible,  or
        plausible yet properly not believed.  Plausibility is not a term of
        art.  It  is  simply  that  the  inherent  likelihood  or  apparent
        reasonableness of a claim is an aspect of its  credibility  and  an
        aspect which may well be related to background material  which  may
        assist when judging it.  The Tribunal went on to say that "the more
        improbable the story, the more cogent  the  evidence  necessary  to
        support it, even to the lower standard of proof."  In  relation  to
        the  contention  that  there  was   an   alternative   satisfactory
        explanation for matters found to be implausible by the Adjudicator,
        the Tribunal said that it was for the claimant to put  forward  all
        relevant evidence and to recognise and explain any  inconsistencies
        and improbabilities and a conclusion was not necessarily  erroneous
        because it did not contemplate possibilities that were  not  raised
        for the Adjudicator's consideration.


     6. In Gulnaz Esen v SSHD [2006] CSIH 23 the  Court  of  Sessions  said
        that Adjudicators are entitled to draw inferences of implausibility
        when assessing credibility and to draw on their  common  sense  and
        ability to identify what was or was not plausible, as  long  as  it
        was based on hard evidence.


     7. This is an appeal in which the Judge considered the  evidence  with
        the required degree of anxious scrutiny and gave  detailed  reasons
        for the findings that were made. As such the weight to be given  to
        that evidence was a matter for the Judge. The finding  in  relation
        to the evidence of the witness referred to in paragraph  4  of  the
        grounds has not been shown to be one outside the range of  findings
        available to the Judge or to be in any way perverse or  irrational.
        In paragraph 158 the Judge finds:


          158.    I have noted the witness's evidence, but this was limited,
   given that he did            not know  about  the  alleged  situation  in
   Pakistan, and he did not know             about the  appellant's  claimed
   relationship the UK.


     8. The fact the witness may have taken the Appellant to the gay  areas
        of Manchester does not necessarily establish that the Appellant  is
        a gay man. Indeed that area is one that many pass through on  their
        way to and from the city centre for work on a daily  basis  without
        any connotation relevant to their sexuality.


     9. I find no material legal error proved in relation to the manner  in
        which the Judge considered the evidence or the weight given to that
        evidence.


    10. There is also no challenge in the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
        appeal to the findings regarding events in Pakistan.


    11. As the evidence has been considered properly and  adequate  reasons
        given for findings made, the only remaining avenue of challenge  is
        if those findings can be said to  be  perverse  or  irrational.  Mr
        Sadiq in his final submission did state that the findings  are  not
        rational in the context of the evidence of Mr Waheed,  but  I  find
        nothing wrong with the Judge's treatment of that  evidence.   In  R
        and Others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982  Lord  Justice  Brooke  noted
        that perversity  represented  a  very  high  hurdle.   It  embraced
        decisions which were irrational or unreasonable in  the  Wednesbury
        sense. In the case before this Tribunal I do not find such a hurdle
        reached, let alone breached.


    12. Mere disagreement with the conclusions reached or a  desire  for  a
        different outcome does  not  establish  arguable  legal  error.  As
        stated, weight is  a  matter  for  the  Judge  who  considered  the
        evidence adequately. No legal error material  to  the  decision  to
        dismiss the appeal has been made out.


Decision

    13. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.  I make no such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 1st August 2014












