
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07244/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On 2nd February 2015                 |On 3rd February 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     MI
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 19th October 1964 and  she
    appealed against the decision to remove her from  the  UK  following  a
    decision to refuse her asylum, humanitarian protection  and  protection
    under the European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. The appellant's claim was that she was a lesbian and that she had  been
    an active member of the 'Say it Loud Club' an LGBT club in  Uganda  and
    that she had demonstrated on LGBT matters in the UK.  She was afraid of
    being returned to Uganda.  In a determination dated 28th November  2014
    Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Widdup refused the appellant's  appeal
    on all grounds. Permission to appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal
    Judge Robertson particularly in relation to ground 5 of the application
    for permission to appeal on the basis that the Judge made  no  findings
    on the evidence of two key witnesses as  the  LGBT  activities  of  the
    appellant.

 3. At the hearing Ms Walker relied specifically on grounds 4  and  5.   Ms
    Holmes  observed  that  the  decision  was  a  careful   and   thorough
    determination save for the omission in relation to the two witnesses.

 4. At the first tier  tribunal  two  witnesses  attended  the  hearing  in
    addition to the appellant. Mr Sesange from the 'Out and  Proud  Diamond
    Group' which campaigned  on  behalf  of  lesbians,  (his  evidence  was
    recorded at paragraphs [14] to [17]) and Mr Ssali, the founder  of  the
    'Say it Loud Club' which is a London based LGBT  group,  (his  evidence
    was recorded at paragraph [36] to [39]).

 5. The judge  at  [77]  concluded  that  'in  weighing  the  evidence  and
    considering it in the round, I am unable to find that she is a  lesbian
    and she is not therefore at risk on return to Uganda'. Despite  careful
    and logical reasoning and despite the judge at  [59]  stating  that  he
    'will consider the evidence of Mr Sesange and Mr  Ssali  together  with
    all the  other  evidence  when  making  a  rounded  assessment  of  the
    appellant's case',  the judge unfortunately made no  further  reference
    to the evidence of the two witnesses.  Further to AK (Failure to assess
    witnesses' evidence) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00230 and  MK  (duty  to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) I  find  that  there  was  an
    error of law which could have a material effect on the  outcome.   This
    error went to the  heart  of  the  findings  on  credibility  and  both
    representatives agreed that this appeal should be returned to the First
    Tier Tribunal.

 6. I note that there were further grounds of appeal not least in  relation
    to the treatment of the photographic evidence and the identification of
    appellant  by  her  family.   Ms  Walker  made  specific  reference  to
    paragraph 2.5.6 of the August 2014 Country of Origin Information Report
    on Uganda, which had been drawn to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    attention in her skeleton argument but had not been addressed.  In view
    of my findings on the witness evidence and the fact  that  I  have  set
    aside the determination I merely identify this as a further error.

 7. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed      Date 2nd February   2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
