
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA 07247 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 April 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE BAKER
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                  G--- S---
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel, instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. As the appellant is an asylum seeker whose anonymity was  preserved  by
    the First-tier Tribunal we have made an order pursuant to  Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. No report of  these
    proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Sri Lanka against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal to dismiss his appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to return him to Sri Lanka. It is his case  that  he
    is a refugee or otherwise entitled to international protection.

 3. In very simple terms it is the appellant's case that he was a low level
    LTTE  activist.   He  left  Sri  Lanka,  having  escaped  from  custody
    irregularly under payment of a bribe, but he remains of interest to the
    authorities in Sri Lanka and the evidence is that his family  home  was
    visited in 2012 by officers looking for him and they  beat  his  family
    because they could not find him, and that  therefore,  although  a  low
    level activist, he cannot be returned safely.

 4. It is the Secretary of State's case that the appellant has not told the
    truth about what has happened to him but in  any  event  his  level  of
    activity is such that he is not at risk in the event of his return now.

 5. We are aware of the  country  guidance  case  of  CJ  which  identified
    categories of people who are at risk and categories of people  who  are
    not going to be at  risk  in  Sri  Lanka.   The  Court  of  Appeal  had
    indicated that that determination of the Tribunal in  country  guidance
    was unsatisfactory. Although the people who are identified as being  at
    risk in CJ are indeed at risk people, not recognised in CJ as being  at
    risk might still be entitled to international  protection.  Whilst  the
    Court of Appeal is deliberating on the matter  the  Tribunal  must  not
    dismiss appeals against people just because they are not in a  category
    of people recognised as at risk in the case of CJ.  It follows that  we
    are quite satisfied that it is at least possible that the appellant  is
    in a category of people who are at risk.

 6. There are two features of the determination that have  been  criticised
    in argument before us that particularly concern us.

 7. The first, and the less serious, point  is  the  consideration  of  the
    appellant's claim to have been released on  the  payment  of  a  bribe.
    This claim is often made in Sri Lankan cases.  It  is  something  which
    appears to have happened at least on some occasions  when  people  were
    released by the authorities.  It is relevant because  if  in  fact  the
    appellant was released on payment of a bribe it may be the  records  do
    not show that he was released at all and he may have to explain himself
    in the event of his return.

 8. It would have been very much better  if  this  point  had  been  raised
    specifically with the appellant in cross-examination so  given  him  an
    opportunity to explain himself when he was dealing  with  the  evidence
    given.   However  it  does  not  follow  that  the   determination   is
    necessarily wrong in law, particularly as similar points were raised in
    the Reasons for Refusal letter.

 9. The greater concern is about the appellant's claim that his family were
    beaten by officers looking for him in the early  part  of  2012.   This
    claim was made clearly.  It was just not addressed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  We do not know the reason for this.  We  recognise  it
    is possible that if we were at the hearing it would have been  apparent
    that there was no need to take the point but we cannot understand  from
    the determination how that can be right.  It seems to us that  this  is
    an important part of the appellant's  case  which  has  just  not  been
    resolved. Although it is clear that this is a case where the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has gone about the task carefully,  somehow  this  point
    has been overlooked and this is not  something  that  can  be  remedied
    easily.  It goes to the very core  of  the  case  and  means  that  the
    determination is unsatisfactory to the point we have to  set  it  aside
    and rule that the case has to be heard again.

10. We therefore set aside the  decision  and  allow  the  appeal  to  that
    extent.

11. Certain points were resolved in the favour of  the  appellant  and  not
    everything in the determination has been discredited.

12. When the case is reconsidered the principles of  Devaseelan  (Secretary
    of State for the Home  Department  v  D  (Tamil)  [2002]  UKIAT  00702*
    (formerly known as Devaseelan)) will apply and  the  existing  findings
    should stand as a starting point but it is not our intention to tie the
    hands of the First-tier Tribunal.  It  must  decide  the  case  on  the
    totality of the evidence before it  taking  as  a  starting  point  the
    favourable findings that have already been made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 May 2014                    |








