
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: AA/07715/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |      Decision & Reasons           |
|On 7 May 2017                      |Promulgated                        |
|                                   |On 9 May 2017                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                         AMIR JAHANDIDEH aka MARDAN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr J Nicholson counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:       Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 3 June 1981 and is a national of Iran.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on 13 September  2016  which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  14
   December 2015 to refuse his claim for refugee  protection  based  on  his
   claim that he was of adverse interest to the Iranian authorities  because
   of his political opinions and religious beliefs.
The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Thorne ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision.
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing:
   a) That the Judge failed adequately to engage with the  medical  evidence
      contained  in  Dr  Lords  report  which  confirmed  that  scars   were
      diagnostic of his claimed torture.
   b) The Judge erred in that he arrived at a  negative  assessment  of  the
      Appellants credibility before considering the medical evidence.
   c) The Judge erred in failing to take account of the internet posts  that
      the  Appellant  submitted  on  the  day  of   hearing   which   albeit
      untranslated contained  visual  material  that  was  critical  of  the
      regime.
7.  On 23 November 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom  refused  permission
   to appeal. The application was renewed and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer
   gave permission to appeal.

8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Nicholson  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) What the Judge wrote at paragraphs 54-55 was critical in that arguably
      he had already made up  his  mind  about  the  Appellants  credibility
      before he considered the medical evidence.

   b) The Judge only noted that the Appellant had PTSD but did not note  his
      physical injuries.

   c) In relation to the Facebook entries they  were  untranslated  but  the
      Judge admitted them. Evidence was adduced in relation to the poet Karo
      and was  referenced  in  the  submissions.  Nothing  in  the  decision
      reflected consideration of that evidence.

   d) The Judge did not deal with  the  issue  of  the  Appellants  lack  of
      beliefs and the risk this posed other than at paragraph 58 and what he
      said was inadequate.

   e) The Judge failed to fully engage with the risk factors set out in  SSH
      when determining the risk on return at paragraph 59.

   f) The Judge failed to specifically consider those  factors  set  out  in
      paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules in  particular  the  delay  in
      making a decision and not all of the delay was the Appellants fault.

9. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Bates submitted that :

   a) In relation to the delay it was open to the Judge  to  find  that  the
      Appellant had failed to apply for asylum promptly and that this was in
      fact relevant to his overall credibility.

   b) In relation to the diagnostic findings the Appellant claimed  that  he
      had been assaulted while the Judge may have accepted  that  the  Judge
      had injuries as a result of  a  beating  he  had  to  assess  if  that
      occurred in the way the Appellant described.

   c)  While  the  Judge  allowed  the  Appellant  to  adduce  the  Facebook
      screenshots as they were untranslated they had no context.

   d) The Judge was also entitled to take into account that  the  events  in
      issue occurred 17 years ago: he claimed that the  events  occurred  in
      1999 and he had returned to Iran in 2003 without any problem.

   e) In relation to SSH and the risk on return the Appellant was  simply  a
      failed asylum seeker and therefore the finding that he was not at risk
      was open to him.

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

11. The decision of the Judge is  challenged  on  the  basis  that  he  made
   adverse credibility findings and then rejected the  medical  evidence  on
   that basis. I am satisfied that this suggestion is based on a failure  to
   read the decision fairly and as a whole. The Judge in his  decision  sets
   out in some detail the Appellants claim including the claim that  he  was
   detained and tortured by the Iranian authorities at paragraph 5 and  this
   was confirmed in both his witness statement and oral evidence  which  the
   Judge took into account. The Judge details paragraph  22  the  Appellants
   claims about his torture and the associated findings  as  set  out  in  a
   medical report from Dr Lord dated 19.11.201.

12. In reaching his decision the structure  of  the  findings  is  that  the
   Judge set out at paragraph 49-53 a number of significant adverse findings
   based on the Appellants immigration history including: the use of a false
   passport;  a claim for asylum in the UK in 2006 then  leaving  for  Japan
   before it was resolved using a second false passport; A claim for  asylum
   in the UK in 2007 using a false name and date  of  birth;  Absconding  ;A
   claim for asylum on 20/10/2009 ;An application for  voluntary  return  to
   Iran  on  29/11/09  ;Failure  to  contact  the  Respondent  again   until
   11/04/2014.

13. The Judge then specifically at paragraph 54 states that in reaching  the
   conclusion that the Appellant was not an honest or  reliable  witness  he
   had taken into account the medical evidence. The Judges analysis  of  the
   medical evidence at paragraph 22 which has not itself been challenged  as
   incorrect is that anal rape could not be confirmed or refuted;  the  stab
   in the eye while  it  occurred  could  have  been  an  accident;  it  was
   impossible to say that he had been slapped; the scars  to  his  face  and
   foot and arm were diagnostic of blows and there had at some point been  a
   diagnosis of PTSD. In S v SSHD 2006 EWCA Civ 1153  the  Court  of  Appeal
   said that an error of law only arose in  this  type  of  situation  where
   there was artificial separation amounting to a  structural  failing,  and
   not where there was a mere error of appreciation of the medical evidence.
    Mibanga was distinguished.  In that case, the medical evidence had  been
   so powerful and extraordinary that it took the case into  an  exceptional
   area.  The Court of Appeal said that HE (2004) UKIAT 00321  was  relevant
   to the case in so far as, where medical evidence merely confirmed that  a
   person's physical condition was consistent with his claim, the effect  of
   the evidence was only  not  to  negate  the  claim.   It  did  not  offer
   significant separate support for the claim.  The CA said that Mibanga was
   not to be regarded as laying down a rule of law as to the order in  which
   judicial fact finders were to approach evidential material  before  them.
   In this case an explanation as to why the medical evidence did not  carry
   weight had been given by the IJ. I am satisfied that the medical evidence
   in this case did not offer significant separate  support  for  the  claim
   because while some of the injuries were diagnostic of  blows  they  could
   not , of course, corroborate in this case the sort of incident  that  led
   to such blows. Given the findings made as a whole as  to  the  Appellants
   credibility the Judge was entitled to reject the Appellants claim  as  to
   who inflicted the blows and did so looking at the evidence as a whole.

14. In relation to the Judges approach to the  internet  evidence  in  would
   appear that the Judge allowed the Appellant  to  adduce  on  the  day  of
   hearing the Appellants Facebook Pages ad blog pages. The weight  that  he
   gave to such documents was a matter for him in the overall context of the
   adverse credibility findings he had made. He  adduced  such  evidence  in
   part to support his claim that he had a lack of  religious  beliefs  that
   would draw adverse attention to him from  the  Iranian  authorities.  The
   Judge at paragraph 58 was entitled to give little weight to the documents
   because firstly they were untranslated and also because  he  was  clearly
   not satisfied that they had been 'published on the  internet':  the  fact
   that an Appellant has a blog or indeed a Facebook page does not mean that
   either are publicly accessible as 'settings' for these on  the  internet,
   public or private, were not adduced in evidence.  He was thus entitled to
   find that there was nothing before him to suggest  that  the  authorities
   were aware of the existence of the blog or his Facebook page.

15. In the light of all his findings the Judge was entitled to  conclude  at
   paragraph 59 that the Appellant was simply  a  failed  asylum  seeker  on
   return and would not be  of  interest:  he  gave  a  brief  but  adequate
   analysis of SSH.

16. In relation to the claim that the Judge  failed  to  adequately  address
   paragraph 353B of the Rules I note that no such allegation  was  made  in
   the grounds of appeal and no notice was given of any intention  to  amend
   the grounds of appeal in accordance with the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Immigration Rules 2014. However even if there had been  such  a
   ground of appeal while I accept that the Judge did not specifically refer
   to paragraph 353B I am satisfied that in his comprehensive  and  detailed
   assessment of the circumstances of this case that  the  Judge  took  into
   account all relevant factors. The only matter that Mr Nicholson  appeared
   to be able to identify which the Judge had not specifically  referred  to
   was the delay. However given the uncontested immigration history set  out
   in the decision I am satisfied that it  is  difficult  to  identify  what
   period of delay Mr Nicholson relies on that was attributable to any  lack
   of action by the Respondent and which would outweigh  the  other  factors
   identified in the case to justify a grant of leave outside the Rules.

17. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

18. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

19. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
8.5.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell









