
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07318/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |           Decision and Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On  20 November 2015                     |           On 11 December 2015       |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     aYk
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Andrew Joseph, Counsel, instructed by Wick and
Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 4 September  2014  refusing  to  grant  him
    asylum and to remove him to Eritrea.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born in 1985. He claims  that  he
    is a Pentecostal Christian and was arrested and detained  on  7  August
    2012 after being caught at a Pentecostal  gathering.  He  then  escaped
    from detention on 20 October 2012 and left Eritrea for Sudan by car and
    on foot on 29 October 2012. His family  helped  him  to  pay  $3000  to
    leave. He was taken to the British embassy in Khartoum to apply  for  a
    visa. He does not know whether  the  passport  used  was  forged  or  a
    genuine passport obtained in the appellant's identity through  the  use
    of bribery. The respondent confirms that the appellant  applied  for  a
    student visa unsuccessfully on  21  May  2013  and  successfully  on  1
    October 2013. He arrived in the UK by air on 28 October 2013,  claiming
    that the agent kept his passport. He  claimed  asylum  on  29  November
    2013.

 4. The respondent accepted identity and nationality but  decided  that  to
    obtain an Eritrean passport the  appellant  would  have  to  be  either
    working for the government or requiring a student visa  on  grounds  of
    education. The respondent did not accept that the passport and  student
    visa were forged documents. The respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant would have been issued with a passport on 12 December 2012 if
    he was wanted in Eritrea as a  Pentecostal  Christian.  The  respondent
    rejected the appellant's claim to be a Pentecostal Christian or that he
    was detained, escaped detention and left Eritrea illegally.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Newport on 22  December  2014.  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's evidence regarding his escape was extraordinarily vague and
    that he had not established that he left Eritrea illegally or that  the
    passport that he obtained in Sudan was not properly issued to  him.  He
    was not telling the truth about how he obtained the  passport.  He  was
    able to travel on an original and valid  passport  and  therefore  fell
    into a category  of  person  to  whom  the  Eritrean  authorities  were
    prepared to afford passport facilities and he was not at any real  risk
    on return.

 6. The judge found that the letter dated 26 October 2014 from Pastor Simon
    Kabede ("the pastor's letter") had little weight in the absence of  the
    pastor to give evidence but gave positive weight to the  oral  evidence
    from  YH  and  MK  who  stated  that  the  appellant  was  genuinely  a
    Pentecostal Christian. The judge also  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    ability to answer questions about  the  Pentecostal  faith  during  his
    asylum interview gave rise to no apparent  discrepancies.  Nonetheless,
    the judge attached  little  weight  to  the  appellant's  assertion  in
    respect of his past or current religious convictions. His attendance at
    a Pentecostal Church in the UK added little weight to his  appeal  even
    supported as it was by the evidence of the witnesses  who  attested  to
    his commitment and sincerity.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  judge
    had failed to make any findings in relation to the appellant's national
    service and whether as a result he would be at risk as a deserter.  The
    appellant had been called for further military service in  2012  whilst
    being employed as a statistician for the Ministry  of  Defence  in  his
    capacity as a national service recruit. The judge also failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for discounting the independent witness evidence about
    the appellant's commitment and sincerity in his  church  attendance  in
    the UK. The refusal to accept that the pastor was unable to  attend  on
    22 December; 3 days before Christmas was also considered unreasonable.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Reeds  on  15
    May 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge  failed  to
    give reasons why she rejected  his  account  of  his  practice  of  the
    Pentecostal faith in the UK. It was open to  the  judge  to  reach  the
    conclusion that she did in respect of the pastor's attendance.  It  was
    also arguable that the judge did not consider the  appellant's  account
    of having deserted from  national  service  when  considering  risk  on
    return.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 12 June  2015,  the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  properly
    considered the  evidence  of  the  two  witnesses  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's faith. The judge properly recorded that it was part of  the
    appellant's case that he was at risk on return  for  illegal  exit  and
    draft evasion. The expert report did not provide any  basis  to  depart
    from the substantial assessment of MO (illegal exit - risk  on  return)
    Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

11. Mr Joseph submitted that the headline point was illegal exit. The judge
    confused the passport with an exit  visa  and  the  reasoning  is  thus
    fundamentally flawed. Paragraph 20 of MO applies. Even if the appellant
    had a valid passport that does not reduce risk on return. Paragraph  96
    of MO states that it is possible to obtain a passport in Sudan but that
    does not establish anything either way  about  exit  visas.  The  judge
    found both witnesses as to Pentecostal faith credible and there were no
    arguable grounds to dismiss  the  appeal.  Practising  the  Pentecostal
    faith in the UK would be a risk factor in  Eritrea  but  that  was  not
    addressed by the judge. The appellant was  under  the  control  of  the
    agent when he arrived in the UK and the one  month  delay  in  claiming
    asylum does not reduce  the  risk  factors  on  return.  The  appellant
    arrived with an 18 month student visa valid from  30  May  2013  to  28
    February 2015.

12. Mr Richards submitted in reply that the decision was not flawed and the
    judge considered all of the evidence before reaching  conclusions.  The
    appellant left Eritrea legally with his own passport that was issued in
    Eritrea and he had a visa to come to the UK. The appellant had to prove
    that he left illegally. He  could  have  done  that  by  producing  his
    passport without an exit visa  but  he  has  instead  disposed  of  his
    passport. The judge was  entitled  to  find  at  paragraph  33  of  the
    decision that the appellant did not leave Eritrea illegally. The  judge
    was also entitled to find that attendance at a  Pentecostal  church  in
    the UK did not add weight to the claim. The judge did take the  witness
    evidence into account but the appellant still failed to reach  the  low
    evidential standard. The decision should stand.

13. Mr Joseph further submitted that the appellant said that he came to the
    UK with the agent who  took  the  passport  off  him.  The  premise  in
    paragraph 35 is flawed because the issue of obtaining a passport is not
    the same as obtaining an exit visa. The appellant's account  is  wholly
    consistent with the objective evidence because he was issued  with  the
    passport in Sudan. The judge failed to engage with the categories in MO
    - those  in  the  appellant's  category  almost  inevitable  have  left
    illegally. The procedure to obtain an exit visa is set out in paragraph
    20 of MO and the passport would not have had an exit visa.  There  were
    two applications for a student visa and it would be highly  unusual  if
    the appellant had been granted an exit visa.

14. I find that the key paragraphs of MO are 113-116 which  I  set  out  in
    full;
    "113.    Nevertheless, we do think the  evidence  now  before  us  does
    require us to be less ready to conclude that non-credible Eritreans who
    left Eritrea after August/ September 2008 did so lawfully. Put  another
    way, we do consider that this evidence is now  sufficiently  strong  in
    most cases to counteract negative credibility findings in  relation  to
    an appellant's evidence (see MA (Somalia) para 33).  We regard  August/
    September 2008 as the turning point because there is credible  evidence
    indicating  that  that  was  the  point  in  time  when  the   Eritrean
    authorities, angered by the growing number of cases of persons who  had
    been granted exit visas who had then failed to return, decided  to  put
    their foot down by suspending exit visa facilities. (We put the date at
    August/September to reflect the fact that some  reports,  e.g.  the  US
    State Department report for 2008, locate the date of this suspension as
    being August). We are aware that the British Embassy, Asmara letter  of
    22 February 2011 seeks to cast doubt on whether there was ever  such  a
    suspension. However, we note that  Professor  Kibreab's  evidence  that
    there was such a suspension is supported by several other  sources,  in
    particular UNHCR, the US State  Department  report  for  2008  and  the
    Aswate.com website,  which  the  Tribunal  in  MA  at  para  336  found
    reliable, noting that it was described by Dr Pool  (another  expert  in
    that case on whom that Tribunal found they  could  place  reliance)  as
    independent of opposition political parties and  although  critical  of
    the Eritrean Government, one that he found:
        "... to be one of the most reliable because it is  rare  to  see  a
        website that corrects itself if subsequently proven to be wrong  on
        factual errors and it is a website on which the Home  Office  often
        relies, indeed it is exemplified by the fact that it is  quoted  in
        this COI".
114. It is true that Professor Kibreab's evidence is also  that  since  that
    suspension the exit visa facility has re-opened, but it is also that it
    has done so on a more limited basis.

115. We appreciate that in the context of a  case  in  which  the  decision-
    maker has found a  claimant/appellant  wholly  lacking  in  credibility
    (save in relation to sex and perhaps age and/or date of departure  from
    Eritrea and health), it is difficult  to  see  any  basis  for  finding
    conclusively that they would not  fall within  one  of  the  above  two
    categories (highly trusted government officials and their  families  or
    those  who  are  themselves  members  of  the  military  or   political
    leadership; members of ministerial staff recommended by the  department
    to attend studies abroad). But  at  least  in  a  range  of  cases  the
    evidence may be such as to make it clear that the  claimant  concerned,
    albeit wholly or largely lacking in credibility,  could  not  have  any
    links with government officials or the regime's inner circle and  could
    not have an education or skills profile making it likely they have been
    civil servants or have an educational bent (e.g. if they are  found  to
    come from a rural part of Eritrea and have had no secondary schooling).
    What may be involved here  sometimes  is  clearer  recognition  by  the
    decision-maker that when finding a claimant wholly incredible they  are
    not in fact meaning that they lack  credibility  in  every  conceivable
    particular, since they may in fact accept, for example, that  they  are
    from a rural background and lack education.

116. The general position concerning illegal  exit  remains,  therefore,  as
    expressed in MA, namely that illegal exit by a person of or approaching
    draft age and not medically unfit cannot be assumed if  they  had  been
    found wholly incredible. However, if such a person  is  found  to  have
    left Eritrea  on  or  after  August/September  2008,  it  may  be  that
    inferences can be drawn from uncontentious personal data recorded on an
    appellant as to their level of education or their skills profile as  to
    whether legal exit was feasible."

15. In this appeal, the judge found at paragraph 35 of  the  decision  that
    the appellant had not established that he  left  Eritrea  illegally  or
    that the passport he obtained in Sudan was not properly issued to  him.
    However, the appellant had already left Eritrea by the time he  arrived
    in Sudan and there is no analysis as to how the appellant fell into the
    limited category of Eritreans who might be issued with  an  exit  visa.
    The judge found at paragraph 38 of the decision that the appellant fell
    into a category of person to whom the Eritrean authorities are prepared
    to afford passport facilities but that is not the same thing as an exit
    visa.

16. In addition, the judge has not  made  findings  about  the  appellant's
    national service. The  appellant's  evidence  was  that  he  was  still
    subject to national service which raises  the  risk  that  he  will  be
    treated as a deserter on return. That risk  is  not  addressed  in  the
    decision.

17. Taking those matters as a whole, I find that the  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error  of  law
    and the decision cannot stand. I have not found it  necessary  to  make
    findings in relation to the Pentecostal faith issue  although  it  will
    clearly be important to the appellant to call evidence from a pastor at
    the re-hearing. The judge was entitled to give  little  weight  to  the
    pastor's letter.

Decision

18. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.



Signed   [pic]                      Date 1 December 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


