

                                [pic]

  Upper Tribunal

  (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal
Number: AA/07054/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

 Heard at Field House
 Decision & Reasons Promulgated
 On 11 March 2016                                   On 17 March 2016






                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                                     ZR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


             Appellant


                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent





 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Ms N Braganza, counsel instructed by Harrow Law
 Centre
 For the Respondent:   Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                         DECISION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Bart-Stewart, promulgated
     on 15 December 2015.

  2.  Permission to appeal was granted on 21  January  2016  by  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Andrew.




     Background


  3. The appellant, now aged 15, arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 October
     2014, having entered the United Kingdom clandestinely. He applied  for
     asylum on 20 October 2014.

  4. The basis of the appellant's asylum  claim  before  the  Secretary  of
     State was that he is from Nangahar province and lived there  with  his
     parents and three siblings. He is  in  contact  with  his  mother  who
     continues to reside on the family farm with  two  of  the  appellant's
     siblings. The appellant attended school for around three years,  until
     either 2012 or 2013. His mother  stopped  him  from  attending  school
     after receiving threatening letters from the Taliban. The  appellant's
     father  was  a  policeman  and  was  killed  in  the  course  of  duty
     approximately seven years ago. The appellant's brother Z, was shot  by
     the Taliban because he refused to join them. Very  shortly  thereafter
     the appellant went to  live  with  his  sister  and  her  husband  and
     remained with them until he left Afghanistan.

  5. The Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusal letter of  8  April  2015
     explained that it was accepted that there  was  a  Refugee  Convention
     reason and that the appellant was  an  Afghan  national.  It  was  not
     accepted that the appellant's father was killed by the Taliban,  owing
     to inconsistencies between the appellant's witness statement  and  his
     interview record.  It was accepted that his brother was killed by  the
     Taliban. The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant  was
     targeted by the Taliban and further, decided that the appellant  would
     be able to return to his family network in Afghanistan for protection.
     It was also considered reasonable for the appellant and his family  to
     relocate.

  6. In addition, the respondent provided reasons as to why  she  had  been
     unable to comply with her duty to endeavour to trace  the  appellant's
     family in Afghanistan, that being that the appellant had not  provided
     any substantial contact details. Contact would  be  made  and  in  the
     meantime the appellant's removal would be  delayed  until  appropriate
     reception arrangements  were  established.  Regard  was  also  had  to
     section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
     however the conclusion was that the appellant's  best  interests  were
     served by him leaving the United Kingdom and being reunited  with  his
     family in Afghanistan. Consideration  was  also  given  to  Article  8
     within the Rules, however the appellant was said to be unable to  meet
     any of  the  requirements.  There  were  said  to  be  no  exceptional
     circumstances and it was considered that the appellant's removal  from
     the United Kingdom was appropriate. The accompanying  asylum  decision
     stated that the appellant would be granted leave to enter  the  United
     Kingdom until 8 October 2017.

  7. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the
     appellant and his solicitor, Mr J Jimenez,  gave  evidence.  The  FTTJ
     accepted "the entirety" of the appellant's claim  including  that  his
     father was killed by the Taliban. Nonetheless, the FTTJ did not accept
     that the Taliban would be targeting him, as a  13-year  old  boy;  nor
     that  the  appellant  was  at  real  risk  of  ill-treatment.  It  was
     considered that it had not been explained why the  appellant's  family
     had not  relocated  from  the  local  area  rather  than  sending  the
     appellant to the United Kingdom.



      Error of law


    8. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that firstly,  that  the
       FTTJ made no findings as to the evidence of Mr  Jimenez,  which  went
       directly to the issue of the availability of  relocation.   Secondly,
       that the FTTJ provided no reasons for her finding  that  the  Taliban
       would not target a  13-year  old  boy.  Thirdly,  the  aforementioned
       finding was contrary to the evidence  showing  that  the  Taliban  do
       target 13-year old males. Lastly, it was said that the FTTJ failed to
       assess whether relocation would be unduly harsh and failed  to  apply
       the evidence.

    9. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

   10. The Secretary of  State's  response  indicated  that  the  respondent
       opposed the appeal as it was considered that the  FTTJ  appropriately
       directed herself. The grounds were said to be mere disagreement.


 The hearing


 11. Ms Braganza referred to the "strikingly brief" decision and reasons of
     the FTTJ in this case. She indicated that she  had  discussed  matters
     with Mr Parkinson and they were in agreement that the decision of  the
     FTTJ could not stand as it was.  Ms Braganza  requested  that  I  find
     that the FTTJ's positive credibility findings should stand.  She  also
     intended to rely on an updated expert report and there was said to  be
     a new development, addressed by the appellant in his  further  witness
     statement.

 12. Mr Parkinson confirmed that his view was that the decision was unsafe.
     He was concerned with the findings of fact being retained because  the
     issue of the solicitor's evidence was relevant to  the  issue  of  the
     fate of the appellant's father. There had been no clear findings on Mr
     Jimenez' evidence.

 13. In reply, Ms Braganza disagreed,  arguing  that  the  FTTJ's  positive
     findings could stand.

 14. At the end of the hearing I allowed the appeal, finding that the  FTTJ
     had made material errors of law for identical reasons to  those  given
     in the application and agreed by the representatives before me.

 15. With regard to whether the FTTJ's finding that the appellant's  father
     was killed ought to be preserved, I note the finding in  question  was
     made without any reference to the witness statement or  oral  evidence
     of Mr Jimenez, who spoke to the appellant's mother on  the  telephone.
     His statement, at paragraphs 6(e) and (f) reveals that  the  issue  of
     the death of the appellant's father was discussed at some length.

 16. Given the brevity of the decision and the errors disclosed, I declined
     to preserve any of the previous findings.






 17. An anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  FTTJ  and  I  consider  it
     appropriate that this be continued and therefore  make  the  following
     anonymity direction:

        "Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "


Conclusions


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
     making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision of the FTTJ, with no findings preserved.


     The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo
     hearing before any judge except FTTJ Bart-Stewart.





 Signed     Date: 12 March 2016


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara






 -----------------------
Appeal Number: AA/07054/2015


4



