
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07744/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 September 2015                          |On 30 September 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               mk (Sri Lanka)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Alison Pickup, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
                    Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms Ashika Vijiwala, Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has been  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal taken  under  the
    detention fast track procedure ("DFT") whereby the First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State to  refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  otherwise
    requiring international protection.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    make an anonymity direction, but I consider that the  appellant  should
    be accorded anonymity as he is a vulnerable adult and his case is  that
    he has a well-founded fear of persecution at the hand of  state  agents
    in the country of return.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka and his date of  birth  is  29
    December 1994.  He claims to have left Sri Lanka by plane on 7 February
    2014, and to have arrived in Denmark on 9 February 2014.   He  said  he
    made his way to Italy and then travelled to Belgium, before arriving in
    the United Kingdom hidden in the boot of a car on 5 September 2014.  On
    9 September 2014 he contacted the AIU  and  on  15  September  2014  he
    claimed asylum, and was inducted into  the  fast  track  process.   The
    screening interview took place on 15 September  2014,  and  his  asylum
    interview at Harmondsworth  took  place  on  30  September  2014.   The
    Reasons for Refusal Letter was issued to him the next day on 1  October
    2014.  His appeal was initially due to be heard at Harmondsworth on  10
    October 2014, but on the day of the hearing his representative  applied
    successfully for an adjournment.  The adjournment was granted so as  to
    enable his representatives to commission a medical  report  to  support
    his allegation that he had been subjected to anal rape on the  occasion
    of his third alleged detention by the army, which  he  said  had  taken
    place in December 2013.

 3. The appellant's appeal  came  before  Judge  Chana  for  a  hearing  at
    Harmondsworth on 24 October 2014.  At the outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr
    Lingajorthy made an application for the case to be taken  out  of  fast
    track. They had obtained a  psychiatric  report  from  Medical  Justice
    dated 30 September 2014 (following an interview with the patient on  26
    September 2014) which stated that the appellant had not been offered  a
    medical examination or treatment with regards to his rape history.  The
    appellant reported symptoms which were consistent with his  account  of
    torture and sexual assault.  He needed to have  a  further  substantial
    medical examination to verify fully his history of torture  and  sexual
    assault.  He also required a psychologist to give him treatment.

 4. Mr  Lingajorthy  further  submitted  that  he  had  not  been  able  to
    communicate with the appellant, and he could not get a coherent  answer
    from him earlier in the day when he was  trying  to  take  instructions
    from him.  He said an appointment had been made for the appellant on  9
    November 2014 for an internal medical examination to see if he had been
    raped.  He also wanted to commission a second psychiatric report.   The
    previous psychiatric report did not say that the appellant was unfit to
    give evidence, but a further report  would  elaborate  on  that.   Both
    reports would be available by the end of November 2014.  Mr Lingajorthy
    reminded the judge that the Rule 35 report on the appellant  said  that
    he might have been a victim of torture.

 5. Mr Maine on behalf of the Home Office opposed the application  to  take
    the appeal out of fast track.  The last hearing had been adjourned  for
    a medical report on his allegations of anal rape, and this was supposed
    to have been completed within ten days.  There was no explanation as to
    why this had not been done.  The appellant had given  evidence  at  his
    screening interview and asylum interview where he had answered some 400
    questions.  He was therefore able to  give  evidence.   The  healthcare
    centre had indicated no concerns about the appellant, and had not  said
    that he was not suitable for detention or that he was not fit  to  give
    evidence.

 6. Judge Chana refused to take the case out of fast track, or  to  adjourn
    the  hearing,  as  she  was  not  satisfied  there   were   exceptional
    circumstances  that  demonstrated  the  appeal  could  not  be   justly
    determined  in  accordance  with  paragraph  30  of  the   Asylum   and
    Immigration Tribunal (Fast  Track  Procedure)  Rules.   She  took  into
    account that the Rule 35 report was based on  what  the  appellant  had
    told the doctor, and that the report was brief and only indicated  that
    he might have been a victim of torture.  She took into account that the
    body map in the report did not indicate  that  the  appellant  had  any
    scars on his body.  She took into account that the appellant claimed to
    have been raped about one and a half years ago  (in  fact  it  was  ten
    months ago) but had not asked for any treatment at  the  health  centre
    even though he claimed to be in acute pain.

 7. The judge also noted that,  during  his  solicitor's  submissions,  the
    appellant interjected and said that the nurses at the detention  centre
    had promised him some cream but they had not  given  it  to  him.   The
    judge said that this interjection by the appellant demonstrated to  her
    that the appellant understood the proceedings and was able to  get  his
    point across.

 8. Even if after a physical examination of his rectum, it was  found  that
    the appellant had some old scars, that in itself would not,  the  judge
    reflected, show that they were incurred in the  manner  stated  by  the
    appellant.

 9.  The  appellant  proceeded  to  give  oral  evidence  through  a  Tamil
    interpreter, and he adopted his witness statement which  he  signed  in
    court.  The appellant was cross-examined by the Presenting Officer.  In
    her subsequent determination, Judge Chana said that she  was  confident
    that the appellant had understood all the questions put to him,  as  he
    answered all the questions adequately.

10. The judge's findings of fact were set at paragraphs [38] onwards.   She
    said she had considered all  the  evidence  in  the  appeal,  including
    evidence to which she had not specifically referred.  She had looked at
    the appellant's evidence and had attempted to  decide  whether  it  was
    consistent and coherent.  She had also  considered  the  claim  in  the
    light of the background evidence on Sri Lanka.  The judge  went  on  to
    find that neither the appellant nor his family had ever had anything to
    do with the LTTE at all, and that his entire story was  a  fabrication.
    She found that the appellant was an economic migrant.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

11. The appellant's representatives applied on his behalf for permission to
    appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Ground  1  was  that  a  consultant
    psychiatrist of high professional standing and good repute,  namely  Dr
    Pook, had examined the appellant and had prepared a medico-legal report
    on his behalf (the Medical Justice  report  dated  30  September  2014)
    which had been made available to the First-tier Tribunal prior  to  the
    hearing on 24 October  2014.   The  report  supported  the  appellant's
    account that he had been a victim of torture, and it was central to the
    appellant's credibility.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  not  even
    mentioned its existence in her determination, which showed that she had
    not considered it.

12. Ground 2 was that the judge had been wrong not to grant an adjournment.
     She ought  to  have  accepted  Mr  Lingajorthy's  submission  that  by
    inducting his case into the fast track process,  the  Home  Office  had
    done a grave injustice to the appellant.  She ought to have accepted Mr
    Lingajorthy's submission that ten days was too short a period  for  the
    appellant to obtain a further medical report, and to have taken  proper
    account of his submissions that he  had  been  unable  to  take  proper
    instructions from the appellant that day, which he  attributed  to  the
    appellant's precarious mental health condition.

The Initial Refusal of Permission

13. On 30 October 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Blandy refused  permission
    to appeal, holding that it was not  arguable  that  there  had  been  a
    procedural impropriety in the judge refusing the application to  remove
    the case from fast track.

The Eventual Grant of Permission following a JR challenge

14. A renewed application for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  to  Upper
    Tribunal,  and  and  permission  was   apparently   refused.    I   say
    "apparently" because the relevant refusal notice is not in the file  or
    in the core bundle.  Instead there is a  notice  of  decision  dated  6
    November 2014 issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Warr in respect of another
    appellant in a different appeal.

15. The appellant successfully applied for judicial review of the  decision
    to refuse him permission to appeal.  On 20  April  2015  Deputy  Master
    Knapman made an order quashing the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    refuse permission to appeal.

16. On 11 May 2015 Vice President Ockelton granted the appellant permission
    to appeal in the light of the decision of the High Court.  He  reminded
    the parties that the Upper Tribunal's task was that set out in  Section
    12 of the 2007 Act.

The Rule 24 Response

17. On 21 May 2015 Karen Pal of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a  Rule
    24  response  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  opposing   the
    appellant's appeal.  She submitted that the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had directed herself appropriately.   She  had  made  adequate
    findings of fact and given cogent  reasons  for  those  findings.   The
    judge properly found the appellant would not be at risk  on  return  to
    Sri Lanka, applying the country guidance case of GJ.

Further Representations from the Appellant's Solicitors

18. On 27 August 2015 the appellant's solicitors wrote to the President  of
    the Upper Tribunal inviting the court of its own motion  to  allow  the
    appeal on the papers, to set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de
    novo hearing.  The solicitors relied on the outcome of Detention Action
    v First-tier Tribunal (IAC) & Others [2015] EWHC 1689 in which  it  was
    declared that the fast track Rules governing asylum appeals were  ultra
    vires.  This decision had been upheld by Master of the  Rolls  in  Lord
    Chancellor v Detention Action [2015] EWCA Civ  849.   In  DA/02456/2013
    the  President  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  pronounced  himself
    satisfied that there was a procedural irregularity in  the  proceedings
    under Rule 32(2)(d) as it was common ground between  the  parties  that
    the fast track Procedure Rules were ultra vires following the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in Detention Action.  Further,  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice for the decisions to be set aside.

19. In response, Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson, Principal Resident  Judge  of
    the Upper Tribunal (IAC), said the first step was  to  suggest  to  the
    President of the First-tier Tribunal that he should aside the  decision
    under appeal in the Upper Tribunal.  If he chose to do so, no doubt the
    solicitors would notify the Upper Tribunal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

20. At the hearing before me, Ms Vijiwala conceded at the outset  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside, and  that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing.

21. Miss Pickup acknowledged that this was an acceptable outcome,  but  she
    invited me to go further.   She  submitted  that  I  should  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on the ground that the decision appealed against was
    not in accordance with the law.  She relied on concessions made by  the
    respondent at the hearing in R (JM and Others) v SSHD on 3 July 2015.

22. The appellant was a vulnerable applicant and this was or ought to  have
    been obvious to  the  respondent  from  the  outset.   Her  failure  to
    identify  him  as  potentially  vulnerable  at  any  stage,   including
    following the receipt of a Rule 35 report, and/or to allow further time
    for clinical investigation of  his  case,  was  characteristic  of  the
    systemic failings in the DFT procedure which had led to its  suspension
    on 2 July 2015 and the Secretary of State's concessions at the  hearing
    in R (JM and Others) on 3 July 2015.  While  the  respondent  may  only
    have conceded that there was a systemic problem with the  operation  of
    the DFT in 2015, the specific failings which led to her to  agree  that
    she should reconsider the asylum decisions in the claimant's cases in R
    (JM and Others) also  arose  in  this  case.   There  was  no  material
    difference.  Subjecting the appellant to  an  unlawful  and  inherently
    unfair procedure for deciding his asylum claim resulted in  a  decision
    that was itself unlawful.  So the appeal  should  be  allowed  on  that
    basis.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

23. In the light of Ms Vijiwala's concession and the stance  taken  by  the
    President  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  DFT  appeals
    generally, the reasons for finding a material error of law can  be  set
    out very briefly.

24. Firstly, the appellant was deprived of a fair hearing of his appeal  in
    the First-tier Tribunal on account of his appeal being dealt with under
    the DFT procedure; and, in particular, on account of the appellant  not
    being given sufficient time  to  marshal  all  the  evidence  which  he
    required to present his case effectively.



25. Secondly, Judge Chana failed to acknowledge the  independent  probative
    value of the psychiatric report from Dr Pook of  Medical  Justice.  She
    opined that the appellant was displaying symptoms  of  PTSD  consistent
    with his account of ill treatment in detention.  As a result  of  Judge
    Chana not engaging with this  expert  evidence,  her  findings  on  the
    appellant's account of past persecution were fatally flawed,  rendering
    her findings on future risk potentially unsafe.

Future Disposal

26. The more difficult question is whether the appeal should be allowed  on
    the ground that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law  or
    whether the appeal should be simply remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a de novo  hearing.   Having  carefully  considered  Miss  Pickup's
    submissions, and the evidence upon which she  relies,  I  resolve  this
    question in favour of the Secretary of  State,  for  a  combination  of
    reasons, both merits based and procedural.

27. On the merits, I accept that  the  case  advanced  by  Miss  Pickup  is
    arguable, but the case for this appellant is not as strong as the cases
    for the successful claimants in JM and Others.

28. By an agreed order made by Master Gidden on  19  March  2014  the  four
    claimants were selected  as  representative  lead  cases  in  which  to
    decide, inter alia, whether since 5 January 2015 the DFT had  been  and
    was being operated lawfully and  fairly  in  identifying  and  ensuring
    release of cases unsuitable for fair determination and detention in the
    DFT process.

29. In a subsequent agreed order, the Secretary of State accepted that each
    of the lead claimants was vulnerable but that the DFT systems  operated
    by her had failed to identify them as such  and/or  as  consequentially
    unsuitable for a fair and quick determination in the DFT in  accordance
    with the DFT policy. She accepted that each of their  cases  could  not
    have been fairly determined in the DFT because  each  required  further
    clinical investigation into their claims of torture, ill-treatment,  or
    other vulnerability which could not be obtained in the DFT process; and
    it was accepted in each of their  cases  that  this  should  have  been
    apparent at screening.  The Secretary of State also  accepted  that  in
    each of the cases, the Rule 35 report should have resulted  in  release
    from the DFT because it was clear that a quick decision  could  not  be
    taken fairly and the claimants  required  an  opportunity  for  further
    investigations into their claims for torture,  ill-treatment  or  other
    vulnerability.  Each claim was, therefore,  wrongly  processed  in  the
    DFT.

30. In the case of RE and MY, the Secretary of State agreed to withdraw the
    refusals of asylum under the DFT and to reconsider their claims.   With
    respect to the case of KW, the Secretary of State agreed to  reconsider
    her case, if she was requested to do so.  The outcome  for  the  fourth
    claimant, RE, is not specified.

31. As I explored with Miss Pickup in oral argument, the cases  of  RE,  MY
    and KW are objectively stronger than the  appellant's  case.   This  is
    because the Rule 35 reports for these three claimants had attached body
    maps showing scarring and/or  other  visible  injuries.   The  probable
    reason for the differential treatment of KW's case as against the  case
    of JM and MW is that the Rule 35 report in KW's  case  noted  self-harm
    scars to KW's arms and a burn from a stick on her leg.  In  short,  the
    Rule 35 report was more consistent with self-harm than it was with  her
    account of being tortured in detention.  As for RE, the Rule 35  report
    set out the forms of torture which it was said that RE had experienced,
    including having two toes broken by prison officers.  The report  noted
    he had a deformity of the toes of the right foot, which  was  indicated
    on the body map attached to the report.   So,  looking  at  the  matter
    objectively, the body map in his case was not  strongly  supportive  of
    his account of torture, but was at best equivocal. This may explain why
    the Secretary of State is not recorded  as  agreeing  to  withdraw  the
    decision on his asylum claim, or to give him the option of  asking  for
    his asylum claim to be reconsidered.

32. On the procedural front, it was not part of the appellant's case before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana that she should allow the appeal on the
    ground that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

33. Moreover, I do not consider it is in  accordance  with  the  overriding
    objective to proceed down this route.  Firstly, on the topic of  future
    risk, the Secretary of State will continue to maintain that the  asylum
    claim is defeated by GJ, which is the position taken  in  the  Rule  24
    response. Secondly, a clinical examination of the appellant never  took
    place, and it is not envisaged that such an  examination  can  usefully
    take place now, so long after  the  event.  Thirdly,  in  a  subsequent
    psychiatric report, Dr Pook opined that the appellant's  mental  health
    had deteriorated sharply since her first assessment, and that he was no
    longer fit to give evidence.  In the light of this evidence, it is  not
    now proposed that the appellant  should  be  re-interviewed  about  his
    asylum claim.

Conclusion

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law, such that it shall be set aside.

Directions

35. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a
    de novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge Chana.  None  of  the
    findings of fact made by the previous Tribunal shall be preserved.

36. The appellant's solicitors are permitted to  serve  on  the  Presenting
    Officers' Unit and the First-tier Tribunal  an  expert  report  on  the
    appellant's current mental health condition, by 31 October 2015.

37. A Case Management Review hearing to consider the implications of such a
    report (if any), and the future progress of the appeal generally, shall
    be fixed by the appellant's solicitors at Taylor House in November 2015
    or as soon thereafter as can be arranged.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

























