
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07893/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 3 July 2013                                |on 4 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           MOHAMMED TAWHIDUL ISLAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Miss S Hoey, of Drummond Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr M Matthews,  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on  15  August  1983.   He
   appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clough,
   promulgated on 29 December 2011, dismissing his appeal on asylum  and  on
   all other grounds.



2) At paragraph 11 of her determination the judge found  the  appellant  not
   to be a credible witness.  She then set out the terms of a medical report
   and at paragraph 16 said:

    I have already found the appellant's accounts of his detention ...  not
    credible. While the appellant has scars  as  detailed  in  the  medical
    report, I do not accept that  they  were  caused  during  detention  in
    Pakistan.


3) Assessments of credibility must be  made  on  the  basis  of  a  holistic
   assessment of all the evidence, including  any  medical  report.   It  is
   incorrect to come to a negative assessment of credibility and then to ask
   whether that assessment is displaced by other material.   The  Presenting
   Officer conceded  that  this  case  falls  into  the  category  of  error
   described in Mibanga [2005] INLR 377.

4) Miss Hoey advised that at any further hearing  it  was  not  proposed  to
   take additional oral evidence from the appellant.   An  interpreter  need
   therefore not be booked.  The appellant may seek to file a further report
   on his mental condition.  No steps have yet been taken in  that  respect.
   The admission of any further report will be  a  question  for  the  judge
   rehearing the case.

5) The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  in  its
   entirety.  No findings are to stand.  Under section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
   2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of  judicial
   fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade is such that  it  is
   appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  member(s)
   of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to  reconsider  the  case  are  not  to
   include Judge Clough.





                               [pic]
                                4 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
