
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07442/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 September 2014 and 5 November 2014       |On 6 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     C I

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Nicholson, instructed by Greater Manchester
                   Immigration Aid   Unit


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik. For reasons given  in  his
    determination dated 31 December 2013, the judge allowed the  appeal  by
    the respondent (referred to in this determination as the claimant)  who
    is a national of Nigeria born 1970. She claimed asylum on 20 July  2011
    based on a fear as a former victim of trafficking and as the mother  of
    a child who faced FGM. In addition she feared harm from the person  who
    brought her to the UK.  She entered this country on 30 July 2005.   Her
    daughter was born on 8 August 2011.

 2. The Secretary of State gave directions for the claimant's removal on 22
    July 2013. In an accompanying letter of 19 July she explained  why  she
    did  not  accept  the  protection  claim.  The  reasons  included   the
    following:

    (i)  The claimant's correct identity is different from the one she  now
         relies on in the having regard to the passport used  in  connection
         with her journey to the United Kingdom.

    (ii)     Her daughter did not face a real risk of FGM in Nigeria.

    (iii)    The authorities in Nigeria were able to provide  the  claimant
         with effective protection.

    (iv)     It  was  considered  reasonable  to  expect  the  claimant  to
         approach women's shelters for help on her  return  should  this  be
         required.

    (v)  Internal relocation is available away from  Edo  State  where  the
         claimant had lived.  It was not accepted that the claimant faced  a
         real risk of persecution by M C, the person who  had  arranged  her
         journey to the United Kingdom in the light of the absence of recent
         contact and doubts whether an  attack  on  her  parents  had  taken
         place.

    (vi)     The claimant's case had been assessed by a competent authority
         (that she had been trafficked) and  as  to  her  future  fear,  the
         government in Nigeria had demonstrated willingness and  an  ability
         to counter trafficking; the claimant could report any  problems  to
         the police.

 3. The FtT judge made the following findings:

    (i)  The claimant is of the identity claimed.

    (ii)     A J, the father of  the  claimant's  child  is  not  a  German
         citizen nor was he exercising treaty rights as such in  the  United
         Kingdom. The judge was not satisfied on the evidence of the  status
         of A J in the United Kingdom, his nationality or even that he is in
         the UK at all.  He does not provide financial support for the child
         and the judge did not accept that the child and A  J  have  contact
         such that the decision to remove interferes with their rights under
         Article 8.

    (iii)    The claimant's fear of FGM  of  her  child  upon  returned  to
         Nigeria by her family was unfounded.

    (iv)     As to trafficking, there was no evidence before the judge that
         the claimant was trafficked by a gang and  no  evidence  that  M  C
         worked alone either.  Re-locating would not necessarily provide the
         claimant with a safe haven.

    (v)  The claimant would be returning with a young  child  as  a  former
         victim of  trafficking  with  no  family  support  and  accordingly
         internal relocation was not an option.

    (vi)     The claimant would be  at  risk  on  return  to  Nigeria  from
         traffickers or at risk of re-trafficking such that there would  not
         be sufficiency of protection.

 4. In her challenge to this determination, the Secretary  of  State  makes
    the point that the claimant has had  no  contact  with  her  trafficker
    since January 2006 and had only brought herself to the attention of the
    UKBA because her financial support had ended. The judge had also  noted
    that there was no evidence of the death of  the  claimant's  mother  or
    evidence that the incident involving  her  had  been   brought  to  the
    attention of the police.  The  judge  also  noted  that  the  competent
    authority had found that the claimant had failed to  substantiate  that
    she would be a danger from  MC or other  traffickers  in  the  form  of
    retribution or re-trafficking.

 5. The grounds of application also made reference to the other factors and
    argue that the judge had materially erred in failing to  give  adequate
    reasons why he had departed from the findings of  the  Tribunal  in  PO
    (trafficked women) (Nigeria) CG [2009] UKAIT 00046 as affirmed  by  the
    Court of Appeal in PO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ  132.  This  was
    with reference to the evidence of Miss Olategu-Olagbegi the author  for
    the report the FtT judge in the instant appeal had regard to.

 6. It is argued that the judge had made no clear  findings  regarding  the
    fate of the claimant's  parents  who,  if  they  had  been  treated  as
    claimed, would be indicative of gang involvement. If there had been  no
    gang involvement, it was arguable that the judge had erred  in  relying
    on the expert whose evidence on  sufficiency  of  protection  had  been
    subject to criticism by the Court of Appeal.

 7.  Mr  McVeety's  principal  submission  was  that  having  rejected  the
    credibility of the claimant with particular regard to  FGM,  the  judge
    had appeared to have forgotten that aspect when accepting the  evidence
    of the expert. It was as if these two aspects  of  the  case  had  been
    separated.

 8. Mr Nicholson resisted this submission arguing that the judge  had  been
    entitled to rely on the expert whose expertise  had  been  approved  in
    part by the Court of Appeal.

 9. My conclusions are as follows.

10. Mr McVeety  is  correct  that  although  the  judge  had  accepted  the
    claimant's credibility as to her identity, he had rejected her case  as
    not credible in quite forceful terms regarding the nationality  of  the
    father of her child, his status in the United Kingdom and A J's contact
    with the child. In addition and perhaps most significantly,  the  judge
    had rejected the factual basis on which the claimant had  advanced  her
    fear of FGM on her child. He concluded that the fear "by her family  to
    be unfounded".

11. The judge then turned to the  issue  of  trafficking  at  [23]  in  his
    determination.   After  noting  the  observations  by   the   Competent
    Authority including its credibility concerns but  also  its  conclusion
    that there was sufficient evidence on balance that the claimant  was  a
    victim of trafficking, the  judge  noted  that  the  claimant  was  not
    however under the control of a trafficker at the time of referral.   He
    noted that the claimant  had  no  contact  with  the  trafficker  since
    January 2006, a period of almost five  years  and  that  she  had  been
    'free' from her traffickers in the UK for just under five  years.   The
    Competent Authority had found that the claimant had brought herself  to
    the attention of UKBA because her financial support had ended  and  not
    because of any reasons relating to her  trafficking  here.   The  judge
    also noted that the Competent Authority  had  found  the  claimant  had
    failed to substantiate she would  be  in  danger  from  M  C  or  other
    traffickers in the form of retribution of re-trafficking.

12. The claimant had maintained that she would nevertheless be at  risk  on
    return as a victim and noted the support for this in  the  findings  of
    the expert witness of Bisi  Olateru-Olagbegi  in  the  context  of  the
    guidance in PO (trafficked women) Nigeria. The judge  noted  the  claim
    that two/three men had killed  the  claimant's  mother,  kidnapped  her
    father and caused such fear to her siblings that they ran away  on  the
    instruction  of  M  C  and  concluded  that  it  was  likely  that  the
    trafficking would have been carried out by a collection of individuals.

13. The reason given for rejection of the FGM  claim  was  because  of  the
    timing when this concern first arose and also because of  contradictory
    evidence by the claimant over  the  circumstances  of  her  family  and
    whether they would be present to implement it. Without  resolving  what
    had happened to the family,  the  judge  also  concluded  that  it  was
    improbable that the family would be able  to  locate  the  claimant  to
    carry out FGM on her child.

14. The judge noted that the Competent Authority  had  concluded  that  the
    claimant was not under the control of a trafficker as noted in [24] and
    also that she had failed to substantiate that she would  be  in  danger
    from M C or other traffickers as noted at [25]. The judge  then  turned
    to the report by Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi who, as well as advancing a case
    that the claimant would not escape from societal pressure of FGM,  also
    considered that it was very likely she had  been  trafficked  into  the
    United Kingdom by an organised criminal gang.

15. At [29] of the determination the judge observed:

         "The expert evidence, which I accept, highlights that  the  passage
         of time away from Nigeria is not necessarily a barrier to reprisals
         from traffickers and whilst I acknowledge the appellant has been in
         the UK since 2005, her claim  is  that  in  2008  her  family  were
         persecuted as a  direct  result  of  her  escape.   The  respondent
         considers relocation will provide a safe option  to  the  appellant
         (and her child) and whilst there is no evidence before me that  the
         appellant was trafficked by a  gang,  there  is  also  no  evidence
         before me that M  C  worked  alone  either.   The  expert  evidence
         indicates, and which I  accept,  that  activities  of  this  nature
         involve a number of individuals, thus I find relocating  would  not
         necessarily provide the appellant with  a  safe  haven."  (emphasis
         added).

16. There is no clear finding on the factual issue whether  the  claimant's
    family suffered any ill- treatment. If the claimant's parents  did  not
    suffered the fate  claimed,  this  may  well  impact  on  the  concerns
    expressed by the expert and the correctness of the judge accepting  the
    conclusions in the report.  I consider as a consequence of  this  error
    means the determination cannot stand.  In the circumstances  I  do  not
    consider it would be  appropriate  to  seek  to  preserve  any  of  the
    findings reached by the judge apart from those as  to  the  status  and
    role of A J set out in paragraphs [19]  and  [20].  Accordingly  it  is
    appropriate that the matter be re-heard afresh  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

17. The appeal by the Secretary of State in the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed
    and the case remitted  for  further  consideration  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

18. By way of footnote it was necessary  to  reconvene  the  hearing  on  5
    November.  This was because the  expert  report  and  decision  of  the
    Competent Authority had been mislaid by the administration of the Upper
    Tribunal.  The loss was an internal one and it is not  considered  that
    there was any risk of data protection breach as a result.




Signed                                  Date 6 January 2015


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

