
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07809/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2015                         |On 19th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     R Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Madubuike of AJO Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, R Y, date of birth 8th February 1995,  claims  to  be  a
    citizen of Eritrea.  The nationality of the Appellant is  not  accepted
    by the Respondent. The First-tier Judge found that  the  Appellant  had
    not proved that she was a national of Eritrea.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is necessary to make  an  anonymity
    direction in the current proceedings.  Given all of the circumstances I
    have determined that it is appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Brookfield  promulgated  on  17th  November  2014,
    whereby the judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision
    of the Respondent dated 19th September 2014  to  remove  the  Appellant
    from the United Kingdom.  That decision was  taken  by  the  Respondent
    after the Respondent had refused  the  Appellant  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection or other relief whereby she would be entitled to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

 4. By decision made on 12th December 2014  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was given to the Appellant.

 5. Accordingly the matter now appears before me to determine in the  first
    instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the  original
    determination.

 6. The Appellant claims that she is a female  national  of  Eritrea.   She
    claims that she was born in Eritrea to  Eritrean  parents  in  February
    1995.  At the age of about 2  the  family  moved  to  Addis  Ababa,  in
    Ethiopia.  She thereafter claims that her family were forced  to  leave
    Eritrea in 2000. In Eritrea her parents were arrested in 2003  and  she
    began to live with family members.  She then moved  to  Sudan  with  an
    aunt in 2003.  In January 2008 the Appellant  went  to  Dubai  using  a
    false passport.  In Dubai the Appellant married an  Eritrean  national.
    The Appellant left Dubai on 10th May 2014 travelling to Oman  and  then
    on to France.  The Appellant then came to the United  Kingdom  claiming
    asylum on 17th May 2014.

 7. It was the Appellant's claim that she was unable to return  to  Eritrea
    because she had left the country illegally eleven years previously  and
    she was a practising Pentecostal Christian.

 8. A significant factor in this appeal was whether or  not  the  Appellant
    was an Eritrean national.  The judge in  her  finding  in  paragraph  9
    examines in detail  the  evidence  presented  by  the  Appellant.   Her
    conclusions with regard to the issue of  nationality  are  set  out  at
    paragraph 9(xii).  There the judge  specifically  finds  that  she  was
    unable to conclude on the standard of a reasonable degree of likelihood
    that the Appellant was a national of Eritrea.  However  the  judge  has
    gone on to consider  whether  or  not  it  had  been  proved  that  the
    Appellant was of a different nationality specifically Ethiopian and the
    judge was  not  satisfied  on  the  balance  of  probability  that  the
    Respondent had proved that the Appellant was an Ethiopian.

 9. In considering of the issue as to whether or not the Appellant  was  an
    Eritrean national the judge noted the Appellant's lack of  fluency  and
    inability to speak Tigrinyan.

10. The Grounds of Appeal set out in detail the challenges to  the  judge's
    approach to the issue with regard to language.  First and  foremost  it
    is suggested that the judge has failed to take account of the fact that
    the parents were dual linguists and the judge has, in finding that  the
    Appellant would have been raised from birth to speak  Tigrinyan  before
    being moved to Ethiopia, is an error.

11. The judge has taken into account the fact that the Appellant's  parents
    spoke both Tigrinyan  as  well  as  Amharic.   That  is  evidence  from
    paragraph 9(iv) about two-thirds of the way  through  where  the  judge
    specifically notes that the Appellant  had  made  the  claim  that  her
    parents were bilingual.  However the judge had  taken  account  of  the
    fact that the Appellant had lived from birth in Eritrea.  The Appellant
    had been born in 1995.

12. The Grounds of Appeal make much of the fact that prior to 1991 and  the
    separation of Eritrea from  Ethiopia  Amharic  had  been  the  official
    language.  However by 1995 when the Appellant was born Amharic  was  no
    longer a language forced upon Eritreans.

13. The background evidence indicated that as much as 50% of the population
    spoke Tigrinyan.  The Appellant's representative  seeks  to  rely  upon
    that to suggest that accordingly 50% of the population  did  not  speak
    Tigrinyan and that the Appellant would therefore be within that section
    of the population.  That seems to ignore the fact that the  Appellant's
    parents  were  bilingual.   The  Appellant's  parents  were  using  the
    language of Eritrea Tigrinyan as one of their main languages  according
    to the Appellant's account.  The judge has merely  found  that  it  was
    reasonably likely that  living  in  Eritrea  with  parents  that  spoke
    Tigrinyan as one of their main languages, the Appellant would have been
    raised from birth to speak Tigrinyan to the age of 2.   That  would  be
    before the Appellant went  to  Ethiopia.   The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant would have begun to learn  to  speak  Tigrinyan  during  that
    period of  time  and  that  thereafter  her  parents  would  have  used
    Tigrinyan.

14. In challenging the  judge's  approach  with  regard  to  the  issue  of
    language the Appellant's representative has sought to submit a document
    headed "The Languages of Eritrea".  However it was accepted  that  that
    document referred to Tigrinyan being spoken by 50%  of  the  population
    and that Tigrinyan  and  Arabic  were  the  working  languages  of  the
    country.  The  other  languages  referred  to  are  Tigre  40%  of  the
    population; Afar 4% of the population; Saho 3% of  the  population  and
    Bega, Nara and Kunama a residual amount.  It  is  also  indicated  that
    English and Italian are widely understood.   The  important  points  to
    make are firstly, that document was not before the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  Secondly it has to be noted that Amharic is not noted there  as
    a major language spoken within Eritrea.

15. Whilst the Appellant's representative seeks to  rely  upon  a  specific
    paragraph from that report it is further to be noted that  Amharic  was
    the language of the Ethiopian ruling regime and was made  the  official
    language during that time but whilst Eritrean  languages  were  banned.
    The report refers to the fact that:-

         Most Eritreans refused to speak Amharic.  Instead they continued to
         teach their native languages to their children.

16. In the light of that the judge's conclusion that  a  child,  some  four
    years after the occupation by the Ethiopians had ceased,  would  within
    the first period of her life be substantially exposed to  Tigrinyan  as
    the major language of the country.  The judge was entitled to  come  to
    the conclusion that the Appellant  would  have  been  taught  to  speak
    Tigrinyan from her birth until such times as she did go to Ethiopia.

17. Even thereafter whilst the Appellant was in Ethiopia it is to be  noted
    that the Appellant's family were bilingual.  Whilst they returned  when
    the Appellant was 5 to Eritrea, at that stage the judge was entitled to
    conclude that the Appellant would have been taught and  brought  up  to
    speak the Tigrinyan language.

18. Accordingly the judge was entitled to  conclude  that  the  Appellant's
    lack of knowledge of the Tigrinyan language was such that she  was  not
    satisfied that such a claim to be Eritrean and not  to  know  Tigrinyan
    was credible.

19. The Appellant's representative seeks to make the argument that  if  50%
    of the population spoke Eritrean then the other 50% of  the  population
    spoke  something  else.   However  the  documents  submitted   by   the
    Appellant's representative indicates that other  languages  other  than
    Amharic would have been taught not Amharic itself.   The  languages  to
    which the Appellant was supposedly exposed  were  either  Tigrinyan  or
    Amharic  and  there  was  no  background  evidence  submitted  by   the
    representatives to show that the Appellant would have  been  taught  in
    one of the other languages prevalent within Eritrea  according  to  the
    documentation upon which they now wish to rely.

20. It  is  further  suggested  that  the  judge  has  taken  into  account
    immaterial factors.  With respect that is not what the judge has  done.
    The judge has clearly examined all the evidence.  The  judge  has  then
    taken account of the evidence and made a  conclusions,  given  all  the
    circumstances, that the fact that the Appellant did not speak Tigrinyan
    was a significant factor in  showing  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    national of Eritrea.  However that is not  the  only  factor  that  the
    judge has taken into account.  The judge has  gone  on  to  make  other
    points.

21. The only other evidence that the Appellant had submitted with regard to
    proof of her nationality was taken account of by the judge.  There  was
    a  birth  certificate.  As  noted  in  paragraph  9(ix),   that   birth
    certificate emanated from documents all of  which  were  issued  in  or
    about 2014.  The judge considered the  circumstances  in  which  births
    were registered in Eritrea.  In subparagraph (x) the  judge  has  given
    the circumstances based upon the background information  as  to  how  a
    copy of a birth certificate could be obtained.

22. The judge has properly taken into account all  of  the  evidence.   The
    judge on examining all of the evidence had made specific findings  that
    parts of the Appellant's account were not credible.

23. The challenges by the Appellant's representative are nothing more  than
    a disagreement with the findings of fact made by the judge.  The  judge
    has fully justified the reasons given for finding  that  the  Appellant
    was not a national of Eritrea.

24. The Appellant's representative has further sought  to  argue  that  the
    judge's approach to  the  issue  of  nationality  in  paragraph  9(xii)
    applies the wrong standard of proof.  It  is  quite  evident  that  the
    judge in looking at whether the Appellant had established that she  was
    an Eritrean national applied the reasonable degree of  likelihood  test
    as required by the cases of MA, (disputed nationality) Ethiopia  [2008]
    UKAIT00032, Hamza [2002] UKIAT 05185 and Asif Khan [2002] UKIAT  00174.
    Thereafter the judge has gone on in having found that the Appellant had
    not  established  her  nationality  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
    Respondent had established on  the  balance  of  probability  that  the
    Appellant was an Ethiopian.

25.  The judge has given valid reasons for finding that the Respondent  had
    failed  to  discharge  the  burden  upon  her   on   the   balance   of
    probabilities.  It was only at that stage where the burden was  on  the
    Respondent to prove a specific nationality other than that  claimed  by
    the Appellant that the judge applied the balance of probabilities.

26. The approach by the judge  applies  the  correct  burden  of  proof  in
    respect of each of the separate  issues.   Accordingly  the  judge  has
    fully justified the conclusions that she has reached with regard to the
    nationality of the Appellant.

27. Having made specific findings the judge has then gone  on  to  consider
    whether or not the Appellant would be at risk.   The  judge  has  fully
    justified her decision to find that the Appellant would not be at  risk
    given the findings made.  Those were conclusions on the  basis  of  the
    evidence that the judge was entitled to make.  The judge  has  properly
    analysed the evidence and given justifiable reasons for the conclusions
    reached.

Notice of Decision

There is accordingly no arguable error of law within the  determination.   I
uphold the decision to dismiss this matter on all grounds.

Anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 18th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

