
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: Aa/07246/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 11 February 2016                          |On 29 February 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                                     KA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Antonia Benfield, Counsel, instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 1. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Eban)   allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on 10 April 2015 to refuse
    to grant asylum to the respondent and to remove him from the UK.

Introduction

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1983.  He  arrived  in
    the UK in September 2010 as a dependent of his wife who  had  leave  to
    enter as a Tier 4 student. She was  granted  further  leave  to  remain
    until October 2015 but in September 2014  was  served  with  an  IS151A
    notice on the basis that she  had  relied  on  false  English  language
    certificates. The respondent claimed asylum on 23 October 2014.

 3. The respondent claims that he had his own coconut business in Sri Lanka
    and started to support the LTTE in June 2007. He collected  money  from
    shops and provided accommodation for LTTE members. He was  arrested  at
    his home in January 2010. He was detained for two days and beaten.  The
    authorities knew that he had supported the LTTE and he was photographed
    and fingerprinted. He was then taken to the CID office in Colombo where
    he was detained for two weeks. He then spent  six  months  in  Welikada
    prison before being released in August 2010 after his father helped  to
    arrange an agent. He then stayed with the agent until he left  for  the
    UK in September 2010. Since arriving in the  UK  the  authorities  have
    been visiting his family home and asking about his whereabouts.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but decided that his account of his  LTTE  involvement  was
    vague and lacking reasonable detail as were the details of his release.
    There was no medical report to support his claimed injuries. There were
    fundamental inconsistencies in the psychiatric report. Dr Dhumad stated
    that the respondent spoke Tamil through a Tamil interpreter. There  was
    no evidence that the authorities had visited the respondent's  home  in
    Sri Lanka.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 24 November 2015. He was represented  by  Mr
    Paramjorthy, Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent
    was regarded by the authorities as someone who wished, during the  war,
    to undermine  the  unitary  state.  The  respondent  was  a  clear  and
    consistent witness and the psychiatric evidence supported  a  diagnosis
    of PTSD arising from his experiences in Sri Lanka. The judge found that
    the respondent  was  Sinhalese,  assisted  the  LTTE  as  claimed,  was
    arrested and released on a  bribe  as  claimed,  was  photographed  and
    fingerprinted, left Sri Lanka with his wife with the assistance  of  an
    agent using his own passport and did not claim asylum on arrival in the
    UK as he relied upon what he had been told by the agent.

 6. The judge found that the fact that  the  respondent  was  of  Sinhalese
    ethnicity and assisted  the  LTTE  during  the  war  put  him  at  risk
    notwithstanding that he had not been involved in  diaspora  activities.
    That was because he had sympathised with and assisted the  Tamil  cause
    at a time when the government was at war  with  the  LTTE  even  though
    there was no pressure on him to side with the LTTE. There  was  a  real
    risk that the authorities would consider that he  retained  his  formed
    political convictions and that he would pose a current  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a unitary state. There was a real  risk  that
    he would be detained for questioning on return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the respondent would be regarded  to  have  a  significant
    role in post-conflict Tamil separatism as there was no evidence that he
    had undertaken activities of any type  in  the  last  four  years.  The
    authorities had access to sophisticated intelligence and the judge  had
    failed to adequately explain why the government would  want  to  detain
    him after he returned to Sri Lanka. The judge also failed  to  consider
    that the release after a bribe would not be recorded as an  escape  and
    was more likely to indicate that the authorities were not interested in
    the respondent.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davidge
    on 23 December 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge's
    finding that  the  respondent  would  pose  a  current  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka even absent involvement in diaspora activity ran
    contrary to the country guidance  in  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). The finding  that  the
    respondent wished during the war to undermine  the  unitary  state  was
    arguably insufficient to fall within the risk categories. It  was  also
    arguable that the judge had failed to consider that the authorities had
    concluded historically that they had no interest in the respondent.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 10 February 2016 the  respondent  submitted
    that the judge had given adequate reasons for the  findings  that  were
    entirely open on the evidence and on correct application of the country
    guidance. The judge had made a clear finding that  the  respondent  was
    released on a bribe and that was not inconsistent with risk on return.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

11. Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied upon the primary ground. There was  only  a
    very brief assessment of risk at paragraph 29 of the decision. That was
    completely contrary to  GJ  because  it  was  wholly  unclear  why  the
    appellant would be perceived to be a current threat to the integrity of
    the unitary state. Previous links are not enough and there was  only  a
    very historic LTTE association. The second ground (failure to  consider
    release  on  a  bribe  as  evidence  of  lack  of  interest  from   the
    authorities) was not pursued by Ms Brocklesby-Weller.

12. Ms Benfield submitted that the sole ground of challenge was  on  asylum
    grounds and nothing had been said about Article 3. It was  not  a  pre-
    requisite that the respondent was involved in diaspora activities.  The
    judge correctly relied upon paragraph 356(7)(a) of GJ. It was  open  to
    the judge to find that the respondent would be perceived as a  risk  to
    Sri Lanka. There was a history of voluntary support for the  LTTE.  The
    authorities had been to the respondent's home and he was likely  to  be
    perceived as traitorous. However, Ms Benfield conceded that  there  was
    no express finding that the Sri Lankan authorities were looking for the
    respondent. There were no adverse credibility  findings  so  the  issue
    could be presumed in the respondent's favour.

13. Ms Brocklesby-Weller observed that there was no finding at paragraph 24
    of  the  decision  that  the  authorities  had  been  looking  for  the
    respondent nor was the issue mentioned at  paragraph  29.  Ms  Benfield
    responded that it was not necessary for the judge to make every finding
    of fact. If a material error of law was found  then  the  appeal  could
    still be re-determined by the Upper Tribunal.

14. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted in response that the  historic  diaspora
    activity point was important because the decision  centred  on  current
    risk from the Sri Lankan authorities. Recent interest in the respondent
    was not borne out in the reasons.

15. I find that Ms Brocklesby-Weller was correct not to pursue  the  second
    ground of appeal which asserted that the judge erred in law by  failing
    to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of  fact  or  opinion  on
    material matters. That ground is based upon the failure of the judge to
    resolve whether the respondent was released on a bribe and  if  he  was
    whether that indicated that he was of no adverse interest.  The  ground
    is clearly misconceived. In GJ, Professor Good gave evidence summarised
    at paragraph 113 (approved at paragraph 262)  confirming  that  release
    through payment of a bribe was extremely common  and  release  did  not
    necessarily indicate a lack  of  further  adverse  interest.  Mr  Anton
    Puethanayagam, Attorney at Law, gave evidence at paragraph  146  (found
    at paragraph 275 to be useful and reliable) that it  cannot  be  argued
    that only people of low interest to the authorities are able to  secure
    release through a bribe. Detainees may be released following payment of
    a bribe even if  they  are  of  significant  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities. I find that the judge did not err in law on this issue.

16. The first ground of appeal has more substance. At paragraph 29  of  the
    decision, the judge found that the respondent was at  risk  because  he
    was  Sinhalese  and  assisted  the  LTTE  during  the  war.  The  judge
    considered that there was  a  real  risk  that  the  authorities  would
    consider that the respondent retained his political convictions and  as
    a result would pose a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a
    single state. The difficulty with the judge's approach is that any  Sri
    Lankan of Sinhalese ethnicity who supported the LTTE during  the  civil
    war would qualify. That is a category not  recognised  in  GJ  and  the
    judge's approach runs contrary to the general recognition  in  GJ  that
    the Sri Lankan  authorities  operate  on  the  basis  of  sophisticated
    intelligence rather than  simply  assessing  threat  on  the  basis  of
    ethnicity. I find that the judge has failed to give sufficient  reasons
    for finding that the respondent was at risk of detention on return.

17. However, the findings of fact are incomplete and there is no reason why
    the respondent should be deprived of the favourable  findings  of  fact
    that appear at paragraphs 24-25 of the decision. In  particular,  there
    is no finding of fact in relation to the respondent's evidence that the
    authorities had been visiting the family  home  and  asking  about  his
    whereabouts. If the Sri Lankan authorities have been  actively  seeking
    the respondent since he left Sri Lanka then that  might  be  compelling
    evidence of risk of detention on return. I reject the  submission  that
    the issue can be presumed in the respondent's favour. Further  findings
    of fact are required but there is no reason why those  findings  cannot
    be made by the previous judge.

18. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal on asylum grounds involved the making of an error of law and its
    decision cannot stand.

Decision

19. Both representatives invited me to consider a further  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal if I set aside the  judge's  decision.  Bearing  in
    mind paragraph 7.2 of the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  I
    consider that an appropriate course of action. I preserve the  findings
    of fact made at paragraphs 23-25 of the decision.

20. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eban.  The  purpose  of  the
    further hearing is to determine the outstanding  matters  of  fact  and
    then to apply the country guidance to the respondent's asylum claim.

Signed

[pic]

Judge Archer
Deputy         Judge         of         the          Upper          Tribunal
              Date 23 February 2016


