
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07665/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2016                            |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     M B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tetty, instructed by Switalskis, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, MB, was born in 1986 and  claims  to  be  a  citizen  of
    Eritrea.   The  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was  rejected  by  the
    respondent who also ordered that she should be removed from the  United
    Kingdom by a decision dated 16 April 2015.  The appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  J  M  Holmes)  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 July 2015 dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal at [7] criticise the  judge
    for having found [27] that the appellant had  been  unable  to  produce
    documentary evidence of the farm which she helped to  run  in  Eritrea.
    The grounds assert that this aspect of the case was not material to the
    findings  on  credibility.   I  disagree.   The  judge   has   properly
    considered all the evidence and there is  no  suggestion  that  he  has
    attached particular importance to the farm activities in any way  which
    may properly be described as peripheral to her main claim  for  asylum.
    It was reasonable for the judge  to  question  why  the  appellant  had
    failed to produce evidence from Eritrea (there is no suggestion of  the
    judge criticising her failing to bring evidence with her when she fled)
    which could have assisted in establishing the background to her  claim.
    The point made by  the  judge  is  that  such  evidence  could  without
    unreasonable difficulty have been obtained by the appellant whilst  she
    was living in the United Kingdom. It was open to the judge to find that
    the appellant had not done so because she was aware that the  documents
    would not corroborate her evidence.

 3. At [29], the judge recorded that, "The  appellant  denies  ever  having
    been required to perform a period of national service.   This  evidence
    is simply not consistent with the evidence reviewed in MA and MO and  I
    am not satisfied that it is true."  The grounds of appeal  set  out  in
    extenso the evidence considered by the Upper Tribunal  in  the  country
    guidance case of MA (draft evaders; illegal departure; risk) Eritrea CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00059.  The argument advanced in the grounds is  that  the
    case of MA and that of MO do not address the "efficiencies or otherwise
    of the drafting process."  The judge noted  that  the  appellant  never
    claimed to have been issued with any "document formally  exempting  her
    from national service."  She also denied having  been  issued  with  an
    identity card until after she was married.  I am satisfied  that  these
    are matters to which the country guidance cases referred and  that  the
    background material upon which those cases and others have  been  based
    was not consistent with the appellant's claims both as regards national
    service and any possible  exemption  from  national  service.   It  was
    reasonable  for  the  judge  to  assume  that  a  young  woman  of  the
    appellant's age would  have  been  required  to  perform  a  period  of
    national service; I do not see why the possible failure of the  country
    guidance cases to address inefficiencies in the drafting  system  (that
    is,  whether  anyone  may  have  "slipped  through  the  net".)  should
    undermine the judge's finding.

 4. The arguments at paragraphs [9-12] of the grounds are, in  my  opinion,
    no more than a series of disagreements with findings made by the judge.
     The judge is accused of having "substituted his reasoning for those of
    others  [including  the  appellant]."   I  disagree.   The  judge   has
    throughout applied the standard  of  reasonable  likelihood  there  was
    nothing to prevent him from finding aspects of  the  appellant's  claim
    not to be reasonably likely.

 5. The judge is also criticised at [51-52] regarding the question  of  the
    appellant's removal to Eritrea.  The judge saw  no  difficulty  in  the
    appellant being required to pay the 2% diaspora  tax  upon  return  and
    relied on background material which indicated that the appellant may be
    able to obtain her own Eritrean passport and thereby avoid returning to
    Eritrea  on  an  emergency  travel  document.   Considering  that   the
    appellant did obtain a passport, she would not have to  deal  with  any
    perception on the part of the receiving  authorities  that  she  was  a
    failed asylum seeker who had made an illegal exit from the  country.  I
    find that the judge did not err in that analysis for the reasons  given
    in the grounds of appeal or at all.

 6. Viewed as a whole,  the  judge's  decision  is  carefully  and  closely
    reasoned.  His findings are not  perverse  as  the  grounds  appear  to
    suggest and I considered uncogent.  I  find  that  the  judge  has  not
    seriously erred in law either for the reasons stated in the grounds  or
    at all.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 8. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 20 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

