
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07489/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 5th March 2015                            |On 29th April 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JC
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


    For the Appellant: Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
    For the Respondent:     Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Bolton CAB


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of the Peoples' Republic of China date  of
    birth 17th December 1989. On the  19th  November  2014  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Cruthers) allowed on asylum grounds her appeal  against
    a decision to remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999[1].  The Secretary  of  State  now  has
    permission[2] to appeal against that decision.

 2. The basis of the Respondent's asylum claim had been that  she  faced  a
    well-founded fear of persecution in China for reasons of her membership
    of a particular social group and her  imputed  political  opinion.  She
    claimed to have been  detained  as  an  eight-year  old  child  by  the
    authorities because her father was a member of the Falun Gong and  held
    for nine years during which time she was ill-treated. She  escaped  and
    is now wanted. She further feared return to  China  because  since  her
    arrival in the UK in 2007 she has had two children, one of  whom  falls
    outwith the state 'one-child' policy.

 3. The Secretary of State noted that the Respondent had been in the UK for
    five years when she finally claimed asylum. That,  and  other  matters,
    weighed against her in  the  assessment  of  her  credibility  and  the
    Secretary of State was not satisfied that the burden of proof had  been
    discharged. Her account was rejected as untrue.

 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the Respondent gave
    oral evidence and was cross-examined by Counsel. The determination sets
    out the refusal letter in full, and revisits the Secretary  of  State's
    case on credibility at paragraphs 35 on.  Paragraph 37 reads:  "I  have
    carefully considered all the attacks on the  appellant's  account  that
    are made in the RFRL, as expanded on by Mr Cliff at the hearing. But in
    my judgement those 'credibility points' are not sufficient, even  taken
    cumulatively, and with the  operation  of  section  8,  to  reject  the
    appellant's core account  when  judging  by  the  standard  appropriate
    here".  Since the only matter in issue was credibility, the  appeal  is
    allowed.

 5. The grounds of appeal are lengthy but in essence are that the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal was perverse.  The grounds  draw  particular
    attention to the following findings:

          i) The account of being detained for nine years and then escaping
             is inherently unlikely [paragraph 36]

         ii) It is difficult to believe that the Appellant  would  remember
             an address given to her when she was eight, prior  to  a  nine
             year detention [41]

        iii) There was a contradiction in the  description  given  of  'the
             escape incident' in  that  during  her  asylum  interview  the
             appellant had said that a guard had tried to rape her  pulling
             at her clothes, whereas she had  told  Dr  Lord  that  he  had
             stripped her naked [43].

 6. The Secretary of State submits that in light of these findings the only
    rational outcome would have been a dismissal.

    My Findings

 7. This is a reasoned determination by an experienced judge.  The findings
    are found at paragraphs 35 to 47.  The case for the Secretary of  State
    is that an "inherently incredible" account should be dismissed.   Judge
    Cruthers was correct to view that submission  with  caution.   That  is
    because the Chinese regime is oppressive, and oppressive regimes cannot
    be expected to act rationally.  It is because what we in the  UK  might
    regard as being inherently unlikely, such as the arbitrary detention of
    an eight year old, might not be so unlikely in the  context  of  China.
    It is because China is a large  country,  and  the  country  background
    material indicated that there was not a consistent  approach  taken  to
    the Falun Gong during the period in question,  that  leaving  open  the
    possibility that the Respondent was the victim of a particularly brutal
    - and irrational - security chief.

 8.  Counsel  for  the  Secretary  of  State  did  identify  a  number   of
    contradictions in the evidence, but it is  abundantly  clear  from  the
    determination that the Tribunal gave careful consideration to  each  of
    the points made by the Secretary of State but having weighed them  with
    the evidence was satisfied  that  the  Respondent  had  discharged  the
    burden of proof.

 9. In the conclusions at 44-46 it  would  appear  that  the  Tribunal  was
    reluctant to allow the appeal, but was driven to by proper  application
    of the lower standard of proof.  Credit is given for the consistency at
    the core of the account and the fact that the Respondent has not sought
    to exaggerate or embellish  her  account.   Overall  I  find  that  the
    determination cannot be  described  as  irrational.  The  Tribunal  has
    clearly engaged with the criticisms of the evidence, and  has  properly
    applied the standard of proof.  It  is  not  the  decision  that  every
    Tribunal would have made, but that is not an error of law.

    Decisions

10. The determination does not contain an error of law and it is upheld.

11. In view of the subject matter in this appeal I  make  a  direction  for
    anonymity having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders.

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
         family. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             17th April 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Decision to remove dated 17th September 2014
[2] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on the 4th
December 2014

