
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07125/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Akhter of counsel instructed by M&K Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. An anonymity order was previously in place. Pursuant to  Rule  14  of
       the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/269)  I
       make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs
       otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of  publication
       thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original Appellant.
       This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure
       to comply with this direction could give rise to  contempt  of  court
       proceedings

    2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of MH  ('the  claimant')  who
       appealed against a decision taken on 9 March 2015 to refuse to  grant
       him asylum.

  Background Facts

    3. The claimant is a citizen of Myanmar born on 30 March 1984. He  is  a
       stateless Rohingya born in Myanmar. He fled to Bangladesh when he was
       8 years old with his siblings. He lived in Bangladesh until 2006 when
       he came to the UK entering illegally. He  made  a  claim  for  asylum
       under Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended)  (the
       'Immigration Rules') on  12  February  2014.   That  application  was
       refused because the Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  that  the
       appellant was a stateless  Rohingya.  The  Secretary  of  State  also
       rejected the claimant's claim that he would be persecuted if returned
       to Bangladesh. The  Secretary  of  State  also  considered  that  the
       appellant was not in need of  Humanitarian  protection  or  that  his
       removal  would  breach  the  UK's  obligations  under  the   European
       Convention on Human Rights.

  The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    4. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
       promulgated  on  28  September  2015,  Judge  Lagunju   allowed   the
       claimant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the  appellant
       has a well-founded fear of persecution if he were to be  returned  to
       Myanmar. Although the judge did not consider that the claimant had  a
       well-founded fear in Bangladesh, the judge found that he was entitled
       to International Protection. The judge found that  the  claimant  did
       not qualify for leave to remain under appendix FM and  EX1.1  of  the
       Immigration Rules. She found that the  claimant  satisfied  paragraph
       276ADE(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  because   there   would   be
       significant obstacles to his integration on return to Myanmar  and/or
       Bangladesh (although it is not entirely clear  that  the  judge  also
       referred specifically to integration in Bangladesh.)

  The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    5. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal.  On 14 October 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker granted
       the Secretary of State permission to appeal.  The grant of permission
       indicted that the grounds  may  have  merit  because  the  First-tier
       Tribunal judge does not address why the appellant cannot be  returned
       to Bangladesh. Thus, the appeal came before me.

  Summary of the Submissions

    6. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge found that there  was  no
       convention  reason  why  the  appellant  could  not  be  returned  to
       Bangladesh,  that  he  exaggerated  his  evidence  with  respect   to
       Bangladesh, that he would have sufficient protection if  returned  to
       Bangladesh or that he could re-locate. His finding that the appellant
       would  not  be  able  to  re-integrate  is  manifestly   inadequately
       reasoned. The removal  directions  were  to  Myanmar  or  Bangladesh,
       therefore the judge has materially erred in allowing the appeal.

    7. In her oral submissions Ms Everett submitted that paragraph 31 of the
       decision is insufficiently reasoned  regarding  whether  there  is  a
       significant obstacle  on  return  to  Bangladesh.  The  decision  was
       perverse on this issue given the immigration history. The judge found
       at paragraphs 25 and 26 that there was  no  fear  of  persecution  on
       return to Bangladesh. The removal directions were to  either  Myanmar
       or Bangladesh. The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  spent  a
       substantial amount of time in Bangladesh (paragraph  26).  She  found
       that the appellant speaks Sylheti Bengali - this is the only language
       he speaks. In paragraph 31 there is barely any reasoning

    8. Ms Akhter submitted that there is only one ground of appeal namely  a
       challenge to the fact that the judge allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum
       grounds. The judge found that the appellant  was  a  Rohingya  Muslim
       from Myanmar. The Secretary of State has  not  attacked  the  finding
       that the appellant was a Rohingya Muslim. There is  no  challenge  to
       paragraph 276ADE in the grounds of appeal - the  Secretary  of  State
       cannot now raise a new ground of appeal. The grant of permission does
       not refer to 276ADE. The appeal is only in relation to the convention
       reason. The judge made findings in relation to 276ADE - the appellant
       has lost his parents and has no contact with his brothers. The  judge
       found that the appellant would  face  significant  obstacles  to  re-
       integration in Bangladesh. There are sufficient reasons  in  relation
       to re-integration.

    9. In reply Ms Everett submitted that it is clear  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal judge found that the claimant is not at risk  on  return  to
       Bangladesh and that there is sufficiency of protection.  Additionally
       the  claimant  could  re-locate.  The  claimant  has   moved   around
       Bangladesh.  It was erroneous of the judge to find that he  qualified
       for  humanitarian   protection.   In   answer   to   the   claimant's
       representative's challenge  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
       challenged 276ADE Ms Everett referred me to the grounds of appeal. It
       is set out that the challenge is to the  finding  that  the  claimant
       would not be able to re-integrate into Bangladesh as it is manifestly
       inadequately reasoned. The permission to appeal does not restrict the
       grounds. She submitted that an  assertion  that  family  members  are
       either dead or untraceable is not sufficient to make a finding that a
       person could not re-integrate.

  Discussion

   10. I find that the Secretary  of  State  has  challenged  the  Paragraph
       276ADE finding of the judge. The grounds set out that:

           "His finding that  the  appellant  would  not  be  able  to  re-
           integrate within Bangladesh is manifestly inadequately  reasoned
           ..."

   11. There are therefore two central issues. Firstly did the judge err  in
       finding that the claimant was in need of international protection and
       secondly, whether or not the judge erred in finding that the claimant
       meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules?

   12. The judge appears to have considered that as a result of her  finding
       on the return to Myanmar the claimant was entitled  to  international
       protection notwithstanding the fact that she had found that he  would
       not be at risk of persecution on return to Bangladesh and that in any
       event he could live safely if he re-located to a  different  area  of
       Bangladesh.

   13. Although the judge set out in paragraph 8 of the  decision  that  the
       Secretary of State had served an amended notice of  decision  listing
       both Bangladesh and Myanmar the judge  has  failed  to  consider  the
       alternative of returning the claimant to Bangladesh when  considering
       the need for International Protection.

   14. As the judge had found that it would be  safe  for  the  claimant  to
       return to Bangladesh the judge erred in finding that the claimant was
       entitled to International Protection.

   15. With regard to the insufficiency of  reasoning  in  relation  to  the
       finding that the claimant met paragraph 276ADE the  judge's  analysis
       extends to one paragraph. It is not clear to me that  the  judge  has
       specifically considered the obstacles to the  claimant's  integration
       on return to Bangladesh. However if the final part of  the  paragraph
       is to be read  as  being  specific  to  Bangladesh  then,  as   three
       quarters of the  single  paragraph  concerns  his  re-integration  in
       Myanmar, there are only two  sentences  that  could  be  read  as  an
       analysis of the obstacles to reintegration in Bangladesh.  The  judge
       stated:

           "... I consider also that the appellant has lost his parents and
           his  only  brothers  were  last  seen  in  a  refugee  camp   in
           Bangladesh. I find therefore that the appellant has  shown  that
           there are significant obstacles to his integration on return."

   16. Whilst a judge does not have to set out in  detail  all  the  factors
       that have been taken into account, in this case  the  judge  has  not
       engaged with the test under paragraph 276ADE and has simply failed to
       explain why, on the background to this case, the limited factors  she
       identified  presented  significant  obstacles   to   the   claimant's
       integration. I am unable to infer from her overall determination what
       those  reasons  would  have  been  to  enable  me   to   uphold   her
       determination on that basis

   17. If the judge had not made the error of law, it is far from clear that
       she would have reached the same decision in respect of the  need  for
       International Protection. The failure  to  consider  the  alternative
       option of returning the claimant to Bangladesh amounted to a material
       error of law. The failure to give sufficient reasons and engage in an
       analysis of the test required under the Immigration  Rules  also,  in
       this case, amounts to a material error of law.

   18. I therefore set aside the decision pursuant to  section  12(2)(a)  of
       the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  in  respect  of  the
       International Protection findings and the  findings  with  regard  to
       paragraph 276ADE. However, the findings in paragraphs 25, 26, 30  and
       32 are preserved. No cross appeal has been made  in  respect  of  the
       judge's findings that the claimant  is  not  at  risk  on  return  to
       Bangladesh (paragraphs 25 and 26) nor in relation to the findings  on
       family life (paragraph 30) or Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules
       (paragraph 32). Both parties considered that  I  could  re  make  the
       decision if I found an error of law.

Re- making the decision

   19. In the case of Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  ST
       (Eritrea) [2010] EWCA Civ 643 ('ST (Eritrea)') the  Court  of  Appeal
       considered paragraph 334(v) of the Immigration Rules  which  requires
       that:

           '(v)   refusing  his  application  would  result  in  him  being
           required to go (whether immediately or after the time limited by
           any existing leave to enter or remain) in breach of  the  Geneva
           Convention, to a country in which  his  life  or  freedom  would
           threatened  on  account  of  his  race,  religion,  nationality,
           political opinion or membership of a particular social group.'

   20. The Court of Appeal held that:

           "It is only if subparagraph (v) is satisfied that a  person  who
           is recognised to be a refugee is entitled to asylum ..."

   21. In RR (refugee - safe third country) Syria [2010] UKUT 422 (IAC)  the
       Upper Tribunal succinctly set out the position  in  the  headnote  at
       paragraph 4:

           "4)    The question then, is whether  by  reference  to  A,  the
           country of nationality, the claimant is a refugee. If he is not,
           the Refugee Convention does not apply to  him.  If  he  is,  his
           appeal falls to be allowed only if his return to country B would
           be contrary to Article 33 of the Refugee Convention."

   22. In this case the Secretary of  State  issued  removal  directions  to
       either Myanmar or Bangladesh. The judge found that the claimant would
       be at risk on return and in the alternative  that  in  any  event  he
       could re-locate within Bangladesh. There is no cross appeal on  these
       findings. Given the judge's findings there  is  nothing  to  indicate
       that there is a reasonable likelihood that the claimant would  suffer
       from persecution. He lived in Bangladesh for approximately 14  years,
       speaks Sylheti Bengali and is familiar with the culture. Therefore  I
       find that sub-paragraph (v) of paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules
       has  not  been  satisfied  and  the  claimant  is  not  in  need   of
       International Protection. There is  no  evidence  that  the  claimant
       qualifies for humanitarian protection on the basis  of  a  return  to
       Bangladesh or that Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
       Rights would be breached by a return to Bangladesh

   23. With regard to private and family life the First-tier Tribunal  judge
       found that the claimant had failed to show that  he  qualifies  under
       either the parent or partner route under the  Immigration  Rules.  No
       cross appeal in this regard was made. In relation to private life  it
       is not in dispute that the only relevant sub-paragraph  of  paragraph
       276ADE is (vi) which provides:

           '(vi)  subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,
           has lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's  integration  into  the
           country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the
           UK.'

   24. The claimant must be able to demonstrate that there  are  significant
       obstacles to his integration into Bangladesh. The  only  factor  that
       has been identified is that his parents are  dead  and  he  has  lost
       touch with his siblings so has no contact with any relatives.  It  is
       clear that the test is not one of mere difficulty  the  obstacles  to
       integration must be significant. The claimant is a young  adult  male
       aged 31. He had lived in Bangladesh for approximately 14  years  from
       the age of 8. He was able to move around Bangladesh,  find  work  and
       settle on his own. He lived initially with his siblings in a  refugee
       camp but then went to Dhaka on his own where he stayed for around one
       year. He then moved to Sylhet  for  the  remainder  of  his  time  in
       Bangladesh. He formed a close relationship with the man for  whom  he
       worked referring to him as uncle. He speaks Sylheti  Bengali  and  is
       familiar with the cultures and customs of Bangladesh. I find that the
       claimant has not demonstrated that there are significant obstacles to
       his reintegration into Bangladesh.

   25. The claimant does not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  and
       therefore is not entitled to be granted leave to remain in the UK  on
       the basis of his private life.

   26. The  judge  found  that  there  were  no  compelling  or  exceptional
       circumstances about the claimant's circumstances not covered  by  the
       Immigration Rules. No cross appeal was made on this point.

Decision

   27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error pf
       law. I set aside that decision pursuant to section  12(2)(a)  of  the
       Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. I  re-make  the  decision
       allowing the Secretary of State's appeal. The  Secretary  of  State's
       decision stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 17 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

