
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07044/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2016                           |On 17 March 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                                GELILA TEKELE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Kingham, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Wilson, Iris Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Caskie promulgated on 25 August 2015 in which
    he  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 8 April  2015  to  remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom consequent upon a refusal of her asylum claim.

 2. The respondent is a citizen of Eritrea who was born  on  6  June  1991.
    Her case is that she left Eritrea in 1995 at the age of 4  to  live  in
    Ethiopia with her father.  She  was  then  deported  from  Ethiopia  to
    Eritrea in 2001, travelled to Sudan in 2003 where  she  lived  with  an
    aunt for seven years and then travelled to  Dubai  via  Ethiopia.   She
    worked as a housemaid until 2014 and then travelled  via  Portugal  and
    France to the United Kingdom arriving on 20 October 2014.

 3. The Secretary of State accepted that the respondent  is  a  citizen  of
    Eritrea but did not accept that she was suffering  disproportionate  or
    harsh treatment as a result of leaving Eritrea when she  was  aged  12;
    or, that she would be viewed as a traitor [27]; and that, based on  the
    latest country guidance and the Danish Fact-Finding Mission Report that
    she could return to  Eritrea  without  experiencing  any  problems,  by
    paying the two percent Diaspora tax and sending a letter of apology  to
    the Eritrean Embassy [28].  She did not accept that  she  would  suffer
    persecution on account of failing to complete national/military service
    and to exiting the country illegally.  The respondent did  not  in  any
    event accept that she  left  illegally  in  2003  [34].   It  was  also
    considered that her removal to  Eritrea  would  not  be  in  breach  of
    Articles 2, 3 or 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 4. On appeal, the Judge found that:-

      a) the respondent had provided reliable evidence [15] and he  accepted
         her history [16];


      b) in assessing the risk on return [16] the  starting  point  was  the
         country guidance case MO (Illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG
         [2011] UKUT 00190;

      c) the Eritreans would not consider that  the  respondent  is  married
         [17] and she would thus be exempted from military service;

      d) much of the evidence the Secretary of State  relied  upon  to  show
         that the authorities now had  changed  their  practice  comes  from
         sources the reliability of which had been called into question [18]
         and  even  taking  that  evidence  at  its  highest,  the  concerns
         regarding the durability of change  remain  [18]  and  he  was  not
         satisfied that new practice is yet established;

      e) there was  no  evidence  before  him  sufficient  to  overturn  the
         conclusions of the Tribunal in MO  with  regard  to  the  risks  on
         return of those who had  exited  illegally  and/or  are  liable  to
         military service, stating:

             "the evidence produced is open  to  significant  question  and
             criticism from resources such as UNHR and I bear  in  mind  in
             assessing their view the guidance of the Supreme  Court  in  R
             (EM (Eritrea)) v SSHD [2014] UKSC 12 at paragraph  71  I  give
             significant weight to those  concerns  and  therefore  limited
             weight to the impugned evidence."

      f) applying the guidance in MO the appellant would at risk of  serious
         harm if returned to Eritrea.

 5. The  respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that
    inadequate reasons were given for rejecting the Danish FFM  Report  and
    although there had been criticisms offered the judge has not engaged in
    an analysis whatsoever of what was contained in the report nor  of  the
    criticisms.

 6. The grounds also contend that the country guidance is in the process of
    considering the change in circumstances raised by the Danish FFM Report
    and the evidence should not simply be dismissed out of hand.

 7. On 18 November 2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  granted  permission
    stating:-

         "1.  The Danish report is a  contentious  piece  of  evidence,  for
             reasons  other  than  those  identified  by   the   First-tier
             Tribunal.  However where  there  is  a  new  country  guidance
             constituted to consider this report, and I give permission for
             this reason alone."


         2.   There is no merit in ground 2.  The point made by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal is that at her age she  would  be  eligible  for
             draft on return to Eritrea.  And that there is a risk that she
             would be perceived as having sought to avoid it: see paragraph
             [18]."


 8. It is not disputed  that  in  this  case  the  judge  followed  Country
    Guidance about which the Court of Appeal held  in   SG  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [46]-[47]:
    46.  The system of Country Guidance determinations enables  appropriate
         resources, in terms of the representations of the  parties  to  the
         Country Guidance  appeal,  expert  and  factual  evidence  and  the
         personnel  and  time  of  the  Tribunal,  to  be  applied  to   the
         determination of conditions in, and therefore the risks  of  return
         for persons such as the appellants in the Country  Guidance  appeal
         to, the country in question. The procedure is aimed at arriving  at
         a reliable (in the sense of accurate) determination.
    47.   It  is  for  these  reasons,  as  well  as  the  desirability  of
         consistency, that decision makers and tribunal judges are  required
         to take Country Guidance determinations into account, and to follow
         them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,  are
         adduced justifying their not doing so.
 9. Given this binding authority, it is to say the  least  remarkable  that
    the Secretary of State's grounds do not properly  address  why,  it  is
    said, that the judge erred in following Country Guidance.


10. Whilst it is correct that a country guidance case has been  constituted
    in respect of Eritrea, substantive hearings have yet to take place  and
    the decision may not be handed down for several months from  now.   The
    fact that a country guidance case is awaited is not a  basis  on  which
    permission to appeal  should  be  sought.   The  fact  that  a  country
    guidance decision is awaited fails to identify any error of law in  the
    decision.

11. In reality in this case the grounds challenging  the  judge's  findings
    with respect to the Danish  FFM  evidence  are  a  "reasons  challenge"
    dressed up as a failure to resolve conflicts  of  fact  or  opinion,  a
    challenge even more difficult to establish given that it is an  attempt
    to persuade a judge not to follow established Country Guidance. It  is,
    in effect, a perversity challenge which is far from made out.

12. The reasons given by  Judge  Caskie  for  rejecting  the  evidence  put
    forward by the Secretary of  State,  which  directly  contradicts  that
    analysed carefully by  the  Tribunal  in  giving  guidance  in  MO,  is
    adequate.  In the context of the  significant  and  serious  criticisms
    levelled at the evidence relied upon by the respondent  by  UNHCR,  the
    existence of which criticism is not  disputed,  and  its  nature  is  a
    sufficient basis under which to reject the respondent's evidence.  That
    is because in this case it goes to the reliability of  the  sources  of
    the evidence.  It cannot be argued that the judge  erred  in  following
    existing Country Guidance in these circumstances.

13. The judge was also entitled to note that MO was the later in  a  series
    of cases all of which were consistent about the behaviour and attitudes
    of the Eritrean regime.  It was open to him to note  that  the  changes
    which the respondent claims have taken place are recent  and,  combined
    with the criticisms levelled against the sources of which this evidence
    relies.  Accordingly,  for  these  reasons,  I  am  not  satisfied  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
    law and I uphold it.


SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
    of an error of law and I uphold it.


Signed                                  Date:  7 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

