



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07266/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17th March 2016                        |On 25th July 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     ED
                            (Anonmity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. Brakaj of Iris Law
For the Respondent:    Mr. J Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The First-tier Tribunal has made  an  anonymity  order  and  for  the
       avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  ED  ("the  appellant")
       is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify   her.    This
       direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to proceedings being
       brought for contempt of court.


    2. This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox on 8th May 2015, in which he dismissed
       an appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  for  the
       Home Department to refuse to grant the appellant asylum.


 Background


    3. The appellant is an Albanian national.  She  left  Albania  on  14th
       July 2013 and travelled to the UK via Italy.  She claimed asylum  on
       22nd August 2014.  Her claim for asylum was refused on 19th December
       2013 and her appeal against that decision was  heard  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Duff on 6th February 2014.


    4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff found:


             "28. ....this appellant has been trafficked and forced to work
             as a prostitute, although I  have  serious  doubts  about  her
             account of matters in Albania and I am not satisfied that  she
             has been threatened by her family or left in the circumstances
             that she claims."


             ...


             37.  It follows from that conclusion  that  this  appeal  must
             necessarily  be  allowed,  following  the   decision   in   AS
             (Afghanistan), on the basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
             decision to remove the appellant was incorrect  on  the  basis
             that she did not comply with her policy in that, by reason  of
             the incorrect conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
             trafficked, the respondent did not go on to consider  whether,
             a renewable residence permit should be issued to the appellant
             owing  to  her  personal  situation  or  for  the  purpose  of
             cooperation in the investigation of criminal proceedings.


             38.  Since I have reached that conclusion that I am  bound  to
             allow the  appeal  to  the  extent  of  remitting  it  to  the
             respondent for further consideration of whether, in the  light
             of the fact that this appellant was trafficked, she should  be
             granted a renewable residence permit; I consider  that  it  is
             not strictly, necessary for me to go further and consider risk
             to the appellant on return as the question of risk  on  return
             must depend upon factors which exist as  at  the  present  and
             which may change in the future.


             39.  Nonetheless, I consider it proper having heard all of the
             evidence in the case to set out that I do not accept that this
             appellant has been subjected to threats from her father  as  I
             regard  her  very  significant  time  studying  and  repeating
             courses until she was  22  years  of  age  as  being  entirely
             inconsistent with a controlling and  hectoring  father  and  I
             consider that it may well be the  case  that  the  appellant's
             father as well as the appellant herself may  have  been  duped
             into thinking that the appellant was leaving for a better life
             in the United Kingdom."


    5. The appeal was allowed on the basis that the  respondent's  decision
       was not in accordance with the law and the matter  was  remitted  to
       the respondent for further consideration.   The respondent revisited
       the matter, and issued a further decision on 21st August 2014.   The
       respondent refused the asylum claim and it was  that  decision  that
       gave rise to the appeal before First tier Tribunal Judge Fox.


 The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox sets out the background to  the  appeal
       before him at paragraphs [2] to [7] of his  decision.   His  findings
       are to be found at paragraphs [8] to [22] of the decision.  He  found
       at paragraph [11] that the appellant would  have  to  deal  with  the
       issue of shame upon return to Albania but insofar  as  the  appellant
       claimed to be in fear of her father, he found:


             "12. ... the Appellant was not so abused that her life  within
             the family household would have been intolerable or give  rise
             to any subsequent claim that she would be  killed.  I  believe
             that allegation is fictitious and designed to lend  weight  to
             her asylum claim."


    7. The Judge found the appellant  to  be  a  strong  independent  person
       capable of standing up  to  her  father  and  carving  out  a  stable
       position within the family environment. The Judge states:


             "15. It is fair to say that the activities that she has become
             involved in after leaving the family home may bring  shame  to
             the family. That is not an unreasonable proposition given  the
             cultural disposition supported by the  background  information
             however, for the reasons mentioned above I believe more likely
             that  the  family  will  provide  support,  accommodation  and
             assistance to her once she is returned safely to Albania. I do
             not accept, on the evidence before me today that there is  any
             merit in her claim family will kill her."


    8. The Judge found at paragraph [17] that there is adequate support from
       the state and NGOs for the appellant and  those  like  her  that  are
       returned  to  Albania  as   victims   of   trafficking   for   sexual
       exploitation.  The Judge had regard to the  medical  evidence  before
       him and states at paragraphs [19] to [21];


             "... I am  satisfied  that  she  suffers  from  Post-Traumatic
             Stress Disorder ("PTSD") as diagnosed by the Psychiatrist. The
             psychiatrist finds many upbeat and positive  elements  in  the
             appellant's current disablement. She continues to recover  and
             her recovery is expected to continue. Certain note of  caution
             can be taken from report that this is not enough to act  as  a
             bar or prohibition on the Appellant's return to Albania."


             20.  As indicated above I am satisfied that the Appellant is a
             resourceful and strong person and that she  will  continue  to
             recover. There is no objective evidence before me  today  that
             the mental health services in Albania are anything other  than
             adequate, or that they do not exist at all.


             21.   It is the Appellant's medical condition that  would  act
             as the unreasonable factor in any  relocation.  For  the  same
             reasons as recorded above, I am not satisfied that it would be
             unreasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate.


    9.  The Judge concluded at paragraph [26] as follows:


             "26.  The Appellant claims that she fears persecution  by  the
             state and by agents within the state. For the reasons recorded
             above, namely, that the objective evidence  clearly  indicates
             there are numerous support mechanisms supported by  the  state
             and by NGO's in Albania that can help the appellant  upon  her
             return to Albania. I am satisfied that  the  traffickers  will
             not be able to  find  her  again  as  there  is  no  merit  in
             returning her for the purposes  of  sexual  exploitation.  The
             risk to them would be disproportionate. The appellant can rely
             upon the police and other state agencies  for  protection  and
             assistance."


The appeal before me


   10. The appellant advances six grounds of appeal.  They are  set  out  in
       summary at paragraph  [2]  of  the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal.
       Broadly stated,  the  appellant  claims  that  the  Judge  failed  to
       consider and apply the principles set out  in  the  country  guidance
       decision of AM and BM (Trafficked Women) Albania CG [2010]  UKUT  80,
       and in particular failed to consider whether the appellant  would  be
       at risk if she were returned to her home area, from  the  person  who
       had trafficked her to the UK.  The appellant also submits that  there
       was a failure to give reasons for the finding  that  she  would  have
       family support and a failure to consider whether the appellant could,
       in light of her medical condition and sense of  shame,  disclose  her
       activities in the UK, to her family.


   11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert
       on 8th June 2015. The matter comes before me to consider  whether  or
       not the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox involved the making
       of a material error of law.


   12. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 22nd June  2015  in
       which she confirms that the appeal is opposed.  The Rule 24  response
       accepts that the decision is not as full as  it  could  be,  but  the
       respondent submits that there are adequate reasons for  the  findings
       made,  and  the  Judge  has  considered  the  relevant  risk  factors
       identified in AM & BM, within his decision.


   13. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Brakaj adopts the matters set  out  in
       the Grounds of Appeal and submits that the consideration by the Judge
       of the issues in the appeal are very brief, for what  is  in  fact  a
       complex appeal.  She submits that although the Judge makes  reference
       to the country guidance decision of AM & BM at paragraph [9]  of  the
       decision, the Judge does not  apply  the  relevant  principles.   She
       submits that paragraphs 181 and 182 of the decision in AM  &  BM  are
       particularly relevant to this appeal, but the  Judge  has  failed  to
       carry out any fact specific assessment of the  issues.   She  submits
       that there is  no  finding  as  to  whether  relocation  would  prove
       effective for the appellant or indeed whether it  is  appropriate  to
       expect the appellant to relocate to another area given her health.


   14. Ms Brakaj submits that the Judge  found  at  paragraph  [11]  of  his
       decision that the appellant will have to deal with the issue of shame
       upon return to Albania.  She submits there is no  reason  to  believe
       that the appellant's family will support her now.  She  submits  that
       because the appellant had defied the family in the past, it cannot be
       assumed that they would support her now.


   15. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the Judge has  failed
       to properly consider the medical evidence that was before him and  in
       particular the opinion of the Consultant Psychiatrist.   Finally,  Ms
       Brakaj draws my attention to the country guidance decision in TD  and
       AD (Trafficked women) [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) that now  augments  the
       country guidance set out in AM & MB.


   16. In reply, Mr Kingham adopts the  matters  set  out  in  the  Rule  24
       response.  He submits that the question of relocation only arises  in
       the event that there is a finding that the appellant is at risk  upon
       return to her home area. He submits that it is clear that  the  Judge
       rejected material  parts  of  the  appellant's  evidence  and  having
       considered the evidence it was open to the Judge to find that  it  is
       more likely that the family will provide support,  accommodation  and
       assistance to the appellant once she is returned safely  to  Albania.
       He submits that the Judge was correct to record at paragraph [13]  of
       the decision that there was no evidence before him  to  suggest  that
       the appellant's former boyfriend DH has returned to Albania. Although
       that matter is dealt with in a short sentence at  paragraph  [13]  of
       the decision, when considered together with the findings made by  the
       Judge as to the support available from  the  appellant's  family,  no
       further elaboration is required. Mr Kingham submits that it does  not
       necessarily follow that a trafficker will seek out  someone  who  has
       escaped.


   17. Finally, Mr Kingham submits that the Judge  properly  considered  the
       medical evidence and addresses that evidence at paragraph [16] of the
       decision.  He submits that the findings made by the Judge as to  risk
       upon return, were open to him, and therefore any error in the Judge's
       approach to internal relocation is immaterial.


Error of Law decision


   18. The issue for me to decide is whether or not the Judge was  entitled,
       in light of the findings made by the  Judge,  to  conclude  that  the
       appellant has not discharged  the  burden  of  establishing  a  well-
       founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason  and  whether  in
       reaching that conclusion the Judge properly  considered  whether  the
       appellant falls within the category of a person who may be at risk as
       set out in the country  guidance  decision  of  AM  and  BM,  as  now
       augmented by TD and AD.


   19. In that respect I follow the guidance of the Court of Appeal in  R  &
       ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The Court of Appeal held that
       a finding might only be set aside for error of law on the grounds  of
       perversity if it was irrational or  unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury
       sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.  A finding
       that  is  "perverse"  embraces  findings  that  are   irrational   or
       unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, and findings of fact  that  are
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal
       should not overturn a judgment at first instance,  unless  it  really
       could not understand the original judge's thought process when he was
       making material findings. I apply that guidance to  my  consideration
       of the decision in this appeal.


   20. Having carefully read the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       and his reasons, I reject the submission that  the  Judge  failed  to
       consider and apply the  principles  of  the  country  guidance  case.
       There is an express reference to the country guidance case of AM  and
       BM at paragraph [9] of the Judge's decision and I have no  reason  to
       believe that having expressly stated that he has had regard  to  that
       decision, the Judge did not do so.  In reaching that decision I  have
       carefully read the findings that are set out  at  paragraphs  [8]  to
       [21]  of the decision and I am satisfied that the Judge engaged  with
       the guidance given.


   21. Headnote (b) to AM and BM states that much  of  Albanian  society  is
       governed by a strict  code  of  honour  which  not  only  means  that
       trafficked  women  would  have  very   considerable   difficulty   in
       reintegrating into their home areas on return but  also  will  affect
       their ability  to  relocate  internally.   Those  who  have  children
       outside marriage are particularly vulnerable.  At paragraph  [11]  of
       his decision, the Judge accepted that the  appellant  would  have  to
       deal with the issue of shame upon return to  Albania.   However,  the
       Judge rejected the appellants account of abuse at the  hands  of  her
       father.  The Judge found at paragraph [12] of his decision  that  the
       allegation made by the appellant is fictitious and designed  to  lend
       weight to her asylum claim.  The Judge again noted at paragraph  [15]
       that the activities that the appellant has become involved  in  after
       leaving the family home may bring some shame to the  family,  but  he
       found that it is more likely that the family  will  provide  support,
       accommodation and assistance to her once she is  returned  safely  to
       Albania.  The Judge found that there was no merit to her  claim  that
       her family will kill her.  In my judgement, the findings made by  the
       Judge are neither irrational nor  unreasonable.   They  are  findings
       that were open to the Judge who had had the  opportunity  of  hearing
       the appellant's evidence.


   22.  I also reject the submission made by the appellant  that  the  Judge
       failed to  consider  whether  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  if
       returning to her home area, from the person who trafficked her.   The
       Judge records at paragraph [13] of his decision  that  the  appellant
       trusted herself and her judgement to run away with her boyfriend  DH.
       He noted that there was no evidence before him to  suggest  that  the
       appellant's former boyfriend has turned from  the  UK/Italy/Ibiza  to
       Albania.   At paragraph [26], the Judge states that he  is  satisfied
       that the traffickers will not be able to find her again as  there  is
       no merit in returning her for the purposes  of  sexual  exploitation.
       The risk to them would be disproportionate.  The  Judge  has  plainly
       considered the matter and again, in my judgement, the  findings  made
       by the Judge are neither irrational nor unreasonable.


   23. I reject the submission made on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
       Judge failed to give full reasons for his finding that the  appellant
       would have family support and whether the appellant could,  in  light
       of her medical condition and sense of shame disclose  her  activities
       in the UK, to her family.    Mr.  Justice  Hadon-Cave  in  Budhathoki
       (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) held:


             "It is generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier
             Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in
             a case. This leads  to  judgments  becoming  overly  long  and
             confused and is  not  a  proportionate  approach  to  deciding
             cases. It is, however, necessary for judges  to  identify  and
             resolve key conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and
             brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can  understand
             why they have won or lost.


   24. In criticising the decision, Ms. Brakaj relies in particular upon the
       matters set out at paragraphs 10.7 to 10.9 of the Psychiatric  report
       that was before the Judge.  The Psychiatrist states that in her view,
       the appellant would struggle to give evidence in court and  that  her
       diagnosis of PTSD would make her vulnerable while answering questions
       related to her trafficking and she will find it difficult  to  answer
       questions around this area.  At paragraph  10.8  of  the  report  the
       Psychiatrist sets out the adjustments that could be made  during  the
       hearing to accommodate  the  appellant  and  at  paragraph  10.9  the
       Psychiatrist expresses an opinion that the  appellant  will  find  it
       difficult to live or work in Albania, because of the  fear  that  she
       has about returning home.


   25. The Judge had the advantage of observing the appellant give evidence.
         The  Judge  refers  at  paragraph  [16]  of  his  decision  to  the
       appellant's evidence about  the  organisation's  that  may  exist  in
       Albania to help the appellant and people  like  her.   I  accept  the
       submission made by Mr. Kingham that the appellant was  not  answering
       questions related to her trafficking, or  around  that  area  of  her
       evidence.  The Judge sets  out  his  reasons  for  finding  that  the
       appellant would have family support at paragraphs [12] to [15] of his
       decision.   The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  would  have  the
       assistance of her family upon return.  That was a  finding  that  was
       open to the Judge on the evidence before him.


   26. The decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  TD  and  AD  refers  to  the
       significant efforts made by the Albanian government  to  improve  its
       response to trafficking.  The Tribunal confirmed  that  there  is  in
       general a Horvath-standard sufficiency of protection, but it will not
       be effective in every case.  When considering whether or not there is
       a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  a  victim  of  trafficking   her
       particular circumstances must be  considered.   In  my  judgement,  a
       careful reading of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       demonstrates that whilst brief, the decision engages with the core of
       the appellant's claim.  The Judge reached findings that were properly
       open to him on the evidence.


   27. In TD and AD the Upper Tribunal confirms that  characteristics,  such
       as  mental  illness  or  psychological  scarring  are   relevant   in
       considering  whether  living  alone,  would  be  reasonable.   In  my
       judgement the Judge properly considered the medical  evidence  having
       regard to the positive elements and the note of caution.   The  Judge
       notes at paragraph [21] of the decision that it  is  the  appellant's
       medical condition that would act as the unreasonable  factor  in  any
       relocation.  He  finds  that  for  the  same  reasons  as  previously
       recorded, he was not satisfied  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
       expect the appellant to relocate.


   28. I reject the submission that the Judge failed to fully  consider  the
       medical evidence before him.  At paragraphs [18] to  [20]  the  Judge
       deals with the medical evidence that was  before  him.   He  accepted
       that the appellant suffers from PTSD  and  properly  noted  that  the
       appellant continues to  recover  and  her  recovery  is  expected  to
       continue.  The Judge noted that a certain  note  of  caution  can  be
       taken from the Psychiatric report but he  found  that  that  was  not
       enough to act as a bar or prohibition to the  appellant's  return  to
       Albania.  In my judgement,  the  findings  made  by  the  Judge  were
       properly open to him on the evidence and again are  neither  perverse
       or irrational.


   29. In my judgement, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no
       material error.  It follows that the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   30. The appeal is dismissed.


   31. An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 25th July 2016



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


The appeal is dismissed.  There can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 25th July 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




