
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07307/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 February 2014                        |                           |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                     MR KIANOUSH DADRAS HAGHIGHI PASAND
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
                            For the Appellant: Mr K Gayle of counsel
           instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Ms C Everett a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 5  September  1975.
      His appeal is against the respondent's decision of  27  July  2012  to
      give directions for his removal from the UK following the  refusal  of
      asylum. The respondent's reasons for refusal are set out in a  lengthy
      letter of the same date.


   2. The appeal history is that following  the  respondent's  decision  the
      appellant  appealed  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  where   First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Clough ("The FTTJ") heard his  appeal  on  4  September
      2012. The appeal was dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection  and
      human rights grounds. The appellant was granted permission  to  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal where an Upper Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the
      FTTJ had erred in law and that her decision should be  set  aside  and
      remade. The appeal then came  before  a  Deputy  Judge  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal on 26 March 2013 who, after a  hearing,  also  dismissed  the
      appeal. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Court of
      Appeal which was granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge on  30  May  2013.
      Subsequently, on 1 November 2013 and by consent, the Court  of  Appeal
      ordered that the appellant's  appeal  be  reconsidered  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  It  is  common  ground  that  in  these  circumstances  the
      appellant's appeal comes before me for rehearing with no  findings  of
      credibility or fact preserved from the earlier determinations.


   3. The appellant claimed to be a citizen of Iran and a Shia Muslim.  Born
      in September 1975 he married in 1997 or 1998 (it is not  clear  which)
      but is now divorced. His wife and two daughters born in  October  1995
      and January 2000 are still living in Iran. He  was  a  member  of  the
      Basij and carried out his military service between 1994 and  1996.  He
      did  not  join  the  Basij  because  of  any  religious  or  political
      conviction  but  to  obtain  the  benefits  which  would   come   from
      membership. In reply to questions at interview he said that  he  never
      participated in any acts of violence against members  of  the  public.
      Whilst carrying out his military service he was assigned as  a  driver
      to the man  who  subsequently  became  his  father-in-law.  He  was  a
      Brigadier General in the military  division  of  Sepah  Pasdaran  (the
      Revolutionary Guards), a devout Muslim and  strong  supporter  of  the
      revolution. He met  his  future  wife  whose  mother  supported  their
      marriage whilst his father-in-law strongly disapproved.


   4. Following the marriage his father-in-law arranged for the appellant to
      be given a civilian job with Sepah in a shop reserved for  members  of
      the organisation. The appellant and his wife lived next  door  to  his
      mother and father-in-law. His father-in-law tried to control his  life
      and was constantly disapproving of the appellant, doubting his loyalty
      to the regime and devotion to Islam. The appellant accepts that he did
      not share his father-in-law's devotion and could not pretend  that  he
      did. In 1999 and because of the resulting tension it was  agreed  that
      the appellant and his wife would move  away  and  that  the  appellant
      would take up a Sepah post at a facility for  senior  members  of  the
      organisation where the appellant would be responsible  for  allocating
      accommodation. The appellant believed that his father-in-law  arranged
      the job because he would be able to make arrangements  for  others  to
      keep an eye on him and report back.


   5. The appellant believed that colleagues of his  father-in-law  reported
      back to him that he was not behaving like a faithful Muslim.  In  2002
      his father-in-law came to where the appellant was working and they had
      a violent argument during which his father-in-law threatened  to  kill
      him. The appellant decided to resign. He  had  to  go  to  Teheran  to
      explain himself and seek his resignation. It was two or  three  months
      before his  resignation  was  accepted.  His  father-in-law  tried  to
      persuade him to divorce his daughter.


   6. After some months unemployment the appellant obtained a  civilian  job
      with the Ministry of Work in Qom. He believes that  his  mother-in-law
      managed to placate his father-in-law sufficiently for him to agree  to
      arrange this. After an interval the appellant resumed living with  his
      wife and children. Sometime later he was told that he  would  have  to
      improve his qualifications if he was to keep his job. He failed in his
      attempt to enter university and lost his  job.  After  about  a  month
      during which he was not able to obtain work he decided  to  move  away
      from Qom and the influence of his father-in-law and  seek  work  as  a
      lorry driver in Teheran, about an hour away from Qom. He obtained work
      as a lorry driver for an individual who owned the lorry.  He  did  not
      have accommodation of his own whilst in Teheran,  either  sleeping  in
      his lorry or at the homes of friends.


   7. Whilst he was in Teheran and in  about  February  2008  the  appellant
      discovered that he had been divorced in his absence. He was sure  that
      this had been arranged through a  lawyer  by  his  father-in-law.  His
      family had received an official letter at the family home.


   8. The appellant believed that his father-in-law made allegations to  the
      authorities that he had given secrets to his brother who was living in
      the USA. The appellant discovered this in March 2008.  A  warrant  was
      issued for his arrest. The appellant's family who were living in Rasht
      informed him that their home had been raided by the  police  who  were
      looking for him. His family obtained information from  an  officer  in
      Sepah who said that the appellant  had  been  accused  of  treason  by
      passing sensitive information to his brother in the USA. The appellant
      believed that the accusation was likely to  relate  to  the  sensitive
      information which he would have had access to whilst  he  was  working
      for Sepah. The  appellant  has  made  it  clear  throughout  that  the
      accusation was baseless and that he had never supplied any information
      to his brother in the USA or anyone else.


   9. The appellant concluded that it would be unsafe to continue to live in
      Iran and in August 2008  he  left  the  country  travelling  first  to
      Turkey. The agent who had been paid approximately �9000  provided  him
      with a false Finnish passport and he flew from Turkey intending to  go
      to Canada with a transit stop in the UK.  He  was  stopped  before  he
      could board a flight to Canada when his false documents were detected.
      He claimed asylum. The appellant had three asylum interviews the  last
      on 23 October 2008. It took the respondent until 27 July 2012 to  make
      a decision on his application.


  10. The appellant claims that he would be at risk of arrest,  torture  and
      death at the hands of the authorities if he was returned to Iran. As a
      former member of Sepah the mere fact that he had claimed asylum in the
      UK would be enough  for  this  to  happen  but  worse  than  that  the
      authorities were looking for him and  there  was  a  warrant  for  his
      arrest for treason.


  11. The appellant claimed to have suffered psychological problems  and  to
      be receiving medication from his GP. He has not been in touch with his
      wife or children since he came to the UK. He provided  the  respondent
      with a number of documents, most of which are  originals.  Ms  Everett
      produced these and I inspected them. They  are  two  Basij  membership
      cards,  a  military  service  completion  card,  a  military  training
      certificate, two Basij commendations and a New Year's greeting letter,
      three Basij cinema discount cards, a "swimming"  card  and  a  "public
      running event" card, a letter confirming his inclusion  in  the  Basij
      compensation payment scheme, two Basij polio eradication cards  and  a
      letter confirming that he passed a Basij training course.


  12. In the refusal letter dated 27 July 2012 the respondent sets  out  and
      assesses the  appellant's  evidence,  his  claims  and  the  documents
      submitted. The respondent accepted that the appellant was a citizen of
      Iran but not his account of events or that he  would  be  at  risk  on
      return. The documents were considered to be of poor quality and  there
      was no objective evidence to verify that they were genuine. There were
      a number of inconsistencies  in  his  evidence  both  in  relation  to
      evidence given by him on different occasions and in  relation  to  the
      country material. The respondent concluded that  the  appellant  would
      not be at risk on return and was not entitled to asylum,  humanitarian
      protection or to succeed on human rights grounds.


  13. The appellant's representatives have provided a composite bundle which
      includes all the documents submitted at the previous hearings plus new
      material  by  way  of  a  supplementary  witness  statement  from  the
      appellant, two letters from his  father,  a  letter  from  his  GP,  a
      skeleton argument, a chronology and updated country material.  I  also
      have the Home Office bundle.


  14. I heard oral evidence from the  appellant  through  a  Farsi  speaking
      interpreter. His evidence in chief was brief  and  limited  to  formal
      matters such as identity and address. He also  adopted  and  confirmed
      the truth and accuracy of his two witness statements dated  28  August
      2012 and 14 March 2013. He was cross-examined at length by Ms  Everett
      and  re-examined.  I  asked  some  questions  for   the   purpose   of
      clarification. The evidence is set out in my record of proceedings.


  15. Ms Everett relied on the reasons for  refusal  letter  dated  27  July
      2012. She said that she would confine her submissions to the  evidence
      given by the appellant at the hearing. She submitted that  there  were
      problems  with  this  evidence  particularly  the   claim   that   the
      authorities did not know where he  was  after  he  claimed  that  they
      started looking for him. He said that during this period and whilst he
      was working as a lorry driver based in  Tehran  he  visited  the  area
      where his wife and daughters were living about three times a week  and
      took the opportunity to visit his elder  daughter  at  her  school  as
      often as he could. It was not plausible that  his  ex-wife  would  not
      know that he was working as a lorry driver or visiting their daughter.
      It was not plausible that he would take the risk of doing this  if  he
      knew that the authorities were looking for him.


  16. I asked Ms Everett whether she wished to make submissions in  relation
      to the claimed inconsistencies referred to in the reasons for  refusal
      letter and the explanations which the appellant had  provided  in  his
      witness statement dated 23 August 2012. She  said  that  she  did  not
      intend to make any further submissions beyond what  was  said  in  the
      refusal letter although she accepted that  some  of  the  explanations
      were  plausible.  She  accepted  that  the  appellant  was   partially
      credible. She did not now dispute that he was married with children or
      that he had had the jobs he claimed. However, she argued that  on  the
      facts he would not be at risk on return.


  17. In reply to my question Ms  Everett  conceded  that  if  I  found  the
      appellant's account of events to  be  accurate  and  credible  in  all
      material respects then he would be at risk on return  to  Iran  for  a
      Convention reason and would be entitled to asylum and  to  succeed  on
      Article 2 and 3 human rights grounds. In the  circumstances  he  would
      not need and would not be entitled to humanitarian protection.


  18.  Mr  Gale  accepted  that  the  appellant's  account  of  events   was
      complicated  but  submitted  that  his  evidence  was  consistent  and
      plausible. It was not surprising or implausible that  the  authorities
      would have tried to find him at the family home. They had no reason to
      know where else he might be living because of his job and  lack  of  a
      fixed address in Teheran. The most obvious place to try and  find  him
      was the family home. Similarly, there was no reason why his father-in-
      law would know where he was. There was no  inconsistency  between  the
      evidence in paragraph 16 of his earlier  witness  statement  where  he
      said that he had travelled "home" and his later evidence that  he  had
      not gone to where his ex-wife was living but to see his elder daughter
      at her school on occasions when the delivery trips in his  lorry  took
      him to the area. In common parlance "home" could  equally  well  be  a
      reference to the area in which they lived.


  19. Mr Gale argued that during his job at the facility for senior officers
      of Sepah it was not implausible that  the  appellant  would  have  had
      access  to  what  the  authorities  would  perceive  to  be  sensitive
      information. In view of Ms Everett's concession he made no submissions
      in relation to the country material  before  me  or  the  question  of
      whether in the light of this, if the appellant's account of events was
      accepted, he would be at risk on return.


  20. I reserved my determination.


  21. I have no relevant expertise which  would  enable  me  to  assess  the
      genuineness or otherwise of the documents submitted by the  appellant.
      If the respondent has any such expertise she has not said what it  is.
      Equally, the appellant has  not  provided  any  expert  evidence.  The
      respondent criticises some of the documents as being of  poor  quality
      and containing no redeeming security features. I am not told what  the
      redeeming security features might be. I do not know whether  they  are
      of poor quality because I have no  similar  documents  with  which  to
      compare them. In the circumstances I will  consider  and  assess  them
      with all the other evidence in the round.


  22. The respondent accepted that the appellant was a citizen of  Iran.  Ms
      Everett  has  accepted  that  he  was  married,  has   children   and,
      importantly, had the jobs he claimed in Iran.


  23. I find that on the evidence referred  to  by  the  respondent  in  the
      refusal letter it is not implausible that the appellant would not have
      been involved in acts of violence against individuals  or  the  public
      generally. The evidence does not indicate  that  all  members  of  the
      Basij do this. The appellant admitted to witnessing acts  of  violence
      by the Basij. His evidence was  that  he  joined  the  Basij  for  the
      benefits he could gain rather  than  any  religious  or  revolutionary
      beliefs. His evidence does not portray him as a man  of  strong  moral
      convictions  who  would  resign  from  the  Basij  even  if   he   was
      disillusioned with the organisation.


  24. On the country material relied on by the  respondent  I  can  find  no
      inconsistency between the appellant becoming a member of the Basij and
      then having to perform his compulsory military service.  There  is  no
      implausibility in the appellant's father-in-law  threatening  to  kill
      him but not then doing so. I find it is plausible that his  father-in-
      law's increasing dislike and disapproval of the appellant  would  have
      led to his procuring a divorce from  his  daughter  and  making  false
      accusations against the appellant.


  25. I accept that there are some inconsistencies as to the dates and order
      of events. In his witness statement dated 23 August 2012 the appellant
      answers the points taken against him in the refusal letter in  detail.
      Whilst invited to do so Ms Everett did not  make  any  submissions  in
      relation to these answers other than to accept that some of  them  are
      plausible whilst still relying on the refusal letter.  I  accept  that
      the appellant's  representatives  informed  the  respondent  that  the
      originals of the copy documents submitted could be made available  for
      inspection  and  that  at  some  stage  they  were  submitted  to  the
      respondent. With one exception the documents  produced  to  me  by  Ms
      Everett at the hearing were originals. Any criticism based on the lack
      of original documents falls away.


  26. As to Ms Everett's submissions in relation to the  evidence  given  by
      the appellant before me I do not find it implausible that  during  the
      period he  was  working  as  a  lorry  driver  based  in  Teheran  the
      authorities would not know where he was and would try and find him  at
      the family home. During that period he had no fixed  address  and  was
      either sleeping in his lorry or staying with various friends. I do not
      consider that the reference  in  his  witness  statement  to  visiting
      "home" is inconsistent with his evidence that he meant his  home  area
      including his elder daughter's school and not the place where his  ex-
      wife was living. I find that it was risky for the appellant  to  visit
      his elder daughter and her school and that he was likely to  have  run
      the risk of detection  by  his  ex-wife,  his  father-in-law  and  the
      authorities at a time when he had discovered that  they  were  looking
      for him. However, it is plausible that he would have taken the risk in
      order to see his daughter. It is  understandable  that  the  appellant
      does not know the details of the charges against him. It is  plausible
      that if he worked at a facility for senior officers of Sepah he  would
      have had access to information which the authorities would  regard  as
      sensitive.


  27. There are two statements from the appellant's father. The date of  one
      of them is not clear but the other is dated 5 March 2013.  They  state
      that after the appellant left Iran the authorities came to the  family
      home on four  occasions  looking  for  the  appellant  and  took  away
      documents and papers belonging to him.  They  searched  the  property,
      questioned the appellant's father and mother and said that they had an
      arrest warrant for the appellant. The second statement, which  appears
      to be the later, dated 5  March  2013,  states  that  the  appellant's
      mother and father are now living in the USA but have been  told  by  a
      friend that during the preceding three months plainclothes police have
      made another visit to the family home looking for  the  appellant.  Ms
      Everett made no submissions in relation to these statements.


  28. Looking at all the evidence in the  round  including  the  documentary
      evidence and the statements from his father and whilst I  accept  that
      there are some minor  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  evidence,
      including inconsistencies as to dates, I find that the main thrust  of
      his account has been consistent and that he is a credible  witness.  I
      believe his account of events and  find  he  has  established  to  the
      standard of a reasonable likelihood that the facts and beliefs set out
      in paragraphs 3 to 11 of this determination and  the  statements  from
      his father are true and that the documents he has produced are  likely
      to be genuine.


  29. In the light of the country information before me Ms Everett  properly
      conceded that if I found the  appellant's  account  of  events  to  be
      accurate and credible in all material respects then  he  would  be  at
      risk on return to Iran for a Convention reason and would  be  entitled
      to asylum and to succeed on Article 2 and 3 human rights grounds. I so
      find.


  30. The appellant has not asked for an  anonymity  direction  and  in  the
      light of my findings in conclusion I see no good reason to make one.


  31. The earlier decisions in this appeal having been set  aside  I  remake
      the decision and allow the appellant's appeal on asylum and Article  2
      and 3 human rights grounds.







      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 12 February 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
