
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07794/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th January and 20th April 2016  |On 19th May 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                             MANDIP SINGH CHOPRA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Medley-Daley and Miss John-Rose
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mandip Singh Chopra, a citizen of Afghanistan born
    1st January 1990.  He appeals against the decision  of  the  Respondent
    made on 16th September 2014 to refuse to grant asylum and to remove him
    from the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brookfield in February 2015.  On
    6th August 2015 having heard submissions  I  found  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Brookfield and I set her decision aside with no preserved  findings  of
    fact.

The Basis of the Appellant's Claim for Asylum

 3. The Appellant  claims  that  he  would  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Afghanistan because he is a Sikh.   He  claims  to  have
    been verbally abused, beaten and on  one  occasion  cut  with  a  razor
    because of his religion.  He was told that he should convert  to  Islam
    or leave the country.  His family suffered similar treatment  and  they
    have also left Afghanistan.

 4. The Appellant is married and his wife and child are  dependent  on  his
    claim.  They entered the UK on 10th October 2014  and  claimed  asylum.
    The Appellant said  that  a  lot  of  the  attacks  that  he  faced  in
    Afghanistan were when he was on his way to the Gurdwara.  Prior to  the
    attacks becoming so bad and so frequent he would  attend  the  Gurdwara
    every day.  He had to reduce his  attendance.   In  his  interview  the
    Appellant said that he had six sisters.  He is the only son.   Four  of
    his sisters are married and he does not know where they are.   The  two
    younger ones are with his father but he does not know if his father  is
    in Afghanistan or not.  He does not know where he is.  His  father  had
    all his jewellery stolen.  Muslims had entered the  house,  beaten  the
    Appellant and his father and tried and to  take  the  Appellant's  wife
    away.  He said that whenever they went out they would be  attacked.   I
    note from the interview  notes  that  he  had  shown  the  interviewing
    officer his arms and there are old marks from beatings.  He  said  they
    cut him with razors and these marks were on his arms.  He said  he  had
    been beaten in the street eight to ten times.

Decision of the Secretary of State

 5. The decision of the Secretary of State is contained in a  letter  dated
    16th September 2014.

 6. The Secretary of State accepted that the Appellant is a  Sikh  but  not
    that he is a national of Afghanistan. She accordingly  did  not  accept
    that he would be at  risk  in  Afghanistan  or  that  he  had  suffered
    persecution there in the past.

Evidence at the hearing

 7. This case first came before me on 13th January 2016.  An error had been
    made in that an interpreter had not been booked for the  hearing.   The
    Appellant's representative told me that  five  witnesses  had  come  at
    great expense from London all of whom would confirm that the  Appellant
    is a national of Afghanistan, a fact which had  been  disputed  by  the
    Secretary of State in the refusal letter.  The representative said that
    three of the witnesses spoke English and asked if I could hear evidence
    from them that day to avoid them having to come  back  to  court  at  a
    later date.  I agreed to do this.  I heard evidence from  Didar  Singh,
    Ragmeet Singh Chopra and   Manmeet  Singh  Chopra.  Manmeet  Singh  and
    Ragmeet Singh are paternal relatives of the Appellant and  Didar  Singh
    is his brother-in-law.  All three had  provided  statements  confirming
    that they knew the Appellant's family members and that they  knew  each
    other  in  Afghanistan  and  would  visit  each  other.   They  adopted
    statements to this effect.  The Appellant's wife was not in  attendance
    that day.  I agreed that I would adjourn the case part  heard  so  that
    the Appellant's wife could attend and we could book an  interpreter  so
    that evidence could be properly taken.

 8. I had accepted at the end of the  hearing  on  16th  January  that  the
    Appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  Miss John-Rose said  therefore
    that she did not think it was necessary for anyone to give evidence and
    she would not be calling any  witnesses.   She  wished  to  proceed  on
    submissions only.  Mr Harrison had no objection to that.

 9. In his submissions Mr Harrison  said  he  would  rely  on  the  Refusal
    Letter. He said that ideally a caseworker should have reconsidered  the
    case in the light of my finding that the  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan but that had not been possible.

10. Mrs John-Rose had provided a skeleton argument in which it is submitted
    that the number of Sikhs in Afghanistan has reduced significantly.  She
    relied on the recent country guidance case TG and Others (Afghan  Sikhs
    persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 595.  In  oral  submissions  she
    said it is clear from TG that each case has to be looked at on its  own
    merits.  Each case is fact-sensitive.  The question is whether it would
    be unduly harsh for the Appellant and his  family  to  relocate  within
    Afghanistan given that the  problems  that  they  had  were  apparently
    localised.  The Appellant has stated that he has no family  support  in
    Kabul.  He has no means of securing employment  and  accommodation  for
    him  and  his  family.   He  is  uneducated.   He  was  unemployed   in
    Afghanistan.  He does not know where his parents and sisters  are.   He
    does have other family in the UK. He has a child and it would not be in
    her best interests to have to live  in  the  atmosphere  to  which  the
    family would be subjected in Afghanistan.   She  pointed  out  that  no
    challenge had been made to the veracity of the Appellant's account  and
    submitted that the Appellant falls  squarely  within  the  category  of
    persons identified at paragraphs 117 and  118 of TG which read,

         "It is also important to bear in mind that partly because of  their
         declining number, access to extended family / community / charity /
         religious support is generally very difficult for  members  of  the
         Sikh and Hindu communities in Afghanistan. It is likely to be  even
         more  so  upon  relocation.  As   a   consequence   of   this   the
         practicability  of  settling  elsewhere  and  the  availability  of
         meaningful support must be carefully considered. Those  members  of
         the Sikh or Hindu communities  without  access  to  an  independent
         income are unlikely to be able to reasonably  relocate  because  of
         depleted support mechanisms. It follows that such  individuals  are
         unlikely to have a viable internal relocation alternative.

         As noted above, whether a person will be  accepted  on  return  may
         depend upon the availability of support, which is a fact  sensitive
         assessment. We have not been provided with any up to date  guidance
         published by the Respondent regarding this,  but  note  an  article
         dated 6th February 2015 by European Council on Refugees and  Exiles
         (ECRE), titled "Norway not to return families at risk in their home
         area to parts of Afghanistan  with  no  support"  in  which  it  is
         reported that Norway will not return  families  with  children  who
         would face persecution in their home areas to areas of  Afghanistan
         where they do not have sufficient networks or resources. This is in
         accordance with the 2013 UNHCR Guidelines calling for the  internal
         flight  alternative  in  Afghanistan  to  only  apply   where   the
         individual can expect to benefit from meaningful support  of  their
         own family, community or tribe in the area of possible  relocation,
         and consistent with our own assessment (although our own assessment
         has been restricted to members of the Sikh and Hindu communities)."

My findings

11. I have given careful consideration to all the evidence put before me in
    this case.

12. I shall set out the summary of the findings of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    TG.

         "Risk to followers of the Sikh and Hindu faiths in Afghanistan:

         (i)  Some members of the Sikh and Hindu communities in  Afghanistan
         continue to suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim zealots.

         (ii) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  in  Afghanistan  do
         not face a real risk of persecution or  ill-treatment  such  as  to
         entitle them to a grant of international protection on the basis of
         their ethnic or religious identity, per se. Neither can it be  said
         that the cumulative impact of discrimination suffered by  the  Sikh
         and  Hindu  communities  in  general  reaches  the   threshold   of
         persecution.

         (iii)    A consideration of whether an  individual  member  of  the
         Sikh and Hindu communities is at  risk  real  of  persecution  upon
         return  to  Afghanistan  is  fact-sensitive.   All   the   relevant
         circumstances must be considered but careful  attention  should  be
         paid to the following:

             a.   women are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence  of
                  appropriate protection from a male member of the family;

             b.   likely financial  circumstances  and  ability  to  access
                  basic accommodation bearing in mind

                  -    Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member  of
                      the Sikh and Hindu communities

                  -    such individuals  may  face  difficulties  (including
                      threats, extortion,  seizure  of  land  and  acts  of
                      violence) in retaining property  and  /  or  pursuing
                      their  remaining  traditional  pursuit,  that  of   a
                      shopkeeper / trader

                  -     the  traditional  source   of   support   for   such
                      individuals,  the  Gurdwara  is  much  less  able  to
                      provide adequate support;

             c.    the  level  of  religious  devotion  and  the  practical
                  accessibility to a suitable place of religious worship  in
                  light of declining numbers and the evidence that some have
                  been  subjected  to  harm  and  threats  to  harm   whilst
                  accessing the Gurdwara;

             d.   access to appropriate education for children in light  of
                  discrimination against Sikh  and Hindu  children  and  the
                  shortage of adequate education facilities for them.

         (iv) Although it appears there is  a  willingness  at  governmental
         level to provide protection, it is not established on the  evidence
         that at a local level the police are  willing,  even  if  able,  to
         provide the necessary  level  of  protection  required  in  Refugee
         Convention/Qualification Directive terms, to those members  of  the
         Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  who  experience  serious   harm   or
         harassment amounting to persecution.

         (v)  Whether it is reasonable to expect a member  of  the  Sikh  or
         Hindu communities to relocate is a fact sensitive  assessment.  The
         relevant factors to be considered include those set  out  at  (iii)
         above. Given their particular circumstances and  declining  number,
         the practicability of settling elsewhere for members  of  the  Sikh
         and Hindu communities must be carefully considered.  Those  without
         access to  an  independent  income  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
         reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms.

         (vi) This replaces the county guidance provided in the cases  of  K
         (Risk - Sikh- Women) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00057 and  SL  and
         Others (Returning Sikhs and Hindus)  Afghanistan  CG  [2005]  UKAIT
         00137. "

13. It has been accepted that the Appellant is  an  Afghani  Sikh  and  the
    question is whether he would face a real risk  of  persecution  in  his
    home area and if so whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him  and
    his family to relocate within Afghanistan. As Mrs John-Rose said in her
    submissions no real challenge has been made to the account given by the
    Appellant since the Respondent simply relied on  her  belief  that  the
    Appellant was not from Afghanistan and went no further.  The  Appellant
    says that his family have all left Afghanistan because of the  problems
    they suffered there. I accept that the Appellant and indeed his  family
    have  been  subjected  to  serious  discrimination  and  harassment  in
    Afghanistan on account of  their  religion.  There  is  a  question  of
    whether or not this amounts to persecution. It seems  to  me  that  the
    discrimination to which the Appellant was subjected was  a  pattern  of
    discrimination rather than a  one-off  incident.  The  effect  of  this
    discrimination was to  prevent  the  Appellant's  access  to  work,  to
    education and to the means to support  his  family.  He  also  suffered
    restrictions on the right to practise his religion. I  find  that  this
    amounts to persecution. I take into account too that there is  evidence
    that the authorities at local level are neither  willing  nor  able  to
    provide effective protection. Having considered what was said in TG  in
    the light of the Appellant's circumstances as a whole I  find  that  it
    would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the  Appellant  and  his  family  to
    relocate within Afghanistan.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 17th May 2016

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

