
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07102/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 19th November 2015                |On 4th December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ALI AHMAD
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma of Counsel, instructed by Lawland
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer  to  him  as  the  Claimant.   The
    Claimant is male and claims to be of Rohingya ethnicity from Burma with
    a date of birth of 1st January  1986.   The  Claimant  claims  to  have
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 20th January 2005 and  claimed  asylum
    on 26th February 2015 fearing persecution if returned to Burma  because
    of his Rohingya ethnicity.

 2. The application was refused on 27th March 2015, the Secretary of  State
    not accepting that the Claimant had given a credible account,  and  not
    accepting that he is  a  Burmese  Rohingya.   The  Secretary  of  State
    believed that the Claimant is a Bangladeshi national.

 3. The Claimant's appeal was heard by  Judge  Hubball  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the FTT) on 6th August 2015.  The FTT believed the Claimant's
    account, found him credible, and on the basis  that  he  is  a  Burmese
    Rohingya, allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.  There is  no  separate
    finding in relation to human rights.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended  that  the  FTT  had  failed  to
    engage adequately with the evidence concerning matters  which  were  in
    contention between the parties.

 5. It was contended that the FTT had not addressed the concerns raised  by
    the Secretary of State in the refusal letter dated 27th March  2015  at
    paragraphs 22-28.

 6. It was contended that the Appellant's account of the camp in  which  he
    lived, conflicted with the established background evidence and the  FTT
    had not given reasons for preferring the Appellant's evidence.  It  was
    further contended that the judge  had  not  addressed  the  Appellant's
    claimed residence in the UK since 2005, which the FTT accepted  despite
    there being no evidence to support this  claim,  and  despite  the  FTT
    making an adverse credibility finding pursuant to section 8(2)  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  (the
    2004 Act) by reason of the Claimant failing to  make  an  asylum  claim
    until February 2014.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Froom in the following terms;

         "The Respondent disputed the Appellant's claim  to  be  a  Rohingya
         from Burma.  The judge found he was  a  Rohingya  and  allowed  his
         appeal.  In essence the grounds complain the judge did not  address
         all the Respondent's reasons for refusal.

         I grant permission because it is arguable the judge failed to  give
         adequate reasons for his decision in that he did  not  address  the
         Respondent's arguments, as set out in the refusal,  concerning  the
         inconsistency between the Appellant's account of the camp he claims
         to have lived  in  and  the  background  evidence.   In  fact,  the
         majority of the judge's positive findings of fact are unreasoned."

 8. The Claimant did not lodge a  response  pursuant  to  rule  24  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 9. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.



The Secretary of State's Submissions


10. Mr Mills relied and expanded upon  the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.  I was asked to find that it  was
    wholly unclear why the FTT preferred the Appellant's  evidence  to  the
    evidence provided by the Secretary of State.  Mr Mills  submitted  that
    the FTT had not engaged with the  issues  raised  in  the  decision  to
    refuse.

11. I was asked to note that the FTT had found the  Claimant's  credibility
    to be damaged pursuant to section 8 of the 2004 Act.  I  was  asked  to
    find that the FTT on a number of occasions throughout the decision  had
    accepted and believed evidence given by  the  Claimant  without  giving
    adequate reasons.

The Claimant's Submissions

12. Mr Sharma submitted that adequate reasons had been given by the FTT.  I
    was referred to paragraph 93 in which the FTT had stated;

         "93. I have had an extensive opportunity of hearing  oral  evidence
             from the Appellant in this appeal.  Notwithstanding the damage
             to the Appellant's general credibility under section  8(2)  of
             the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act
             2004, I found the core  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  to  be
             consistent and truthful to the lower standard of  proof  of  a
             reasonable likelihood or serious possibility."

13. Mr Sharma pointed out that the  FTT  had  made  specific  reference  in
    paragraph 107 to the Danish report on Rohingya refugees in  Bangladesh,
    which was the background evidence  relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The FTT had  considered  that  report  at  paragraph  114,  and
    therefore it could not  be  said  that  the  FTT  had  disregarded  the
    background evidence.

14. Mr Sharma submitted that the grounds relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of
    State amounted to a disagreement with the findings made by the FTT  but
    did not disclose a material error of law.

The Secretary of State's Response

15. Mr Mills pointed out that paragraph 93 did not contain any reasons  why
    the FTT found the core of the Claimant's evidence to be consistent  and
    truthful.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I announced at the hearing that the FTT had materially erred in law and
    that I would issue a written decision giving my  reasons  for  reaching
    that conclusion.

17. The FTT found that the Claimant's credibility was damaged  pursuant  to
    section 8(2) of the 2004 Act as he had failed  to  claim  asylum  until
    February 2014, having claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom  in
    January 2005.  There is no error of law in that conclusion.

18. However, having found  that  the  Claimant's  general  credibility  was
    damaged, the FTT nevertheless recorded in paragraph 93  that  it  found
    the core of the Claimant's account to be consistent and truthful.   The
    error made by the FTT is to fail to  give  adequate  reasons  for  that
    finding, and to fail  to  give  adequate  reasons  to  explain  why  it
    preferred the Claimant's evidence to that given  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

19. I set out below the head note to  Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)
    [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) which provides a summary of the  principles  to
    be applied in relation to adequacy of reasoning;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

20. Credibility is a  major  issue  in  this  appeal,  and  the  Claimant's
    assertion that he is a Rohingya is central to his claim.

21. Material issues in relation to credibility and the Claimant's ethnicity
    were raised by the Secretary of State in  the  refusal  decision  dated
    27th March 2015.

22. One of the issues raised related to the Claimant's language, in that he
    spoke Bengali and not Rohingya.  It was contended by the  Secretary  of
    State that the Claimant had failed to address the issue as  to  why  he
    was taught Bengali instead of Rohingyan which was his parents'  primary
    language.

23. In paragraphs 98-99 the FTT stated  that  it  believed  the  Claimant's
    evidence that no one in the refugee camp spoke Rohingya  and  this  was
    why he only spoke  Bengali.   The  FTT  gave  no  adequate  reason  for
    reaching this conclusion, which is contrary to the background evidence.
     The FTT had not engaged adequately  with  the  issues  raised  by  the
    Secretary of State, and gave no adequate explanation for  reaching  the
    conclusion that the Claimant's evidence was to be preferred to that  of
    the background evidence.

24. Another issue raised related to the  family/ration  book  used  by  the
    Claimant's  family  in  the  refugee  camp.   The  background  evidence
    indicated that such books are traded and  there  is  a  high  level  of
    fraud.  At paragraph 107 the FTT acknowledged the high level  of  fraud
    and that such books are traded but concluded that the book produced  by
    the Claimant (which had not been produced at the date the Secretary  of
    State refused the claim) was genuine and  could  be  relied  upon.   No
    adequate explanation or reason is given as to why the FFT  reached  the
    conclusion that the book can be relied  upon.   There  is  no  adequate
    explanation as to why the  Claimant's  evidence  can  be  relied  upon,
    despite an adverse credibility finding made pursuant to section 8(2) of
    the 2004 Act.  The FTT noted that the names of  the  Claimant's  family
    are in the book, but this is not an adequate reason for accepting it as
    genuine.  It would be unlikely for the Claimant to produce a book  said
    to belong to his family, if it did not contain his family details.

25. At paragraph 115 the FTT  accepted  the  Claimant's  evidence  that  he
    visited the Bangladeshi High Commission in London  to  try  and  obtain
    identity documents and also  accepted  that  he  went  to  the  Burmese
    Rohingya organisation UK in London.  No adequate reasons are given  for
    accepting this evidence.  There was no documentary evidence to  confirm
    this, and the FTT has  not  adequately  explained  why  the  Claimant's
    evidence was accepted, notwithstanding the adverse credibility  finding
    made pursuant to section 8(2) of the 2004 Act.

26. The FTT used the phrase "I accept" and  "I  believe"  on  a  number  of
    occasions in paragraphs 94-115,  without  giving  adequate  reasons  to
    explain why the evidence was accepted or believed.   I  do  not  accept
    that paragraph 93 of the decision provides a satisfactory explanation.

27. The FTT has not complied with the principles set out in Budhathoki,  in
    that adequate reasons for findings have not been given, and it  is  not
    clear to the Secretary  of  State,  why  the  Claimant's  evidence  was
    accepted above that given by the Secretary of State.

28. The decision of the FTT is set aside with no findings  preserved.   The
    parties agreed, and I accept, having  considered  paragraph  7  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012, that  the
    nature and extent of the judicial fact-finding which is  necessary  for
    the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that it is appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

29. The appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  take  place  at  the
    Birmingham Hearing Centre.  The parties will be advised of the time and
    date in due course.  The appeal is to be heard by a First-tier Tribunal
    Judge other than Judge Hubball.  An  interpreter  in  Bengali  will  be
    provided.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

There was no order for anonymity made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There
has been no request for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal,  and  no  anonymity
order is made.


Signed   Date 25th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The fee award will need  to  be
considered when the First-tier Tribunal has heard this appeal.


Signed        Date 25th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

