
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07752/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2015                           |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Miss Dashuri Mezini
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes
For the Respondent:    Ms A Bhachu


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of reference I refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal so that hereafter the appellant is Miss Mezini  and
    the respondent is the Secretary of State for the Home Department.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on 4 June 1985.  She
    claimed asylum on 6 January  2014  but  her  application  was  refused.
    Following a hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 3 December 2014 the asylum appeal was dismissed but  her
    human rights appeal was allowed under Article 3 ECHR.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal that decision and permission
    was granted.  It was submitted that the judge had materially  erred  in
    law by applying the findings of AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG
    [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) to the appellant's case when the appellant did not
    claim to be a trafficked woman.  It  was  further  submitted  that  the
    findings in AM and BM did not have  general  application  to  women  in
    Albania but related solely to women  who  are  found  to  have  been  a
    previous victim of trafficking.  Therefore  the  judge  had  materially
    erred in  law  when  considering  the  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal flight options available to the appellant.

 4. Furthermore, it was submitted that the judge had failed  to  take  into
    account the objective evidence included  in  paragraphs  31-47  of  the
    Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  that  indicate  that  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal flight options are available to someone in  the
    position of the appellant.  The judge also failed to take into  account
    the appellant's educational and employment history when finding that it
    would be unduly harsh to expect her to relocate.

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Holmes candidly accepted that  she  saw  no
    problem with the judge looking at AM and BM because although  the  case
    was dealing with trafficked women from Albania there  was  nevertheless
    other "useful stuff in there".  Her main concern was that the judge had
    not engaged properly with the sufficiency of  protection  and  internal
    flight alternative points in the decision.

 6. I also heard submissions from Ms  Bhachu.  I  concluded  that  although
    there are undoubtedly justified criticisms of the decision it cannot be
    challenged successfully in law.  The judge could have made his findings
    a lot clearer but nevertheless he  has  made  sufficient  findings  and
    given adequate reasons in coming to his conclusion that the  appeal  be
    allowed.

 7. Firstly, I note that the refusal letter itself refers to AM and BM  and
    its applicability to this appellant and certainly much is said in  that
    case about the position of women in Albania generally so it is  clearly
    pertinent to this appeal.  Ms Bhachu referred  me  to  the  Operational
    Guidance Note issued by the Home Office in respect of Albania dated  14
    October 2014 and in particular to 3.20  and  the  following  paragraphs
    that make reference to victims of domestic violence.

 8. At 3.20.3 there is reference  to  a  government  shelter  for  domestic
    violence victims in Tirana;  police  routinely  denying  protection  to
    women housed at this shelter when they travelled to  court  appearances
    or to take their children to school, leaving some to  be  assaulted  by
    their husbands while they were away from the shelter; and police  often
    not having the training or capacity  to  deal  with  domestic  violence
    cases.

 9. At 3.20.12 the comment is made that "for a claim to succeed on  grounds
    of domestic violence, the onus will be on the applicant to  demonstrate
    not only that they will  face  on  return  persecutory  or  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment, but also  why  they  would  be  unable  to  access
    effective protection or alternatively relocate elsewhere in Albania  to
    escape  localised  threats  from  members  of  their  family,  but  the
    reasonableness of internal relocation must be assessed  on  a  case  by
    case basis taking full account of the individual circumstances  of  the
    particular claimant".

10. The judge in the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 30  of  the  decision
    set out that he found that the account provided  by  the  appellant  is
    credible in its material aspects.  He accepted  that  she  has  been  a
    victim of domestic violence at the hands of her family and  has  failed
    to fulfil her promise  to  marry.   She  is  a  single  mother  who  is
    relatively young, and who has  a  child  outside  of  wedlock  with  no
    support on return to Albania.  The appellant has been disowned  by  her
    family and will be targeted by the family of the man she  was  promised
    to marry and this will be for embarrassing them.  She would  be  unable
    to reside in her home area or anywhere in Albania due to her  problems.



11. In paragraph 34 the judge finds that the appellant would  not  get  the
    protection that she seeks from the authorities and gives  reasons.   He
    notes the background material in the country guidance case which refers
    to women living without family being "fair game" for men and those with
    a child and no father were particularly vulnerable.  This leads him  to
    conclude that it is not reasonable for  the  appellant  to  access  the
    protection of the state because the practice is to contact  the  family
    if a request for assistance is made and the appellant is at  risk  from
    her family and possibly other family members given  how  they  perceive
    honour.

12. Later in the paragraph the judge confirms that the appellant's evidence
    that her father and family would not be accepting of her given that she
    has a child born out of wedlock and, bearing in mind the guidance given
    in AM and BM and the  objective  evidence  submitted,  he  accepts  the
    evidence given by the appellant.

13. In paragraph 35 he gives reasons as to  why  the  appellant  could  not
    internally relocate. Those reasons are adequate.

Notice of Decision

14. It is for these reasons that I  find  that  the  judge  has  not  erred
    materially in the decision and therefore the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal stands.

15. Although the appellant was granted anonymity in the First-tier Tribunal
    I was not addressed on the matter and I do not consider  that  now  she
    has  succeeded  in  her  appeal  anonymity  is  any  longer   required.
    Therefore the anonymity direction made at the  earlier  hearing  is  no
    longer in force.



Signed        Date 4 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

