

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07178/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 24th February 2015                |On 25th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL GA BLACK


                                   Between

                                     MD
                            (ANONIMITY ODER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson (Counsel instructed by Times PBS)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a decision  and  reasons  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Griffiths) promulgated on 9th December 2014  dismissing
    the asylum appeal and section 47 directions made under  the  2006  Act.
    This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is an error of law.

2.   The appellant was an unaccompanied minor  from  Afghanistan  whose  age
    was disputed by the Respondent.  He  was  granted  discretionary  leave
    until 4th January 2012.  His application for further  leave  to  remain
    was refused on 8th September 2014.  He claimed that he was at risk from
    the Taliban.

3.   In a decision and reasons  the  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant's
    claim lacked credibility.  The appellant gave evidence as did his uncle
    and former foster mother. In a lengthy decision the  Tribunal  set  out
    its findings and reasons from [42 -  49].  The  Tribunal  accepted  the
    assessment made of the appellant's age by social  services  making  his
    age at the date of hearing to be 18 years and one month.  The  Tribunal
    referred to the standard of proof  as  "more  likely  than  not."   The
    Tribunal found that it was "more likely than not "that the  appellant's
    family had arranged for him to come to the  UK  for  economic  reasons.
    Reasons were given from finding that the appellants'  account  was  not
    credible at [44] and conclusions at [45].

    Grounds of appeal

4.   The main ground argued was that the  Tribunal  erred  by  applying  the
    higher standard of civil proof.  Further the Tribunal  failed  to  take
    into account the appellant's age and adopt a child  sensitive  approach
    in accordance with KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT  00552  (IAC).
    The Tribunal erred by placing too great a  weight  on  the  appellant's
    uncle's return to Kabul, in light of the fact that he was a refugee.

    Permission to appeal

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin granted permission on 9th January  2015
    on all grounds.

    Rule 24 response

6.   The Respondent opposed the appeal and  considered  it  was  unfortunate
    that the Tribunal had referred to the phrase "more likely than not" but
    that this did not cause the decision to be flawed.  The correct  phrase
    is used in the age assessment.

    Error of law hearing

7.   Both representatives made submissions which  I  have  recorded  in  the
    Record of proceedings.  At the end of the hearing I  indicated  that  I
    found material errors of law in the decision which I set aside and  the
    matter was remitted to Taylor  House  for  rehearing.  I  now  give  my
    reasons.

    Discussion and conclusions

8.   In a lengthy decision the Tribunal considered in the main all  relevant
    issues in the appeal.  However, it referred on three distinct occasions
    in the decision [42, 43, 48] to the more stringent  civil  standard  of
    proof. I am satisfied that this amounts to a material error of law. The
    appeal is  an  asylum  appeal  and  the  lower  standard  of  proof  is
    applicable. Although the Tribunal may well  have  carefully  considered
    the issues and evidence, it also importantly needs to show that it  has
    applied the correct standard of  proof  other  than  in  at  [4]  as  a
    standard direction.  Other than the clear references made to the  civil
    standard there is no further reference made in the decision  such  that
    I can be satisfied that the lower standard was applied in reaching  the
    findings and reasons.  Even if the Tribunal applied the civil  standard
    to the age issue [42] it was necessary  to  establish  that  the  lower
    standard "real risk" was otherwise applied.

9.   Further, I  consider that the Tribunal failed to  have  due  regard  to
    the approach in KS (cited above)  that  should  be  adopted  for  cases
    involving minors, particularly that indicated where a minor has reached
    adulthood at the time of the hearing.

10.  There are additional  matters  which  taken  together  with  the  above
    issues lead me to decide that the decision as a whole is deficient  and
    cannot stand.   For  example  the  reference  to  the  social  worker's
    observation that the appellant had been "selective" in his answers,  in
    circumstances  where  the  social  worker  was  not  giving   evidence.
    Furthermore it was perhaps not entirely fair for the Tribunal  to  draw
    adverse  inference  on  the  appellant's  complaint  that  he  did  not
    understand the interpreter's accent, in light  of  the  fact  that  the
    Tribunal in the decision confirmed that the appellant  at  the  hearing
    accepted that there was no prejudice to him [23].

    Decision

11.  There are material errors of law in the decision and reasons  which  is
    set aside. The matter is remitted to Taylor House  for  rehearing  (not
    before Judge Griffiths) on 21st August 2015.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.   This
    is an asylum appeal.


                               Signed   Date 24.2.2015


                               GA BLACK
                               Deputy  Judge of the Upper Tribunal






NO ORDER FOR FEE REPAYMENT IS APPLICABLE


                               Signed   Date 24.2.2015


                               GA BLACK
                               Deputy  Judge of the Upper Tribunal


