

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: AA/07528/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     NR
                       (Anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                   SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                               Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr P Haywood instructed by Turpin Miller Solicitors
Oxford
For the Respondent: Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a national of  Zimbabwe,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against  a  decision  made  by  the  respondent  to  refuse  her
   application for asylum and to remove her from the UK. Judge of the First-
   tier Tribunal Knowles dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals
   with leave to this Tribunal.

2.    The issue in this appeal is whether, having accepted  the  appellant's
   account of her involvement with the Movement of Democratic  Change  (MDC)
   in Zimbabwe and in  the  UK,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
   applying the guidance issued in the relevant country guidance cases.

3.    In the reasons for refusal letter dated 24 July  2013  the  respondent
   accepted that the appellant was a  member  of  the  MDC  within  her  own
   community in Zimbabwe, that she last lived in the district of Arcadia  in
   Harare and was a member of the Arcadia branch in Harare  until  she  left
   Zimbabwe in 2002. The respondent also accepted that the appellant  joined
   the Oxford Branch of the MDC in January  2007.  The  respondent  did  not
   however accept that the appellant has any political profile  in  Zimbabwe
   or in the UK and decided that the appellant is not at risk on  return  to
   Zimbabwe.

4.    On the basis of the documentary evidence and the  oral  evidence  from
   the appellant and the  branch  chairman,  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
   appellant was elected as a member of the fundraising committee of the MDC
   Oxford branch in January 2008 and as branch treasurer in March  2012  and
   that her appointment as branch treasurer was a bona fide appointment. The
   Judge accepted that there was documentary evidence that  the  Oxford  MDC
   branch had  been  infiltrated  since  2007.  The  Judge  found  that  the
   appellant 'is  a  committed,  trusted  member  of  the  Party  with  good
   organising skills and is reasonably likely to have been regarded as  such
   by other Party members in Arcadia'  and  that  she  was  elected  as  the
   organising secretary of the Branch in her branch  in  Zimbabwe  (a  claim
   rejected by  the  respondent)[72].  Despite  damage  to  the  appellant's
   credibility by using a false passport endorsement in 2004 the Judge found
   that the appellant had suffered a degree of harassment, intimidation  and
   even violence at the hands of Zanu-PF supporters at her place of work and
   at her home in Zimbabwe [74]. In terms of her involvement with the Oxford
   branch of the MDC the Judge found that, as treasurer, the  appellant  'is
   likely to be regarded as a key member of the executive committee  of  the
   Oxford MDC responsible, as she is, for the collection and distribution of
   funds. I a satisfied that she has a significant political profile.'

5.    The Judge did not accept parts of the appellant's claim, that is  that
   her husband used his influence within Zanu-PF and the CIO  to  intimidate
   and harass her after their divorce and that her brother was abducted  and
   suffered serious chemical burns. The Judge regarded both of these  claims
   as embellishments of the appellant's account.

6.   Having made these findings in relation  to  the  appellant's  political
   profile the Judge went on to consider the risks  to  the  appellant  upon
   return to Zimbabwe in line with the current country guidance case  of  CM
   (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059(IAC).  He
   considered that there was no evidence that Arcadia is a high density area
   of Harare and concluded that the  appellant  is  therefore  not  at  risk
   there. He found that, even if the appellant is at risk  in  Arcadia,  she
   could safely relocate internally to Bulawayo. The  Judge  considered  the
   guidance in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT  00094
   in deciding whether there would be a risk  to  the  appellant  at  Harare
   airport. He concluded that the appellant may face a risk  of  persecutory
   ill-treatment if  she  returns  involuntarily  but  not  if  she  returns
   voluntarily.

7.    In granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Rintoul indicated that it was particularly arguable that the First-
   tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  his  consideration  of  the  risk  of  the
   appellant coming to the attention of the CIO as it is arguable that it is
   not just involuntary returnees who are at risk given what was said in  HS
   as followed in CM, it being  arguable  that  the  CIO  seek  to  identify
   activists.

8.   At the hearing Mr  Haywood  submitted  that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to
   approach his analysis of risk on return on the basis that  the  appellant
   could be expected to  return  to  Zimbabwe  voluntarily  given  that  the
   context of the country guidance cases was in relation  to  failed  asylum
   seekers. He submitted that the Judge misunderstood the  country  guidance
   in relation to this issue. Mr Nath submitted that, when paragraph 80  and
   81 are read together, it is clear that the Judge was not trying to draw a
   distinction between voluntary and  involuntary  returnees.  He  submitted
   that it was open to the Judge to find that the appellant would not be  at
   risk in Zimbabwe if she returned voluntarily.

9.    In making his distinction between voluntary and involuntary  returnees
   the Judge relied on the guidance given in HS where the  Tribunal  adopted
   and applied the findings in AA (Risk for involuntary returnees) Zimbabwe
   CG [2006] UKAIT 00061. The Judge said [80];

      'The Tribunal found, however, that a person who returns voluntarily to
      Harare will be indistinguishable  from  ordinary  travellers  who,  it
      found, could pass freely and without difficulty in or out of Zimbabwe.
      Only a person who  returns  involuntarily  will  be  identified  as  a
      deportee and may be diverted for questioning by the CIO  to  establish
      whether that person is of any interest. A deportee  will  only  be  of
      interest if initial questioning reveals that he or she has  a  profile
      considered adverse to the regime. I acknowledge that, if the appellant
      returns involuntarily, she is likely to attract the attention  of  the
      CIO as a deportee and that her answers during  initial  interview  may
      well reveal the need  for  further  interrogation  during  which,  the
      Tribunal found, there is a real risk of persecutory ill-treatment.  In
      my view, however, the key issue here is the Tribunal's finding that  a
      person who can return to his or her own country voluntarily is  not  a
      refugee, notwithstanding that, as a forced returnee, he or  she  would
      be at risk..."

10. The Tribunal in CM  stated that the guidance  in  relation  to  risk  on
   return at Harare airport remained that set out in  HS where the  Tribunal
   said;


      "264. The CIO has taken  over  responsibility  for  the  operation  of
      immigration control at Harare airport  and  immigration  officers  are
      being replaced by CIO  officers.  We  accept  also  that  one  of  the
      purposes of the CIO in  monitoring  arrivals  at  the  airport  is  to
      identify those who are thought to be, for whatever reason, enemies  of
      the regime. The aim is to detect  those  of  interest  because  of  an
      adverse military or criminal profile. The main focus of the  operation
      to identify those who may be of adverse interest remains those who are
      perceived to be politically active in support of the  opposition.  But
      anyone perceived to be a threat to or a  critic  of  the  regime  will
      attract interest also.


      265.  The  fact  that  the  CIO  has  taken  over  responsibility  for
      monitoring all returning passengers at Harare airport is not something
      that affects the level of risk. The evidence before AA(2) was that all
      deportees were handed over to the CIO for questioning  in  any  event.
      Then, as now, those deportees will have  been  identified  in  advance
      from the passenger manifest and the CIO will have formed a preliminary
      view as to which, if any, are of further interest.


      266. Large numbers of passengers pass through  the  airport.  The  CIO
      continues to recognise that it cannot question everyone; and so  there
      is a screening process  to  identify  those  who  might  merit  closer
      examination. We see no reason to suppose that the heightened  role  of
      the CIO would change this. There are now additional demands  upon  the
      CIO as it is responsible for monitoring all passengers passing through
      the airport, both on arrival  and  departure.  We  have  set  out  the
      evidence that indicates in whom the CIO has an interest. This will  be
      those in respect of whom there is any reason  to  suspect  an  adverse
      political, criminal or military profile  of  the  type  identified  in
      AA(2). In addition, those perceived to be associated  with  what  have
      come to be identified  as  civil  society  organisations  may  attract
      adverse interest as critics of the regime.


      267. There is no evidence that ordinary passengers returning from  the
      United Kingdom  experience  any  difficulty  in  passing  through  the
      airport. In fact, the evidence is to the contrary. Nor is there a real
      risk that those returning to Zimbabwe after  being  refused  leave  to
      remain after the leave initially granted has expired are regarded with
      suspicion or treated otherwise than as ordinary travellers.


      268. Nor is there evidence of any consistent pattern of  treating  any
      differently those who have not claimed asylum in  the  United  Kingdom
      but who have been forcibly removed to Zimbabwe because they have  been
      refused leave to enter or remain. There is no evidence that any of the
      twenty three "immigration deportees" removed since  August  2006  have
      experienced any such difficulties. We have accepted that all those who
      are deportees will be identifiable  as  such  upon  return  to  Harare
      airport and so will generally be  subjected  to  some  enquiry  before
      being allowed to pass through the airport.


      269.  This  demonstrates  that,  despite  the  political  rhetoric  of
      President Mugabe and other highly placed members of the ruling  party,
      the fact alone of returning to  Zimbabwe  having  spent  time  in  the
      United Kingdom, even if there is some  irregularity  discernable  from
      stamps in the passenger's passport, does not give  rise  to  any  real
      risk on return to Harare airport.
      ...


      279. We do not accept either that all those  seen  as  having  claimed
      asylum in the United Kingdom will be thought to be supporters  of  the
      MDC on that account alone. As noted earlier, the suggestion  that  the
      Zimbabwean authorities  proceed  on  the  basis  that  anyone  with  a
      connection with Britain must be considered a supporter of the  MDC  is
      impossible to reconcile with the significant effort put into obtaining
      intelligence concerning those in the United Kingdom who do support the
      opposition. After all, there would be  little  point  in  sending  CIO
      operatives to infiltrate groups in  the  United  Kingdom  if  everyone
      retuned was, in any event, to be presumed to be a supporter of the MDC
      and an enemy of the state qualifying for detention and interrogation."

11. The Tribunal in AA, which was affirmed in HS, concluded;

      "244. A person who is returned involuntarily to Zimbabwe  having  made
      an unsuccessful asylum claim in the United Kingdom does  not  face  on
      return a real risk of being subjected to persecution or  serious  ill-
      treatment on that account alone. That is so whether or not the removal
      is escorted. Each case  must  be  considered  on  its  own  facts.  We
      reaffirm the country guidance in SM and Others (MDC - internal flight-
      risk  categories)  CG  [2005]UKIAT  00100.  The  evidence  before   us
      demonstrates that those at risk upon return to  Zimbabwe  continue  to
      fall into the risk categories identified and set out in  SM.  This  is
      subject to what we say about those whose  military  history  discloses
      issues that  will  lead  to  further  investigation  by  the  security
      services upon return to Harare Airport and those in  respect  of  whom
      there are outstanding and unresolved criminal issues.


      245. There continue to be three flights a week from the United Kingdom
      to Harare Airport. These are generally fully booked with ordinary
      travellers who pass freely and without difficulty in and out of
      Zimbabwe. Anyone who is indistinguishable from the ordinary traveller
      will not have any difficulty in passing through the airport. A person
      who has made an unsuccessful claim for asylum but who makes a
      voluntary return, with or without the assistance of an IOM
      reintegration package, will be indistinguishable from the ordinary
      traveller unless there is reason to believe that he will be identified
      on return as falling within one of the risk categories we have
      identified."


12. I agree with Mr  Haywood's  submission  that  Judge  misinterpreted  the
   guidance set out in the case law. It is clear from reading the  decisions
   in AA, HS and CM that the Tribunal has said that the CIO  are  interested
   in those who have an adverse political  profile,  regardless  of  whether
   they are returned voluntarily or involuntarily, and no interest in  those
   with  no  adverse  political  profile,  even  if  deported  following  an
   unsuccessful claim for asylum. It cannot be right, as found by the Judge,
   that anyone, even with a very significant adverse political  profile  can
   enter Zimbabwe without coming to the  attention  of  the  CIO  simply  by
   travelling there voluntarily.  This is contrary to  the  finding  of  the
   Tribunal in HS that the CIO monitors all arrivals at Harare  airport  'to
   identify those who are thought to be, for whatever reason, enemies of the
   regime. The aim is to detect those of  interest  because  of  an  adverse
   military or criminal profile. The main focus of the operation to identify
   those who may be of adverse interest remains those who are  perceived  to
   be politically active in support of the opposition. But anyone  perceived
   to be a threat to or a critic of the regime will attract  interest  also'
   [264].

13. I am satisfied that the Judge erred in his interpretation  of  the  case
   law and therefore in his assessment of the  risk  to  he  appellant  upon
   return to Zimbabwe. I therefore set aside the decision and remake it.

14. There is no challenge to the factual  findings  made  by  the  Judge.  I
   therefore apply the case law to those findings in remaking the  decision.
   The Judge found that the appellant was a member of the MDC in Arcadia and
   that she was elected as organising secretary in 2001  and  that  she  was
   harassed, intimidated and suffered  violence  at  the  hands  of  Zanu-PF
   supporters at her place of work and  at  her  home.  He  found  that  the
   appellant is a member of the Oxford branch of the MDC, she was elected as
   a member of the fundraising committee in January 2008 and as  the  branch
   treasurer in  March  2012.  The  evidence  before  the  Judge,  which  he
   accepted, was that in this  role  the  appellant  was  the  custodian  of
   monetary transactions and maintained subscription records and sent  funds
   to the party treasurer in Zimbabwe. The Judge found that the  MDC  Oxford
   branch was infiltrated and a number  of  members,  including  the  former
   chairman, were suspended in 2008. The Judge concluded that the  appellant
   has a significant political profile [77] and that if she  was  questioned
   by the CIO at Harare airport her answers during an initial interview  may
   well reveal the need for further interrogation during which  there  is  a
   real risk of persecutory ill-treatment [80].

15. I apply the guidance set out in HS to the facts found by  the  Judge.  I
   note that the Oxford branch of the MDC was infiltrated and I accept  that
   it is likely that this  will  have  led  to  the  identification  of  the
   appellant. Also, the appellant is the branch secretary of the oxford  MDC
   branch and has contact with the party secretary  in  Zimbabwe  and  holds
   details of members. This  too  may  lead  to  her  identification.  I  am
   satisfied that if the appellant returns to Zimbabwe, whether  voluntarily
   or involuntarily, she is likely to  be  identified  by  the  CIO  at  the
   airport as being of interest as a result of  her  political  profile.  At
   that stage it is likely that she will be taken for interrogation  and  at
   that second stage there is a real risk of serious harm.

Conclusion:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law.

I set aside the decision

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.



Signed
                                   Date:  30 June 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Signed
                                   Date:  30 June 2014



A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




