
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07754/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 15th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     N K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Neville (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Nightingale, promulgated on 26th June 2015, following  a  hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 18th June 2015.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Namibia,  born  on  14th  January
    1986.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  17th
    September 2014, refusing him leave to enter the UK  as  a  refugee  and
    also directing his removal to Namibia.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is a gay man and that at the age of 21
    he  had  a  relationship  with  a  woman  called  Violine,   but   this
    relationship ended after a year and he was not attracted to  her.   The
    following year he met a man called Marvin and after  a  time  of  being
    friends they began a relationship.  The Appellant also  claimed  to  be
    involved with a group which had campaigned on behalf of LGBT  community
    in Namibia.  He also claims that after his father died in August  2013,
    his uncle and his cousin beat him up and that he was then raped by  the
    uncle on numerous occasions.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before  the  judge  on  18th  June  2015,  there  was  a
    preliminary matter which the judge expressly dealt with.  This  was  an
    application for an adjournment made by the Appellant's  representative,
    in order to obtain a medico-legal report in respect of the  Appellant's
    scars.  This had not previously been done by the earlier solicitors who
    were awaiting funding.  However, as the judge  heard,  the  Appellant's
    representative had previously advised  the  solicitors,  following  the
    adjournment on 7th May 2015, that the Appellant had instructed her that
    he had a number of scars with regard to the rape and the  ill-treatment
    that he had endured.  These needed investigating by virtue of a medico-
    legal report.  The solicitors had then applied for funding on 20th  May
    2015.  They had not received a reply to  that  request.   They  made  a
    further request on 8th June 2015.   They  received  no  response.   Two
    experts had been identified by the solicitors.   However,  Counsel  for
    the Appellant, "accepted that the adjournment application had only been
    made by those instructing her the day before the hearing and  made  too
    late to be considered  prior  to  the  morning  of  the  hearing"  (see
    paragraph 25).  The judge went on  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant's
    hearing had  been  adjourned  twice  previously.   She  held  that  the
    Appellant's solicitors  must  have  been  well  aware  that  given  the
    contents of his asylum interviews and statements and given  the  nature
    of the claims made about ill-treatment a report might  be  appropriate.
    The judge held that, "indeed,  I  find  it  highly  unlikely  that  any
    competent solicitor would not have  previously  considered  whether  to
    make such a reference" (see paragraph 26).

 5. The judge  also  went  on  to  consider  in  the  public  interest  the
    anticipated costs of an adjournment.  Consideration was also  given  to
    the fact that the Appellant had asked for a Ojitherero interpreter  and
    one  had  been  obtained  and  brought  at  considerable   expense   in
    circumstances where, "there had been no indication that there would  be
    any request to adjourn from the Appellant's representative or,  indeed,
    any attempt at all to safeguard against unnecessary public  expenditure
    in  booking  a  specialist  interpreter  from  an   outside   provider"
    (paragraph  27).   All  things  considered,  the  application  for   an
    adjournment was rejected by the judge.

 6. The  judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the  oral  evidence  and  the
    submissions  made.   The  judge  observed  that   notwithstanding   the
    Appellant's claim that he needed an interpreter, and especially at  the
    time of the asylum interview, in evidence before her,

         "I found it notable that the Appellant repeatedly in  his  evidence
         before me, reverted to English, sought to answer  questions  before
         they were interpreted into Ojitherero and had to be told by  me  on
         at least three occasions that he must wait for the question  to  be
         translated and answer the question in Ojitherero" (paragraph 66).

 7. The judge further observed that when the Appellant arrived in the UK on
    18th December 2013 he was interviewed by an officer and he "... gave no
    indication  that  he  was  in  any   way   fearful"   (paragraph   67).
    Furthermore, the Appellant in the course of the interview,

         "Gave a detailed account of a wife who worked as a  nurse  and  who
         had not been able to come with him as she was unable to  take  time
         off work.  He had a return ticket, explained he  was  a  Manchester
         United supporter and produced a ticket for his  attendance  at  the
         match as  well  as  proof  of  the  pre-booked  bed  and  breakfast
         accommodation" (paragraph 68).

 8. In the end, the  judge  did  not  believe  the  account  given  by  the
    Appellant and found him to be an untruthful witness.  She held that,

         "The Appellant has been wholly  inconsistent  with  regard  to  his
         employment.  He presented himself as an employee of  Busy  Bees  on
         arrival, but at the screening interview said he had worked for  six
         months as a security guard who he did not know." (paragraph 70).

    Furthermore, the Appellant's account of his relationship with  Violine,
    "... has also been wholly  inconsistent"  (paragraph  71).   The  judge
    considered the description of the Appellant's relationship with  Marvin
    and  held  this,  "...  also  to  be  inconsistent  and  riddled   with
    discrepancies" (paragraph 72).

 9. Ultimately, the judge concluded that the Appellant's evidence was given
    "in a vague and evasive manner."  The  Appellant  raised  matters  that
    were wholly relevant.  The Appellant also "reads  and  writes  English,
    and was able to read over and check his witness statements  before  me.
    He therefore had ample opportunity to correct any  answers  which  were
    being mis-recorded in the course of his interviews" (paragraph 78).

10. The judge concluded that,

         "This is an Appellant who I have found  to  be  wholly  lacking  in
         credibility on the lower standard applicable.  He  has  been  vague
         and evasive in evidence, has provided an inconsistent  account  and
         has admitted to telling lies.  I reject his  account  in  full  and
         without reservation.  It has not been established that he is a  gay
         man.  It has not been established that he has ever been  persecuted
         as a gay man ..." (paragraph 79).

    The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    refusing an application for an adjournment made on  the  basis  that  a
    medico-legal report had not been completed  although  two  experts  had
    been identified to  potentially  write  the  report.   The  Appellant's
    representatives  accepted  that  in  hindsight  it  would   have   been
    appropriate to make an application for funding  at  an  earlier  stage,
    given the potential evidential force of such a report.  However, it was
    unfair to the Appellant for the judge to hear the appeal  without  such
    potentially vital evidence being provided.

12. On 23rd July 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

13. On 4th August 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered to the  effect  that
    the Appellant's solicitors would have been  aware  of  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim and the fact that he had asserted from the outset that  he
    was raped by his uncle and suffered ill-treatment.  Yet it appears that
    there was no urgency in attempting  to  obtain  medical  reports.   The
    judge gave adequate reasons at paragraphs 26  to  27  for  refusing  to
    adjourn the matter.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 15th January 2016, I had the  benefit  from
    Mr Neville of Counsel of a well-compiled  skeleton  argument,  which  I
    have found of much assistance.  Representing the  Respondent  Secretary
    of State, was Mr David Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer.



15. In his submissions before me, Mr Neville,  relying  upon  the  skeleton
    argument, submitted that there were  three  essential  points.   First,
    there was the refusal to adjourn in order to get  medical  reports  for
    the scars that the Appellant claimed  to  have.   The  judge  does  not
    address the issue of whether a fair result  could  be  achieved  by  an
    adjournment.  The judge's focus was very much on there having been  two
    previous adjournments and considerable expenditure of the public purse,
    but no focus on the fairness of the result to the  Appellant.   It  was
    not enough to  say  (at  paragraph  26)  that  those  representing  the
    Appellant as his legal solicitors, had failed to act with due haste  in
    order to apply for public funding to get a medical  report.   The  main
    question was, notwithstanding their own failures, what  the  impact  of
    that failure was upon the Appellant.   Their  failures  should  not  be
    visited upon the Appellant.

16. Second, there was the ground that the Respondent's own policy document,
    "sexual identity issues in the asylum claim" (dated 11th February 2015)
    states that,  "discussing  matters  such  as  sexual  identity  may  be
    unfamiliar to some people and, in an official context such as an asylum
    interview, may prove  additionally  daunting."   Therefore,  sufficient
    allowance had to be made for this.  Nevertheless, Judge Nightingale did
    not make such allowance.  Full reasons were not given for  the  finding
    that the Appellant's explanation was lacking in credibility.

17. Third, the  Appellant  required  an  interpreter  for  his  substantive
    interview.  He spoke the Ojitherero language.  It was difficult to  get
    such an interpreter.  The judge's evaluation of this issue is  that  at
    the hearing the Appellant spoke English and even  wrote  it.   However,
    this overlooks the fact that the substantive hearing before  the  judge
    was on 18th June 2015.   However,  prior  to  that  the  Appellant  had
    already been in the United Kingdom and his substantive interview was in
    March 2014.  There was a period of  some  one  year  and  three  months
    during which time the Appellant had lived in London and in  Birmingham.
    This was ample time for him to brush up on his English and to acquire a
    working knowledge of it.  This was why  at  the  time  of  the  hearing
    before the judge, the Appellant actually did speak far  better  English
    than he would have done when he first arrived and  was  interviewed  in
    March 2014.  It was wrong to penalise the Appellant on  this  basis  by
    saying that because he spoke English now he could not have intended  to
    have an interpreter as a matter of necessity then.

18. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that since the President's decision in
    the well-known case on adjournments in Nwaigue (Adjournment:  Fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418, it had become rather customary for people  to  apply
    for adjournments on both  sides  of  these  Tribunal  hearings,  if  an
    adjournment had not been granted.  However, there was a need  for  some
    perspective on this issue (see Nwaigue  (Adjourment:  Fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00418 (IAC)).

19. Mr Mills submitted that the procedure Rules had also  been  changed  to
    make it easier to appeal on the basis that adjournments  had  not  been
    granted.  However, there was no rule of law that if an adjournment  was
    refused when asked for a viable appeal could be launched.  One  has  to
    consider the impact of this on both sides.  The judge did consider this
    impact on both sides.  She was  not  bound  to  grant  an  adjournment.
    There had already been two previous adjournments  for  appeal  hearings
    and the judge had rightly referred to the cost to the public purse.

20. In reply, Mr Neville submitted  that  Nwaigue  has  opened  up  a  more
    tolerant approach to adjournments.  There have been Rule changes.   The
    context here was the  competence  of  previous  representation  when  a
    medical report had not been applied for, but also the identification of
    two experts who could now provide a report in a  timeous  manner.   The
    judge did not consider these two aspects.

21. Yet, the importance of  the  interpreter  to  the  Appellant  was  also
    important.  For example, at the interview the  Appellant  had  said  in
    English that, "I asked for my own  language."   When  the  interviewing
    officer states that this is difficult he also  adds  that,  "a  lot  of
    questions have to be repeated.  This highlighted  the  fact  that  some
    difficulty  was  being  caused  in  relation  to  the  absence  of   an
    interpreter in the Appellant's language at that stage.  He  asked  that
    the error of law be found and the matter be remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a re-making of the decision.

No Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007]) such that I should set aside  the  decision.   First,  the
    Appellant's solicitors were aware of the Appellant's asylum claim.   He
    had, after all, asserted it from the outset.  He had said that  he  was
    raped by his uncle and that he had  suffered  ill-treatment.   Yet,  no
    medical reports were commissioned.  There had  been  two  adjournments.
    When the judge herself was faced with an adjournment, it was on account
    of the application having been made only  the  night  before,  and  the
    judge had regard to the public interest in the prompt  and  expeditious
    disposal of  claims,  and  particularly  where  a  claim  had  been  so
    longstanding, and where the failure to procure a report could  only  be
    laid at the Appellant's legal advisor's door.  The judge considered the
    matter painstakingly at paragraphs 26 to 27 before deciding  to  refuse
    to adjourn.

23. It has been submitted that the position  is  different  now  given  the
    Tribunal judgment in Nwaigue [2014] UKUT 00418.  In that case, however,
    the President, Mr Justice McCloskey, asserted that if the  Tribunal  is
    to refuse to accede to an adjournment request,  then  such  a  decision
    could be erroneous if, for example, there has been a  failure  to  take
    into account all the material considerations, or if  the  Tribunal  has
    had regard to immaterial considerations, or if the Tribunal has  denied
    the party concerned a fair hearing.  In essence, the main question here
    will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his right to
    a fair hearing.

24. The litmus test is that of a fair hearing.  Rule 21 of The  Asylum  and
    Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  provides  that,  "the
    Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing of an appeal on the application  of
    a party, unless satisfied that the appeal cannot  otherwise  be  justly
    determined."  Mr Justice McCloskey in Nwaigue was clear that,  "in  the
    Rules matrix outline .....  Rule  21(2)  is  a  provision  of  critical
    importance," in referring to this  very  provision.   As  His  Lordship
    explained the essential issue is whether  the  appeal  can  be  "justly
    determined."  The present case was not one where the parties  were  not
    represented or the Appellant was not in attendance.  The  present  case
    was one where a  medical  report,  which  really  ought  to  have  been
    commissioned  far  earlier,  than  it  actually  was  proposed  to   be
    commissioned, and still had not been done at the date of  the  hearing,
    led to the hearing being determined that was  otherwise  than,  "justly
    determined."

25. This is a case, however, where  the  judge  disbelieves  the  Appellant
    fundamentally on practically every important aspect of his claim.   The
    judge noted that the Appellant actually had a wife,  who  worked  as  a
    nurse (see paragraph 68).  The judge observed  that  he  spoke  English
    (paragraph 66).  Also observed by the  judge  was  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant, when interviewed by an officer, gave no indication  that  he
    was in any way fearful of his life in Namibia (see paragraph  67).   In
    fact, the judge was clear that the Appellant had told a series of  lies
    and that his account was wholly inconsistent (see paragraphs 69 to 72).



26. Finally, the judge made this assessment expressly on the basis of  "the
    lower standard applicable"  and  found  the  Appellant  "to  be  wholly
    lacking in credibility" (see paragraph 79).  She did  not  believe  the
    Appellant to be a gay man.  She did not believe that he had  been  ill-
    treated by his uncle or any other  person.   She  was  clear  that  the
    Appellant presented at the outset as facing no  real  risk  in  Namibia
    (paragraph 79).

27. Second, there is the question of the Respondent failing to  follow  her
    own policy document  of  "sexual  identity  issues  in  asylum  claim."
    However, "whatever shortcomings there may or may not have been in  this
    regard, they were  cured  by  the  judge's  own  detailed  and  careful
    assessment of  the  situation  before  her,  where  the  Appellant  was
    represented and where he gave evidence."

28. Third, it is suggested that he had requested  an  interpreter  for  his
    substantive interview and had not been  provided  with  one.   However,
    there is every indication that the interviewing officer  was  sensitive
    to this fact and in fact stated that, "a lot of questions have  had  to
    be repeated," and there is no suggestion here that  the  effect  of  so
    doing has in any way detracted from the Appellant  not  being  able  to
    make his case clear to the interviewing officer.  It is inevitable that
    there are bound to be languages coming up before the authorities,  such
    as  the  Ojitherero  language,  for  which  interpreters  may  well  on
    occasions be difficult to find, and the main question  is  whether  the
    authorities have conducted themselves in a reasonable and  fair  manner
    so as to ensure that anxious scrutiny has been  exercised  in  enabling
    the Appellant to make his story known to the officials.

29. Mr Neville  has  argued  that  the  judge  himself  did  not  find  the
    Appellant's use of the English language to be  so  woefully  inadequate
    that he was  unable  to  tell  his  story.   Mr  Neville  provides  the
    explanation that the reason for this is to do with the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had by the time of his asylum appeal before the  judge,  been
    in the UK for one year and three months, and had  lived  in  Birmingham
    and in London, during which time he would have picked up on the English
    language.

30. However, this overlooks the fact that the judge found the Appellant  to
    be intrinsically lacking in candour and to be  an  untruthful  witness,
    and the Appellant's insistence on the use of an interpreter was not one
    that the judge was, on the evidence before her, persuaded by.   Indeed,
    the judge observed that,

         "I have found nothing in the course of  the  Appellant's  evidence,
         and the numerous answers to questions which he gave in English,  to
         indicate that the level of misunderstanding which is now claimed is
         down to his inability to follow questions or, indeed, give answers"
         (see paragraph 66).

31. Ultimately, it has to be borne in mind that the  judge  considered,  on
    the lower standard of  proof,  to  which  the  judge  repeatedly  draws
    attention in asylum claims such  as  this,  to  have  been  lacking  in
    credibility.  As she observed,

         "At no point  in  his  interview,  in  which  detailed  answers  to
         questions were recorded, does the Appellant indicate that he is  no
         longer with his wife or, indeed  that  his  documents  are  not  as
         claimed or that he is not in the United Kingdom in order to take  a
         short holiday ..." (see paragraph 68).

32. Accordingly,  notwithstanding  Mr  Neville's  attempt  to  persuade  me
    otherwise, in his careful and well-measured submissions,  there  is  no
    error of law in the original judge's determination.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    10th February 2016

