
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07594/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 21 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                     N K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. An anonymity direction  was  previously  made  and
    will continue.

 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devlin promulgated on 10 March 2015 which dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision to remove him  from  the  UK  for
    reasons set out in a refusal of asylum decision dated 8 September 2014.

Background

 4. The Appellant was born on 9 April 1988 and is a national  of  Iran  and
    was born a Shia Muslim.

 5. On 11 May 2015 the Appellant applied for asylum on the  basis  that  he
    had  to  leave  Iran  illegally  because  he  wanted  to   convert   to
    Christianity.

 6. On 8 September 2014 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter can be summarised that in essence:

      a) It was not accepted that the Appellant was a Christian convert.

      b) The Appellants credibility was generally undermined by his  failure
         to take the opportunity  to  claim  asylum  in  Spain  and  he  had
         destroyed his passport.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Devlin  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

      a) He considered in considerable detail the  discrepancies  raised  in
         the refusal  letter  and  found  there  were  indeed  a  number  of
         discrepant responses which  made  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant
         unreliable.

      b) He identified a number of other discrepancies between the screening
         interview, the asylum interview and his oral evidence.

      c) He considered the points made in respect of the Appellant's claimed
         conversion to Christianity in the refusal letter and while  finding
         some of the points to be well made he was unwilling to draw adverse
         inferences from other claims made by the Respondent  which  he  did
         not consider well founded.

      d) At paragraphs 301- 363 he set out in detail the submissions of  the
         HOPO and Mr Brown who also represented the Appellant in the  First-
         tier which included from both consideration of the evidence of  [H]
         in relation to the Appellant's conversion.

      e) He identified at paragraphs 345-361 the concerns that he had  about
         the evidence of [H].

      f) His conclusions as to the events that the Appellant claimed led  to
         his flight from Iran are at paragraph 364 -  372  and  he  finds  a
         number of discrepancies.

      g) He considered the credibility of the Appellant's decision to become
         a Christian in Iran and whether he was a  genuine  convert  at  the
         date of hearing and confirmed that he looked at the evidence in the
         round.

      h) While acknowledging that the  Appellant  had  completed  the  Alpha
         course and been baptised and was a regular attendee at  Church  and
         noting that the Dorodian witnesses were aware of the possibility of
         false converts he found that he was  not  satisfied  to  the  lower
         standard of proof that the  Appellant  was  a  genuine  convert  to
         Christianity .

      i) He considered whether the Appellant would be at real risk on return
         as a failed asylum seeker who had left Iran illegally  claiming  he
         had converted to Christianity noting in detail the submissions made
         by Mr Brown. He considered whether Mr Brown had adduced very strong
         grounds supported by cogent evidence to justify him departing  from
         the CG case of SB (risk on  return-illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]
         UKAIT 00053 and concluded at paragraph 419 that he had not.

      j) At paragraph 423 he concluded that he could not be  satisfied  that
         the Appellant left Iran illegally but  rather  was  someone  facing
         forced return.

      k) He concluded that there was  no  evidence  of  risk  on  return  as
         someone  who  had  fabricated  a  claim  to   have   converted   to
         Christianity.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged and initially permission  to  appeal  was
    refused. Grounds were renewed and on 16 June 2015 Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins gave permission to appeal stating:

         "... it is  arguable  that  he  misdirected  himself  when  he  was
         critical of the length of the Alpha course because it  is  arguable
         that he had sufficient details in the unchallenged evidence of [H].
         It is  arguable  that  this  error,  if  established,  is  material
         although it might be thought that it did  not  matter  because  the
         Judge did have a  clear  idea  of  the  time  [H]  spent  with  the
         appellant ...

         I am however more concerned  about  the  risk  on  return  ...  the
         appellant must be careful to show how the Judge erred, if  at  all,
         in considering the material that was before him and not merely rely
         on appeals  or  applications  on  apparently  similar  facts  being
         allowed."

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Brown  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) He relied on the grounds  of  appeal  that  raised  two  issues  in
         relation to the evidence of [H] and the Judge's assessment  of  the
         Alpha Course and how the Judge dealt  with  the  current  unsettled
         issue of risk on return to failed asylum seekers.

      b) In relation to risk on return the Judge missed the point which  was
         that prison conditions in Iran breached  Article  3  and  a  failed
         asylum seeker would be detained and  therefore  there  would  be  a
         breach of Article 3.

      c) He argued that in SB it was not accepted that detention  facilities
         breached Article 3 but the Home Office now accepted  this.  If  the
         Appellant was detained the  Judge  was  required  to  consider  the
         breach of Article 3.

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr McVitie submitted that:

      a) The Judge accepted that the Appellant attended the Alpha Course but
         concluded that the Appellant was not a genuine Christian.

      b) In relation to the risk on return the Judge set out in  detail  why
         he did not find that the Appellant was at risk on return.

11. In reply Mr Brown on behalf of the Appellant submitted that  the  Judge
    failed to consider, having accepted that  he  would  be  questioned  on
    arrival, whether such questioning would occur while the  Appellant  was
    detained.

The Law

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Rationality is a very  high  threshold  and  a
    conclusion is not irrational just because some alternative  explanation
    has been rejected or can be said to be possible. Nor is it necessary to
    consider  every  possible   alternative   inference   consistent   with
    truthfulness because an Immigration judge concludes that the story told
    is untrue. If a point of evidence of significance has been  ignored  or
    misunderstood, that is a  failure  to  take  into  account  a  material
    consideration.

Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

14. The first challenge was to the Judges finding that  the  Appellant  was
    not a genuine convert to Christianity and in particular how  the  Judge
    factored the evidence of [H] in relation to the  Appellants  attendance
    at the Alpha Course into that assessment. In particular it is suggested
    that the Appellant should have been given the  opportunity  to  address
    the concerns expressed by the Judge about the course at paragraph 354.

15. The Judge set out the oral evidence of [H] in detail at paragraph 20-22
    (xii) and this included at 22 (vi) that the Appellant had  attended  12
    weeks of Alpha classes 1 hour each and the meetings that followed  that
    were about 3 hours long He found that the  witness  gave  his  evidence
    'openly, honestly and conscientiously' (paragraph 330).He did not  say,
    although it would have been open to him, that  an  honest  and  genuine
    witness can be mistaken.

16. He set out in detail why the witness believed that  the  Appellant  was
    genuine. He noted that the witness acknowledged a number of aspects  of
    his evidence which inevitably affected the weight he  attached  to  the
    evidence given that they limited the witnesses opportunity  to  make  a
    meaningful assessment and  these  included  :  he  had  only  seen  the
    Appellant 2-3 times a week; the Appellant was one of 30 Iranians in the
    congregation; evidence of 'fervour' could only carry one  so  far;  the
    Appellant was one of 50-60 who attended bible classes; the witness  did
    not have much time for individual work with members of the Bible group;
    the witness barely spoke Farsi; he could not cite contributions by  the
    Appellant in Bible class that had 'impressed'  him  and  the  Appellant
    came to his home for lunch on 3 occasions.

17. The Judge gave reasons at paragraph 342-344 why he was  unpersuaded  by
    [H]'s suggestion that the 'fervour' displayed by  the  Appellant  could
    not be 'faked'.

18. The Judge does state that he found it difficult to know what weight  to
    attribute to the fact that the Appellant had completed the Alpha course
    as there was no evidence of the nature and content of the course or how
    the genuineness of  faith  is  assessed  on  the  course  and  how  the
    Appellant performed or why it was determined  that  he  had  progressed
    sufficiently for him to be baptised.  The  Judge  makes  clear  in  his
    decision when addressing the genuine nature of the Appellant's  claimed
    conversion that although  he  accepted  the  evidence  given  that  the
    Appellant was a participating member of the Church  and  had  completed
    the Alpha course these were not determinative as Mr Brown suggested  of
    the issue of his conversion: the Judge looked at all of the evidence in
    the round. The Judge however in acknowledging that  the  Appellant  had
    completed the Alpha course also identified that  Canon  White  did  not
    feel able to say any more  than  that  'nothing  in  [the  Appellant's]
    behaviour caused him to doubt [that he was a  participating  member  of
    the Christian  Church]'  and  this  was  despite  that  fact  that  the
    Appellant had completed the Alpha Course. It seems to me that the Judge
    was entitled to say that if completion of  the  Alpha  course  was  not
    determinative of the Appellant's faith for Canon White it had to affect
    the weight he gave to the Appellant's completion of it.

19. More importantly I am satisfied  that  what  the  Judge  said  in  this
    paragraph 354 must be read in the context of the decision  as  a  whole
    but specifically in the context of many paragraphs that deal  with  the
    credibility of the Appellant generally and the credibility of his claim
    to have converted to Christianity. If his concern about the length  and
    content of the Alpha course was the sole basis for him not finding that
    the Appellants  claimed  conversion  was  genuine  I  accept  that  the
    Appellant should have been given the chance to address it  but  it  was
    one  brief  observation  against  a  swathe  of  other  findings   that
    undermined his claim.

20. Thus in  an  extremely  detailed  and  well-reasoned  analysis  of  the
    evidence I am satisfied that the Judge gave more than adequate  reasons
    for why he did not find the Appellants claimed conversion to be genuine
    by reference to all of the evidence in  the  round  and  not  just  the
    evidence of [H] and these included:

      a) The Judge considered at paragraphs 61-185  various  responses  that
         the Appellant had given in the asylum  interview.  He  set  out  in
         detail  those  answers  that  he  found  were   discrepant.   These
         undermined the Appellants general credibility  and  the  Judge  was
         entitled to conclude rendered his evidence unreliable.

      b) The Judge additionally identified  at  paragraphs  186-208  further
         discrepancies between the  Screening  Interview,  asylum  and  oral
         evidence in relation to his claimed desire to convert in Iran.  The
         Judge was entitled to conclude as he did that this  undermined  the
         Appellant's evidence generally and  rendered  the  account  he  had
         given of events in Iran unreliable.

      c)  The  Judge  at  paragraphs  209-300  specifically  considered  the
         Appellants account of his conversion  to  Christianity  as  it  was
         challenged  in  the  refusal  letter.  He  rejected  a  number   of
         challenges including those relating to the failure to take steps to
         convert on arrival, in relation to his apparent inability to recite
         verses or name the  Apostles  concluding  fairly  that  he  had  no
         benchmark against  which  to  test  the  Appellants  understanding.
         Nevertheless he found that there were  discrepant  answers  setting
         those out in detail at paragraphs 243- 264.

      d)  He found at paragraph 284-293 that  it  would  be  reasonable  for
         someone  who  had  decided  to  convert  to  be  able  to  identify
         differences between their old and new religion and found  that  the
         Appellant was unable to do so.

      e) He found that the reasons given by the Appellant  for  choosing  to
         convert were vague and lacking in clarity (paragraphs 293) and then
         went on at paragraph 295-298  to  cite  examples  of  the  lack  of
         clarity. These were conclusions that were open to him.

      f) He considered that the evidence of the Reverend Canon Richard White
         who did not attend court but provided a supporting letter.  He  set
         the contents of the letter  out  in  some  detail  and  gave  clear
         reasons for his conclusion at paragraph 318 that the Canon's letter
         was 'hardly a ringing endorsement of the Appellant's claim to be  a
         genuine convert to Christianity' concluding that  it  added  little
         weight to his claim.

      g) He recognised that there  may  be  an  incentive  to  those  facing
         removal to demonstrate outward manifestations of faith.

21. The second argument is that the Judge failed  to  assess  the  risk  on
    return as an undocumented failed asylum seeker.  In  essence  Mr  Brown
    argued that the Appellant would be detained for questioning  on  return
    and that given the contents of the OGN of October 2012  conceding  that
    detention facilities breached Article 3 the Appellant would be at risk.
    The Judge noted the arguments and analysed each  case  advanced  by  Mr
    Brown at paragraphs 393- 428. I am satisfied that the Judge  understood
    Mr Brown's argument but did not accept it. He gave adequate reasons for
    rejecting the arguments in that he stated that the OGN of  2012  relied
    on have been superseded by more recent COI reports; he  found  that  SB
    was still the Country Guidance case and therefore that he needed strong
    grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence  to   depart   from   it;   he
    distinguished at paragraph 400-404 the COI relied on by Mr  Brown  from
    this case and concluded that making a false claim of itself  would  not
    put the Appellant at risk; he accepted that illegal exit  might  result
    in questioning but at paragraph 423 did not accept that  the  Appellant
    had exited illegally and therefore it could  not  be  assumed  that  he
    would be detained for questioning; in relation  to  those  cases  where
    permission to appeal decisions in other Iranian cases had been  granted
    the Judge analysed the reasons and found them to be  'opaque'  and  did
    not justify a departure from SB. He also gave reasons at paragraph  427
    for finding  that  given  his  finding  that  the  Appellant's  claimed
    conversion was fabricated the  Iranian  authorities  were  sufficiently
    astute as to distinguish between opportunistic  claimants  and  persons
    they regard as subversives.

22. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

23. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 21 1 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
