
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07924/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 June 2015                      |On 25 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AG
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E MacKay, McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by Judge
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal  D'Ambrosio  allowing  an  appeal  by  the
    respondent (hereinafter referred to as "the claimant")  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds.

 2) According to the claimant he was born in  August  1974  in  Syria.   He
    claims that he and his family, whom he says are in a  refugee  camp  in
    Turkey, are citizens of Syria or Bedouin ethnicity.

 3) The respondent did not accept that the claimant is a  Syrian  national.
    He has provided no documentary evidence to show this.  According to the
    respondent he could not  answer  many  questions  about  Syria  at  his
    screening and asylum interviews.  He answered only some basic questions
    correctly.  He sought to explain his lack of knowledge because  he  was
    uneducated and a Bedouin and as such was not part of Syrian society.

 4) The Secretary of State in addition  relied  upon  a  language  analysis
    report by Verified AB.  This report concluded that the claimant was not
    from Syria but was probably from Tunisia.  The claimant attributed this
    result in part to his Bedouin dialect and claimed also that  he  has  a
    stutter.  Before the First-tier Tribunal it was held on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the claimant would not be returned to Syria for
    as long as the civil war continued but it  was  the  intention  of  the
    Secretary of State to remove the claimant to Tunisia.

 5) The judge considered the language analysis report and  found  that  its
    results were not conclusive.  In support of  his  appeal  the  claimant
    relied upon witness statements seemingly confirming  his  identity  and
    nationality from individuals who claimed to have known  him  in  Syria.
    The judge accepted these witness statement as genuine.  The judge heard
    the claimant's evidence and found  it  credible.   On  this  basis  the
    appeal was allowed.

 6) The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on  the  basis  that
    the judge had not properly assessed the language  analysis  report  and
    had not properly considered the claimant's lack of knowledge  of  Syria
    at interview, and his explanations  for  how  his  knowledge  developed
    between his screening interview and  his  substantive  interview.   The
    judge did not consider the evidence, including the Syrian  letters,  in
    the round in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.

 7) Permission was granted on the grounds that  it  was  arguable  that  he
    judge had failed to have regard to the  language  analysis  report  and
    there appeared to be no explanation as to why the report's  conclusions
    were rejected.

Submissions

 8) At the hearing before me Mrs O'Brien submitted that the judge  had  not
    properly considered the language analysis report.  This concluded  that
    the claimant was most likely Tunisian.  There was conflicting  evidence
    as to the  claimant's  nationality.   The  report  indicated  that  the
    claimant was masking his true  linguistic  background,  which  was  not
    consistent with his claim to be of Syrian origin.  The comments made by
    the judge at paragraph 61 of the determination about the report did not
    give adequate consideration to the tensions set  out  within  it.   The
    judge did not deal with the  suggestion  that  the  claimant  had  been
    seeking to manipulate his  speech  patterns.   Nowhere  did  the  judge
    address the crux of the report.  It was not submitted on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State that the report could lead to only one  outcome  but
    it was necessary for the decision maker to grapple with the  issues  in
    the report and balance them with the other evidence.  The judge  placed
    no weight on the report without  giving  it  full  consideration.   The
    judge did not look at all the evidence in the  round.   The  judge  was
    wrong to conclude that because of tensions in the report it  should  be
    left to one side.  In so doing the judge misdirected himself and failed
    to consider all the evidence.  In  addition  to  the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in MN and KY [2014] UKSC 30 there was a  recent  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in RM (Sierra Leone) [2015] EWCA Civ  541.   Mrs
    O'Brien ended by submitting that there had been no proper  analysis  by
    the judge of the evidence and there should be full reconsideration.

 9)  For  the  claimant,  Mr  MacKay  pointed  out  that  Mrs  O'Brien  had
    acknowledged on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  the  linguistic
    analysis report did not lead to any one  outcome.   The  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal clearly acknowledged the need to look  at  all  the
    evidence in the round.  He set out all the evidence and  grappled  with
    all the issues.  The judge found at paragraph 61 that  the  conclusions
    of the report were not supported by the results of  the  tests  carried
    out.  At paragraphs  62-66  the  judge  said  he  preferred  the  other
    evidence.  He looked at the evidence in the round and found  in  favour
    of the claimant.  He  considered  the  conflicting  evidence  and  gave
    reasons why he preferred the claimant's evidence.

10) Mr MacKay continued that at paragraph 48 of MN and KY the Supreme Court
    said that it was necessary to look  at  the  reasoning  in  a  language
    analysis report.  This is what the judge had done.  The report said  no
    more than that  there  was  a  possible  attempt  by  the  claimant  to
    manipulate the outcome.  Mr MacKay continued that the judge had made it
    clear in his decision that he was balancing both sides of the  argument
    and he found in favour of the claimant, in terms of paragraph 65-66  of
    the decision.

11) In response Mrs O'Brien said the judge had to grapple with the signs of
    inconsistent speech variation by the claimant.  The judge had not  done
    this.  The language analysis report did not have to be conclusive to be
    taken into account.  The judge had to engage nevertheless with what the
    report said and the judge did not take into account the suggestion that
    the claimant had linguistic characteristics with a number  of  dialects
    and clear indications of another speech pattern.

12) Mr MacKay submitted that if there was to be a remittal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal this should be to the same judge.

Discussion

13) Having read the judge's decision I am satisfied that it  cannot  stand.
    The reasoning given by the judge for rejecting the conclusions  of  the
    language  analysis  report  are  far  from  adequate.   I  accept   the
    submission by Mrs O'Brien that the judge  has  not  adequately  engaged
    with the issues in the report and has not had proper regard  to  it  in
    making  his  findings.   The  judge  was  not  obliged  to  follow  the
    conclusions of the report but if he chose not to do so he  should  have
    given clear and viable reasons for not doing so.

14) The judge referred to the content of the report at paragraphs 57-60  of
    the decision.  The judge notes at paragraph 60 that the  suggestion  in
    the report is that it is probable that the claimant does  not  normally
    live in Syria and probable that he  normally  lives  in  Tunisia.   The
    judge then says, at paragraph 61, that the report's explanations are by
    no means conclusive.  This in itself  is  unobjectionable.   The  judge
    gives what he considers to be a couple of examples of where the results
    seem not to be  conclusive.   The  judge  then  considers  the  witness
    statements lodged in support of the claimant  and  the  claimant's  own
    evidence and concludes that the claimant's evidence is credible.  In so
    doing the judge fails to explain the basis  on  which  he,  in  effect,
    brushes aside the conclusions of what is a  carefully  argued  language
    analysis report and accepts instead the claimant's  testimony  together
    with translations of letters from writers none of whom were present  at
    the hearing.  Furthermore, in accepting the  claimant's  testimony  the
    judge does not address adequately the criticisms made of the claimant's
    evidence in the reasons for refusal letter.  The judge does little more
    than say that he is satisfied that the Arabic letters are  genuine  and
    having heard the claimant he finds him an honest witness.

15) In an appeal where there is conflicting evidence between,  on  the  one
    side, the claimant's own testimony and letters adduced  in  support  of
    the claimant and, on the  other  side,  a  detailed  language  analysis
    report as well as detailed criticisms  of  the  claimant's  answers  at
    interview, it is not adequate for the judge to  say  little  more  than
    that he prefers the claimant's evidence and in doing so  brushes  aside
    the language analysis report.  The lack of adequate  reasoning  in  the
    judge's decision amounts to an error of  law  such  that  his  decision
    should be set aside.

16) In view of the extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  required  for  this
    decision to be re-made, I consider it appropriate to remit  it  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for this purpose.  Although Mr MacKay suggested the
    appeal  be  remitted  to  the  same  judge,  I  do  not  consider  this
    appropriate.  What is required is for a  different  judge  to  look  at
    matters afresh.  None of the findings made by Judge D'Ambrosio  are  to
    be preserved.

Conclusions

17) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

18) I set aside the decision.

19) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard before  a
    different judge with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

20) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   As  the
    appeal against the refusal of asylum is continuing, however, I consider
    that such an order should be made at least until  the  proceedings  are
    concluded.

21) Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an anonymity order.  Unless either a tribunal  or  a  court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the claimant.
    This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


Signed      Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
