
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
aa/07508/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |            Decision & Reasons          |
|Birmingham                           |Promulgated                             |
|On 11 February 2016                  |            On 29 February 2016         |
|                                     |                                        |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                           TESFALDET SOLOMON HAILE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Hagan sitting in Birmingham on  19  August
    2015) dismissing his appeal against the decision by  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to  recognise  him  as  a  refugee  from  Eritrea,  but
    allowing his appeal against removal on the ground that he qualified for
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339 of the  Rules.  The  First-
    tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction,  and  on  the
    particular facts of this case I do  not  consider  that  the  appellant
    requires anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 5 November 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         It is arguable that, having found that the appellant is entitled to
         Humanitarian Protection [39] on account  of  the  ill-treatment  he
         would suffer on return to Eritrea, having left illegally and  being
         of military age [37], First-tier tribunal Judge  O'Hagan  erred  in
         concluding that the  appellant  had  not  established  he  [was]  a
         refugee. There is arguably no proper consideration of  whether  the
         treatment would be for a Convention reason. It is,  however,  clear
         from the decisions in MA (draft  evaders  -  illegal  departures  -
         risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059 and MO (illegal exit - risk  on
         return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC) that the reason for  the
         ill-treatment is that those who exited illegally are perceive to be
         opposed to the regime, and thus the Convention reason is  political
         opinion.

 3. In the light of this reasoning, he proposed to dispose  of  the  appeal
    without a further hearing, and to allow it on asylum and  human  rights
    grounds, unless either party objected to this course of action.

The Rule 24 Response

 4. On 5 January 2016 Tony Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team settled  a
    Rule 24 Response opposing the appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Reza produced a skeleton argument in which
    he developed the case that the decision of Judge O'Hagan ran counter to
    country guidance authority. Ms Petterson agreed with  Mr  Reza's  legal
    analysis and conceded that an error of law was made out for the  reason
    given by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul. She  also  did  not  oppose  the
    appeal being set aside and remade as envisaged by him.

Reasons for finding an Error of Law

 6. As the parties are now in agreement, the reasons can be shortly stated.
    In accordance with the country  guidance  authorities  cited  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul, the judge's primary  findings  of  fact  should
    have led to the  appeal  being  allowed  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    (Article 3 ECHR) grounds, instead of the appeal  being  allowed  on  an
    alternative basis under Paragraph 339 of the Rules.

 7. The judge found that most of the appellant's claim was  a  fabrication.
    He did not accept that he was detained for opposing the government  and
    had then escaped from captivity. He did not accept that  the  appellant
    had gone into hiding in the vicinity of his village  for  a  period  of
    over a year, while the authorities were searching for him; and that  in
    the same period he had got married at a wedding ceremony in the village
    organised by his family. But the judge accepted that the appellant  was
    of military age and had left Eritrea illegally.

 8. The judge misdirected himself in law at  [37]  in  holding  that  these
    facts did not engage the Refugee Convention.

 9. The judge went on to give  sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that  he
    should follow the country guidance cases of MA and MO on the  issue  of
    risk on return, in preference to  the  case  advanced  in  the  refusal
    letter that conditions for returnees had improved to  the  point  where
    was no longer a real risk of serious harm for returnees who had  exited
    the country illegally. Having reached this conclusion  (which  has  not
    been appealed by the Secretary of  State),  the  judge  needed  to  ask
    himself whether there was anything in MA  or  MO  which  precluded  the
    appellant  being  afforded  refugee  protection,   as   distinct   from
    humanitarian protection in the alternative. The answer was, and is, no.
    As held by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, the reason for the apprehended
    ill-treatment is that those who have exited illegally are perceived  to
    be opposed to the regime, and thus the appellant faces a real  risk  of
    persecutory treatment for a Convention reason, namely imputed political
    opinion.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: the appellant's appeal is  allowed  on  asylum  and  human
    rights (Article 3 ECHR) grounds.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson










