
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07517/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 26 June 2014                                 |On 2 July 2014             |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    MR SK
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Paramjorthy, Counsel.


                                  DECISION


 1. This is a respondent appeal but I shall henceforth refer to the parties
    in the original terms detailed in the determination  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal N. M. K. Lawrence following a hearing on 27 January
    2014.

 2. Therein an anonymity direction was made.  I direct  that  it  continues
    for the reasons given.

 3. The judge allowed the appellant's appeals on all bases.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  That  initial  application
    was decided by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan who  decided  on
    13 March 2014 that the determination disclosed  no  arguable  error  of
    law.

 5. The respondent renewed the application which  was  then  considered  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 29 April  2014  who  gave  permission  to
    appeal.  His reasons were:-

         "On balance it is arguable that the judge erred both in respect  of
         the conclusions he came to as to exclusion and also (although  this
         is more marginal still) with regard to risk on return."

    Upper Tribunal Judge Allen did not deal with the issue  of  timeliness.
    I treat his decision as  a  conditional  grant  pending  the  issue  of
    timeliness being determined.

 6. Before me both representatives agreed that it was  incumbent  upon  the
    respondent to lodge the renewed application for permission to appeal no
    later than 26 March 2014.  It was not received by the Tribunal until 31
    March 2014.

 7. The written explanation for the late filing of the application states:-

         "The Secretary of State seeks an extension of time as  due  to  the
         nature of the case (exclusion) it was necessary to seek  the  views
         of a number of people in deciding whether  or  not  the  permission
         application was renewed."

 8. Mr. Tarlow could offer no explanation beyond that contained within  the
    application itself for the application being filed out of time.

 9. I can only extend time and admit the application if I consider that  in
    the interests of justice it is just to do so.  The  respondent's  delay
    is not justified by the explanation given  and  accordingly  I  do  not
    admit the application.

Decision

10. The permission to appeal application is not admitted.






Signed                              Date 30 June 2014.
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
