
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07611/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 12 May 2015                               |On 5 June 2015                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MJ
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Gowman, instructed by Crowley & Co Solicitors


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  Neither party invited  me
    to rescind the order and I continue it  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 6  July  1981.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 August 2012 and claimed asylum.  On
    11 September 2014, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim
    for asylum and humanitarian protection and under Art  8  of  the  ECHR.
    The Secretary of State accepted that the appellant  had  been  detained
    and seriously mistreated by the Iranian authorities in 2009 but did not
    accept her claim that following a celebration of the Charshambeh  Souri
    festival on 14 March 2010, the appellant,  her  husband  and  daughter,
    were attacked by plainclothes Basij and uniformed police.  She and  her
    daughter (but not her husband) escaped and seven days  later  she  left
    Iran.  Authorities had come looking for her and she was wanted by them.



 3. Having  refused  the  appellant's  claim,  on  12  September  2014  the
    Secretary of State refused the appellant leave to enter and proposed to
    remove her to Iran.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 15 January 2015,  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal.  She accepted the appellant's account and that,  as
    a consequence, that she would be at risk on return to Iran.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal against the  judge's
    positive credibility finding.  First, the judge had  erred  in  law  in
    failing to deal with the points raised in paras 21-42  of  the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter relevant to the appellant's credibility.   Secondly,
    the judge had failed to deal with issues raised under s.8 of the Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 in reaching her
    positive credibility finding.

 6. On 30 January 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pooler) granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on those grounds.

Discussion

 7. Mr Richards, who represented the  Secretary  of  State  relied  on  the
    grounds.  Ms Gowman, who represented the appellant, relied on a written
    skeleton argument.  Both representatives made oral submissions.

 8. In the Reasons for Refusal Letter, the  Secretary  of  State  raised  a
    number of points in concluding that the appellant's account was not  to
    be accepted.  First, she relied on the fact that between 2009 and  2012
    the appellant had been able to obtain a passport with the intention  of
    travelling abroad for holiday purposes which suggested that the Iranian
    authorities had no interest in her (para 31).  At paras 33 and 34,  the
    Secretary of State considered it "inconsistent" (by  which  she  surely
    meant "implausible") that the appellant would not have tried  to  phone
    her husband, shortly after she escaped, in order to find out  what  had
    happened to him and further that it was implausible that she  would  be
    recognised personally and that, again, it was "inconsistent" that  when
    she was told her home had been raided she did not ask who had  done  so
    in order to try to determine the fate of her husband.  At para 35,  the
    Secretary of State referred to  the  lack  of  supporting  evidence  or
    documentation to substantiate the appellant's claim.

 9. At paras 36-37, the Secretary of State took into account  the  somewhat
    unorthodox route by which the appellant had  reached  the  UK  using  a
    forged Israeli passport.  Having  travelled  to  Turkey,  she  and  her
    daughter then flew to Malaysia (where they  remained  for  15-17  days)
    before returning to Istanbul Airport where they flew  to  Italy  before
    taking a train to Switzerland, eventually flying from Zurich to the UK.



10. In paras 39-42, the  Secretary  of  State  considered  certain  of  the
    appellant's behaviour to be potentially  damaging  of  her  credibility
    under s.8 of the 2004 Act, namely her failure to  disclose  her  asylum
    claim immediately on arrival but only after being  further  interviewed
    and retracting her account to be an Israeli national on holiday in  the
    UK, producing a forged passport to an Immigration Officer  and  failing
    to claim asylum in a safe third country  where  she  had  a  reasonable
    opportunity to do so, namely Italy and Switzerland.

11. All of these points were relied upon by the Presenting  Officer  before
    the judge.

12. The judge set out the appellant's evidence at length and also a medico-
    legal report from Dr Mary Beyer.  Dr Beyer works for the  Freedom  from
    Torture at the Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims  of  Torture.
    At para 20, the judge noted that:

         "The version of events given to the doctor is a  mirror  reflection
         of the evidence the appellant gave in court to the Tribunal.   This
         account was found to be credible by the doctor."

13. The appellant  presented  to  Dr  Beyer  with  psychological  problems,
    including features of PTSD.  Dr Beyer concluded that the appellant  was
    suffering from "a severe depressive episode and PTSD".  At para 24, the
    judge notes that:

         "The doctor concluded this not solely based on what  the  appellant
         had told her."

    Then, the judge sets out from  para  38  of  the  expert's  report  the
    following:

         "On my observations of effect, body language and  demeanour  during
         the  mental  state  examination.   Although   her   depression   is
         exasperated by the  sudden  and  distressing  separation  from  her
         husband in 2012 it is, in my view, together with the  PTSD,  linked
         to her torture experiences in 2009 which she constantly relives  in
         flashbacks and nightmares."

14. At paras 42 and 43, the judge set out  her  reasons  for  her  positive
    credibility finding as follows:

         "42. Throughout my consideration of the facts of this case I intend
             to bear in mind that great care must always  be  taken  before
             making adverse findings of credibility and each finding should
             only be made where they are justified in the light  of  the  a
             particular circumstances.

         43.  I am asked to assess this claim firstly as a refugee case  and
             to find that the appellant meets the refugee criteria.   I  am
             greatly assisted by the Country  Guideline  case,  the  medico
             legal report obtained by the representative for the  appellant
             and by the appellant's own written and oral testimony.  I find
             from the outset that the appellant  is  an  entirely  credible
             witness.  She  was  clearly  very  distressed  in  giving  her
             testimony.  Her account to the Tribunal was just  as  she  had
             told the doctor and there  were  no  material  inconsistencies
             that led me to conclude she was not a witness  of  truth.   It
             was hard for her to give her evidence as she was so distressed
             at points and various breaks were given to her to  enable  her
             to carry  on.   I  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  in  its
             entirety."

15. Mr Richards submitted that this was an  inadequately  reasoned  finding
    which failed to take into account the  points  raised  in  the  refusal
    letter and made no mention of the issues raised under s.8 of  the  2004
    Act which were "potentially damaging" of the  appellant's  credibility.
    He submitted that it was clear that the Presenting Officer  had  relied
    on these matters as set out  in  para  25  of  the  determination.   He
    submitted that the judge's failure was a material error of law.

16. Ms Gowman submitted that an appellate tribunal should be  reluctant  to
    interfere with a finding by a Tribunal of fact  particularly  where  it
    was based upon having seen and heard a witness.  She relied upon Hemeng
    v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 640 at [15] per Buxton LJ for that  proposition.
    Ms Gowman submitted that the judge had given  adequate  reasons  namely
    the  appellant's  demeanour,  the  medico-legal  report  and  also  her
    reference to "the Country Guideline case".

17. In substance  I  accept  Mr  Richards'  submissions  that  the  Judge's
    decision cannot stand.

18. First, it is clear to me that the judge failed to apply s.8 of the 2004
    Act.  Section 8(1) states that:

         "In determining whether to believe a statement made by or on behalf
         of a person who makes an asylum claim or a human  rights  claim,  a
         deciding authority shall take account, as damaging  the  claimant's
         credibility, of any behaviour to which this Section  applies."  (my
         emphasis)

  19. That provision is unambiguous.  A decision maker, which  includes  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  (see  s.8(7)(c))  must  take  into  account  any
      behaviour covered by s.8.  Here,  there  were  three  aspects  of  the
      appellant's "behaviour" which engaged s.8.

  20. There was the failure on her part to disclose her claim immediately on
      arrival and only to do so after having been  interviewed  further  and
      retracting her story of being an Israeli national coming to the UK for
      a holiday.  That was behaviour which, under s.8(2):

         "...

         (a)  is designed or likely to conceal information,

         (b)  is designed or likely to mislead, or

         (c)  is designed or likely to obstruct or  delay  the  handling  or
             resolution of the  claim  or  the  taking  of  a  decision  in
             relation to the claimant."

21. Further, the appellant produced a forged passport  to  the  Immigration
    Officer.  That falls within s.8(3)(b) which provides that:

         "Without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  subsection  (2)   the
         following kinds of behaviour shall be treated as designed or likely
         to conceal information or to mislead -

         ...

         (b)  the production of a document which is not a valid passport  as
             if it were,

         ..."

22. Finally, the appellant  failed  to  take  "advantage  of  a  reasonable
    opportunity" to make an asylum claim in a "safe country", namely  Italy
    and Switzerland.  That was "behaviour" falling within s.8(4).

23. Whilst none of this behaviour, even if established, required the  judge
    to  find  the  appellant  not  to  be  credible,  it  was  nevertheless
    "potentially"  damaging  of  the  appellant's   credibility   (see   JT
    (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 878) and it was an error of  law  for
    the judge to fail to take that "behaviour" into account.

24. Secondly, there were a number of matters - perhaps wrongly described as
    "inconsistencies" - raised in the refusal letter with which  the  judge
    was required to grapple in reaching her  adverse  credibility  finding.
    Again, these were perhaps not in themselves necessarily  fatal  to  the
    appellant's  credibility  but  they  did  require  consideration;   for
    example, the implausibility of the route of the appellant's journey  to
    the UK.

25. I do not accept Ms Gowman's submission that the judge dealt  adequately
    with the issue of credibility in paras 42-43 of her determination.

26. First, the Judge says that she was "greatly assisted"  by  the  country
    guidance case.  That appears to be a reference to two  cases  cited  at
    para 29 of her determination: BA (Demonstrators in Britain  -  risk  on
    return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) and SB (Risk on return  -  illegal
    exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 0053.  At para 48, the judge again  referred
    to  the  "Country  Guidance  case"  in  relation  to  the   appellant's
    credibility as follows:

         "I rely on the following extracts from the Country  Guideline  case
         as factors which have assisted me in finding the  appellant's  fear
         is well founded and that her version of events of what happened  to
         her in 2009 and 2012 is credible:

         Paragraph 1.2.1 "The security forces are reported not to  be  fully
         effective in combating  crime  and  corruption  remains  a  serious
         problem"

         Paragraph 1.2.3 "if  the  person's  fear  is  of  ill  treatment  /
         persecution by the state authorities, or by agents acting on behalf
         of the  state,  then  they  cannot  be  expected  to  go  to  those
         authorities for protection.

         Paragraph 1.2.6 "The Iranian government requires  all  citizens  to
         have exit permits  for  foreign  travel,  A  woman  must  have  the
         permission of her husband, father or other male relative to  obtain
         a passport ...... Those who leave Iran illegally  without  an  exit
         permit faces being fines on return or sentences to between one  and
         three years imprisonment".

         Paragraph 1.2.8 "Iranians facing enforced return do not in  general
         face a real risk of persecution or  ill  treatment  ......  Illegal
         exit may however add to the difficulties an applicant would face if
         they had attracted the adverse attention  of  the  authorities  for
         another reason.""

27. It is not immediately apparent to me how this supported the appellant's
    claim of what she said had occurred to her  between  "2009  and  2012".
    The 2009 detention and ill-treatment was, of course,  accepted.   Apart
    from dealing  with  issues  of  "sufficiency  of  protection"  and  the
    position of an individual who leaves Iran  illegally,  nothing  in  the
    passages cited appears to relate directly to the appellant's account.

28. Secondly, the judge relied upon the medico-legal report.   Medico-legal
    reports can,  of  course,  be  helpful  in  assessing  an  individual's
    credibility.  The consistency of the appellant's account given  to  the
    judge with that she gave to a doctor is supportive of  her  credibility
    on the basis that she has, on at least two occasions,  given  the  same
    account.  However, the fact  that  the  expert  found  the  appellant's
    account to be "credible", was not a matter which should have been given
    any real weight by the judge.  The issue of  credibility  was  for  the
    Tribunal not for the doctor.  Further, the expert's conclusion that the
    appellant suffered from "a severe  depressive  episode  and  PTSD"  was
    related by the expert to the appellant's "torture experiences in  2009"
    as the judge set out in para 24 of her determination.  The  appellant's
    2009 experiences were accepted before the judge.  It is wholly  unclear
    to me how, therefore, the medico-legal report, and  in  particular  the
    diagnosis of  PTSD,  assisted  to  support  the  appellant's  claim  in
    relation to events after 2009.

29. Finally, the judge relied upon her own observation  of  the  appellant,
    including that  she  was  distressed  and  her  evidence  contained  no
    "material inconsistencies".  Whilst the latter may well be the case  if
    the word "inconsistency" is read literally, that did  not  resolve  the
    points made which were, in substance, that the appellant's account  was
    not wholly "plausible".  The judge failed to engage with  that,  as  Mr
    Richards pointed out.

30. I accept, in  principle,  Ms  Gowman's  submission  that  an  appellate
    tribunal should be cautious in interfering with a tribunal of fact  who
    has seen and heard witnesses.  That will be particularly the case where
    there is a conflict between witnesses at a hearing.  The demeanour of a
    witness may, but with care, be taken into account  if  it  demonstrates
    one witness, for example, is more likely to be telling the  truth.   Of
    course, as is well recognised in this jurisdiction, special  care  must
    be taken when assessing the demeanour of witnesses from a multitude  of
    cultural  and  ethnic  backgrounds.    Behaviour,  gestures  and   body
    language may lead to signals  such  that  both  positive  and  negative
    demeanour may be misread.  Here,  the  judge  was  assessing  the  oral
    evidence of the appellant alone  against  the  background  of  all  the
    material, including the medico-legal report,  the  background  evidence
    and the country guidance case.  I accept that the judge was, at  least,
    entitled in principle to take  into  account  that  the  appellant  was
    distressed.  But, as Mr Richards submitted, the accepted events of 2009
    were undoubtedly distressing and the judge was not  in  a  position  to
    conclude that the appellant's distress was because of  the  genuineness
    of  her  whole  account  or  simply  because  of  her   recounting   or
    recollecting the 2009 events.

31. In my judgment, the  judge  erred  in  law  in  reaching  her  positive
    credibility finding for the reasons I have given.  She failed to  apply
    s.8 of the 2004 Act and failed to grapple with the points raised by the
    respondent in the refusal letter  and  relied  upon  before  her.   The
    judge's reasoning in paras 42-43 cannot stand up to scrutiny.  They are
    inadequate to found her positive credibility finding.

Decision

32. Thus, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal cannot stand.  I set it aside.

33. The appeal must be reheard de novo and the appropriate forum for  that,
    applying the Senior President's Practice Statement at para 7.2, is  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

34. Consequently, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Suffield-Thompson.



                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal










