

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07652/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 June 2017                |On 21 June 2017                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     MA
                          ANNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Karnik, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

Introduction

   1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers to
      his international protection claim.


   2. This is an appeal by the appellant,  a  citizen  of  Iran,  against  a
      decision of the respondent ('the SSHD') dated 25 July 2013,  in  which
      leave to remain was refused, following his asylum claim.

   3. The appellant fears that upon return to Iran he will be  subjected  to
      ill-treatment because the authorities have been informed that  he  was
      having a sexual relationship outside of marriage with a woman, who was
      found to be interested in Christianity.   The  appellant's  appeal  to
      the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed in a decision  dated  1  October
      2013.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  accept  the   appellant's
      credibility and gave comprehensive and detailed reasons for this.

Procedural history

   4. The passage of the appeal from the 2013 First-tier  decision  to  this
      stage is a lengthy and convoluted  one.   It  is  sufficient  to  only
      summarise it here.


   5. The appellant appealed against the First-tier Tribunal decision to the
      Upper Tribunal.  Permission to appeal was refused  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and then the Upper Tribunal.  The appellant's application  to
      challenge the refusal of permission to appeal, to  the  Administrative
      Court was also  unsuccessful.   The  appellant  appealed  against  the
      refusal of permission by the Administrative Court,  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal.  Gloster LJ granted permission to appeal on 13 March 2014.


   6. In a consent order dated 27 July 2015 the Court of Appeal remitted the
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal for a new decision on the application for
      permission to appeal to be  made.   In  a  statement  of  reasons  the
      parties agreed that the First-tier Tribunal  and  in  turn  the  Upper
      Tribunal when refusing permission to appeal, made an arguable error of
      law:


   i) in failing to engage with new material showing a risk to failed asylum
      seekers returning to  Iran,  which  supported  a  departure  from  the
      relevant country guidance decision;


  ii) in failing to attach any weight to representations  dated  14  January
      2013 made on the appellant's behalf, following  his  asylum  screening
      interview  in   order   to   correct   errors   therein   ('the   2013
      representations') - there has been  both  procedural  and  substantive
      unfairness.


   7. In a decision dated  12  December  2016  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted
      permission in view of the consent order and statement of reasons.


   8. The matter now comes before me to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
      decision contains an error of law, and if so whether it should be  set
      aside.

Hearing

   9. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Harrison distanced himself from the
      rule 24 notice and agreed that the decision needs to be remade in  its
      entirety - he accepted that it was procedurally unfair for the  First-
      tier Tribunal to draw adverse inferences from the contents of the 2013
      representations.  He was entirely correct to do so for the  reasons  I
      set out below.   That is sufficient to dispose of  issue  (i)  at  [6]
      above.  Both representatives agreed that when the decision is  remade,
      consideration shall need to be given to  SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:
      failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]  UKUT  308  (IAC)  and  therefore
      issue (i) does not need to be addressed further at this stage.


  10. Both representatives agreed that the error of law  is  such  that  the
      decision needs to be remade completely.  I had regard to para  7.2  of
      the relevant Senior President's Practice Statement and the nature  and
      extent of the factual findings required in remaking the decision,  and
      I decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

Discussion

  11. In the 2013 representations the appellant's solicitors  requested  two
      brief amendments to and clarification of the screening interview  held
      on 21 November 2012.  The First-tier Tribunal regarded the  claims  in
      the 2013 representations to "stand in stark contrast to his  screening
      interview" [15].  Mr Harrison accepted that it  was  not  unusual  for
      representatives to submit further submissions  clarifying  matters  at
      the very brief screening interview, made shortly  upon  arrival  after
      long journeys with the assistance of  an  interpreter,  and  for  such
      representations to be accepted by the SSHD.  In any event, it is  very
      difficult to see what was so stark in the contrast  to  the  screening
      interview.


  12. After directing itself to YL (Rely on SEF) China  [2004]  UKIAT  00145
      the First-tier Tribunal found at [16] that  the  2013  representations
      "give rise to a number of credibility issues" which I summarise below:


   i) The claim that the appellant did not understand the Farsi  interpreter
      at the screening interview in the 2013 representations is  unsupported
      by  his  confirmation  at  the  interview  that  he   understood   the
      interpreter.


  ii) The claim in the 2013 representations that the appellant did not  have
      a fair opportunity to put forward all the relevant details in  support
      of his  claim  is  inconsistent  with  the  record  of  the  screening
      interview, in which relevant questions were asked  and  the  appellant
      was given an  opportunity  to  answer  these  but  failed  to  mention
      important matters such as his girlfriend's abortion and the accusation
      of rape against him.

 iii) The failure to mention Christianity  at  the  screening  interview  is
      inconsistent with his claims at the asylum interview.

  iv)  A  proposed  amendment  to  the  screening  interview  regarding  the
      appellant's pregnant girlfriend does not make sense and in  any  event
      does not address the failure to refer to the abortion.

  13. Mr Karnik submitted that, leaving aside the errors  in  approach  that
      can be demonstrated in relation to the specific  findings  at  (i)  to
      (iv) above, it was procedurally unfair for the First-tier Tribunal  to
      effectively reject  the  2013  representations  and  to  draw  adverse
      inferences from their submission, when that  was  not  a  point  taken
      against the appellant at any stage (asylum interview, decision  letter
      or at the hearing) and  which  the  appellant  was  provided  with  no
      opportunity to address.


  14. When the asylum interview is read as a whole, it  is  clear  that  the
      interviewing officer approached the claim on the basis set out in  the
      screening interview as  amended  by  the  2013  representations.   For
      example, the  appellant's  explanation  that  his  girlfriend  had  an
      abortion, was probed by the interviewing officer  (Q  92-93)  but  not
      because of a failure to mention this at the screening interview.


  15. A similar  approach  was  adopted  in  the  decision  letter.   Direct
      reference is made to the 2013 representations at [6] of the  decision.
      The decision letter appears to have been drafted on the basis that the
      proposed amendments to the answers at  the  screening  interview  have
      been accepted.  The adverse credibility findings reached by  the  SSHD
      are mostly predicated upon her view that the account is implausible.


  16. I therefore accept that at no point did the  SSHD  seek  to  draw  any
      adverse  inferences  from  the  inconsistencies   between   the   2013
      representations and the screening interview or the content of the 2013
      representations.

  17. I have not been able to locate a record of proceedings  on  the  court
      file.  Mr Karnik indicated that the point was not put by the  SSHD  or
      the Judge at the hearing.  Mr Harrison accepted there was no reason to
      dispute this.


  18. I am satisfied that the failure to put matters, apparently accepted by
      the SSHD, to the appellant, constituted procedural  unfairness.   This
      infected the credibility findings made, such that the  decision  needs
      to be remade de novo.

Decision

  19. The First-tier Tribunal  decision  contains  an  error  of  law.   Its
      decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      20. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
20 June 2017




