
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/07588/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 January 2016                        | On 30 March 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between


                                  MR G H J
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appealed, with permission, against the dismissal  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal of his appeal against the decision of the Secretary
    of State's dated  21st  January  1979  refusing  him  protection  as  a
    refugee, humanitarian protection  and  protection  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on 21st January 1979 and is
    a Tamil from Jaffna.  He claims he was forcibly recruited to the  LTTE,
    trained and used for providing first aid  assistance  to  injured  LTTE
    fighters. Having escaped from the group he claims he moved to  Vavuniya
    where he attended university but continued to assist pro-Tamil  events.
    He escaped punishment by the LTTE for his escape as  a  result  of  his
    support to the cause.  He eventually applied for a visa to study in the
    United Kingdom and  left  Sri  Lanka  on  20th  April  2008.   On  22nd
    September 2010 he returned to  Sri  Lanka  and  during  this  time  was
    stopped at a checkpoint, questioned and taken to a police station where
    he claims he was beaten and tortured and escaped making a payment of  a
    bribe.  It  was  also  his  contention  that  he  assisted  in  various
    activities conducted by the Tamil  diaspora  in  the  UK  and  that  he
    therefore feared a return to Sri Lanka.

 3. The application for permission to appeal noted  that  the  brother  had
    returned to Sri Lanka on 15th October 2011 and was arrested on  arrival
    and detained and was subjected to torture  and  he  then  escaped  from
    detention and went to India where he remained.

 4. It was asserted in the application for permission to  appeal  that  the
    judge had failed to acknowledge  that  the  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant.   The judge accepted the appellant had been a low-level LTTE
    supporter, but his evidence of being detained, questioned and  tortured
    on his return, which was consistent with the background  evidence,  was
    not acknowledged by the judge.  The appellant's account was  consistent
    and consistent with the background material.  Secondly the judge failed
    to have regard to the evidence by the appellant  that  he  secured  his
    release from detention through the payment of a bribe and  in  GJ  (Sri
    Lanka) [2013] UKUT 00319 it was specifically accepted by the  Secretary
    of State  that  an  ability  to  leave  through  the  airport  was  not
    indicative of a lack of interest on account  of  the  use  of  bribery.
    This could not  properly  be  relied  on  to  find  the  appellant  not
    credible.

 5. It was only after making his findings that  the  judge  considered  the
    medical evidence and it was clear that medical (psychiatric  evidence),
    which corroborates an appellant's account, should be taken into account
    in the  context  of  all  the  evidence  prior  to  making  credibility
    findings.  The appellant had been identified as suffering from PTSD and
    the failure to properly engage with the  contents  of  the  report  was
    wrong in law.  Similarly the judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
    scarring report which corroborated the appellant's claim.

 6. The judge had clearly failed to have regard to the guidance in  GJ  and
    made it clear that  even  a  mere  perception  that  an  individual  is
    involved with the activity that threatens the unity of the  Sri  Lankan
    state there would be a risk of torture on return (7(a)).

 7. The judge made factual errors in determining  the  appeal.   The  judge
    stated the appellant claimed asylum on 14th November 2014, in  fact  it
    was in 2012.  The judge referred to the appellant making  a  claim  for
    asylum on 14th November 2014  but  it  was  clear  and  recorded  in  a
    previous determination, which was included in the  appellant's  bundle,
    that the appellant had raised his fear of  persecution  previously  and
    the Tribunal was referred to the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Miller who recorded, in a determination promulgated  on  20th  November
    2012, that:

         "Mr Solomon the applicant's Counsel  submitted  as  the  additional
         grounds referred to the fact  that  the  first  appellant  faced  a
         threat to his life in Sri Lanka, his brother having  been  arrested
         upon arrival  from  Dubai  on  account  of  the  first  applicant's
         political activity."

 8. There had been a history in which the appellant had raised the question
    of asylum but the Secretary of State had failed to consider it.

 9. Lastly the judge had failed to consider the aspect of Article 3.

10. In a Rule 24 response the Secretary of State  opposed  the  application
    for permission to appeal.

11. At the  hearing  Mr  Lewis  submitted  that  the  judge  had  committed
    fundamental errors of law not least at paragraphs 5 and 11 in  that  he
    had not set out that part of the appellant's claim, that is, that there
    was a sur place activity. This was part of the submissions made  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It was unclear at paragraph 12  whether
    the judge was referring to him leaving the country in 2008 or 2010  and
    in response to the assertion that it was incredible that the  appellant
    was able to leave the airport without difficulty on his own  documents,
    did not grapple with the finding in GJ as such

    "given the prevalence of bribery and corruption in  Sri  Lanka,  having
    left Sri Lanka without difficulty  was  not  probative  of  a  lack  of
    adverse interest in an individual".

12. Mr Lewis submitted that paragraph  13  just  did  not  make  sense  and
    appeared rather confusing  and  part  of  which  did  not  reflect  the
    appellant's account.  There appeared to be a lack of  anxious  scrutiny
    and indeed the reference in paragraph 15 to a lack of a letter form the
    GTF was misconceive because the appellant had provided such  a  letter.
    There was a text book error in relation to the treatment of the medical
    evidence because the judge had merely tacked on a consideration of  the
    evidence having already made a credibility finding.

13. Miss Sreeramen relied on her Rule 24 response and stated that the judge
    had set out adequate reasons and was entitled to  conclude  that  there
    was no evidence of his risk on return.

14. In conclusion I would concur with Mr Lewis that there  appeared  to  be
    sections of the paragraphs which  were  difficult  to  understand,  for
    example at paragraph 16 the decision reads as follows:

         "Considering the conduct of this appellant, on his  return  to  Sri
         Lanka, while he has demonstrated little fear  as  admitted  to  him
         already, it is hardly credible that he would have been  stopped  at
         the entry point to the airport when the country information reports
         clearly state that  the  airport  has  mechanisms  for  identifying
         persons involved with the LTTE.  If there was no  information  held
         on the appellant and the check was a random check as claimed, I  do
         not find it credible that he would have been tortured  as  claimed.
         I also find it incredible that an appellant who was comfortable  to
         return to Sri  Lanka,  left  the  airport  without  difficulty  and
         travelled on his own  documents  out  of  the  country  could  have
         employed the services of an agent."

15. The reasoning is not entirely clear here but it does indicate that  the
    judge has not taken into account the acceptance of GJ that leaving  Sri
    Lanka  without  difficulty  was  not  necessarily  indicative  of   the
    appellant's account one way or another.

16. In the circumstances, and  in  passing,  I  note  that  in  the  asylum
    interview the appellant was clear that in fact he had used the services
    of an agent to extract himself from Sri Lanka, I find that there is  an
    inadequacy of reasoning and a failure to identify that passing  through
    the airport in Sri Lanka, because of the possibility of  bribery,  does
    not always undermine an appellant's claim.

17. That, however, is not the  only  difficulty  with  this  determination.
    There would appear  to  be  some  factual  errors  such  as  the  judge
    referring to him claiming asylum on  14th  November  2014  rather  than
    claiming asylum as he did in 2012.

18. At paragraph 15 the judge stated

    "I do not find it plausible that  the  appellant  could  have  obtained
    letters from the GTF if he was a high profile member apart  from  being
    at demonstrations".

19. As Mr Lewis submitted and indeed he was the representative in the First-
    tier Tribunal, the appellant did produce a letter from GTF.

20. There was unfortunately a failure to follow Mibanga v SSHD [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367 in looking at the evidence in the round and JL (Medical reports
    credibility) China [2012] UKUT 00145.  The judge appears to  arrive  at
    his credibility findings at  paragraph  16  and  uses  those  concluded
    credibility findings to apply Tanveer Ahmed to give  little  weight  to
    the documentation which was produced.  The judge then proceeds  in  the
    next paragraph at [17] to consider  the  appellant's  medical  reports.
    This is indeed contrary to the legal approach to be taken  to  evidence
    which should have formed part of the overall material to be taken  into
    account by the judge when considering the credibility of  the  claimant
    and his wife and before any final  conclusion  is  reached  as  to  the
    appellant's credibility.

21. Mr Lewis raised  at  the  hearing  that  there  were  sections  of  the
    appellant's claim which were not addressed, not  least  his  sur  place
    claim and this is an element which does not appear to have been  raised
    in the application for permission to appeal but nonetheless  the  legal
    errors which I have identified above in failing to have regard  to  the
    guidance in GJ and failing to treat the medical evidence as part of his
    overall credibility findings fundamentally  undermine  the  conclusions
    regarding of credibility and the matter should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

22. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 10th March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


