


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07652/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10th August 2016                       |On 12th August 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                  Almas [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sean F Ell (instructed by Carter Law Solicitors
Ltd)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Davies) promulgated on 21st August 2015.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1987.  She came  to
      the United Kingdom as a student in 2011.  Her leave was  curtailed  in
      2013 and when encountered 12 months later in October 2014 she  claimed
      asylum.  She claimed that she had been ill treated by her husband  who
      she had been forced to marry in Pakistan and that if returned he  will
      kill her.

   3. The Judge did not find the  Appellant's  claims  to  be  credible  and
      dismissed the appeal.

   4. The grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made on  a
      single issue, namely that it was an arguable error of law to  fail  to
      take into account the Country Guidance cases.  The relevant cases  are
      SN & HM (divorced woman - risk on return)  Pakistan  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
      00283 and SM (lone women  -  ostracism)  Pakistan  [2016]  UKUT  00067
      (IAC).  The remainder of the grounds, the  Judge  granting  permission
      found to be no more than a disagreement with the findings of the Judge
      which were made with sustainable reasons and based on the evidence.

   5. The Appellant had complained that her  husband  and  his  family  were
      members of SSP (Sipah-e-Sahaba).   The Judge found this  claim  to  be
      without credibility as the Appellant's family and her husband's family
      were both related and from the same village and it was  therefore  not
      credible that she and her family would not know of her husband and his
      family's involvement with the SSP as she claimed.

   6. The Judge found her claim not credible because her description of  her
      husband and his behaviour towards her wholly contradicted by the  fact
      that he allowed her to live separately from him and work as a nurse in
      Rawalpindi until 2011.  The Judge also found it not credible  that  if
      her husband were as she claimed, he would have allowed her to come  on
      her own to the United Kingdom to work.

   7. The Judge found that had her  claims  been  credible  she  would  have
      claimed asylum when she arrived in the United Kingdom and  not  waited
      several years and in particular  only  claim  when  she  came  to  the
      attention of the Secretary of State.

   8. The Judge noted that the Appellant is an educated woman and  he  found
      the reason given for her late claim without credibility.

   9. The Judge also found her claim without credibility on the  basis  that
      her husband had divorced her and that being the  case  would  have  no
      reason to wish to harm her.

  10. The Appellant's uncle  gave  evidence  and  the  Judge  dismissed  his
      evidence on the basis  that  he  and  the  Appellant  gave  discrepant
      evidence.

  11. The Judge at paragraphs 94 & 95 set out why this Appellant could  live
      alone in one of the major cities and work as a nurse without risk.

  12. It is true that nowhere in the Decision and  Reasons  does  the  Judge
      specifically refer  to  the  Country  Guidance  cases  by  name.   The
      relevant part of the Country Guidance is found in SN & HM where it  is
      stated that "it will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better
      off, or older women to seek internal relocation to a city. It helps if
      a woman has qualifications enabling her to  get  well-paid  employment
      and pay for accommodation and childcare  if  required.  "It  is  quite
      clear that the Judge had  the  case  law  in  mind  and  followed  the
      guidance contained therein because the basis upon which he found  that
      the Appellant would not be at risk was that she is a  highly  educated
      woman who could live alone and work to support herself.  She is one of
      the categories of person who would not  be  at  risk  returning  as  a
      divorced woman in accordance with case law.

  13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make any material errors of law in its
      Decision and Reasons and the Decision and Reasons is upheld.

  14. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

  15. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.




Signed                              Date 10th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
