
[pic]
      Upper Tribunal

                    (Immigration         and         Asylum         Chamber)
Appeal Number: AA/07088/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




      Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham               Decision & Reasons
      Promulgated

      On                   13                   July                    2015
            On 27 July 2015







                                   Before:




                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY




                                  Between:




                              MR EPHREM HUSSEIN

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And




               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent

      Representation:

      For the Appellant: Mr Howard (Solicitor)
      For the Respondent: Mr Smart (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS




   1. This is  the  respondent's  (the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department's) appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Anthony promulgated  on  the  7th  April  2015.  Although  it  is  the
      respondent's appeal, for the sake of clarity, throughout this decision
      the parties will be referred to as they were referred to in the First-
      tier Tribunal hearing, such that Mr Hussein  is  referred  to  as  the
      appellant and the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  is
      referred to as the respondent.




        Background




   2. The appellant was born  on  the  1st  May  1989.  His  nationality  is
      disputed. The appellant claims to be a national  of  Eritrea,  whereas
      the respondent believes him to be a national of Ethiopia.




   3. The appellant had  originally  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      against the respondent's decision dated  the  3rd  September  2014  to
      remove the appellant as an illegal  entrant  to  the  United  Kingdom,
      after the refusal of his asylum claim. That appeal was  brought  under
      section 82 (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.




   4. The appellant's asylum claim was made  on  the  basis  that  he  is  a
      Pentecostal Christian from Eritrea who is of draft age  and  who  left
      Eritrea illegally. He claims that he was born  in  Eritrea,  but  left
      Eritrea in 1995 when he was about 6 years old, moving with his parents
      to Addis Ababa in Ethiopia. He claims that in 2000,  due  to  the  war
      between Eritrea and Ethiopia, he and his family were deported back  to
      Eritrea and they went to Campo  Sudan  in  Assad,  Eritrea,  where  he
      remained until  2005.  The  appellant's  case  is  that  his  problems
      relating to his religion as a Pentecostal Christian began in 2002 when
      the Pentecostal faith was banned in Eritrea and  he  could  no  longer
      practice his faith openly. It was claimed that  his  home  was  raided
      towards the end of 2002 and that his father  was  taken  away  by  the
      authorities. The Appellant says that he continued to live  in  Eritrea
      until 2005, when he fled with his family to Khartoum in Sudan. In 2008
      he married his wife and says he remained there in Khartoum until 2013,
      when he then travelled from Sudan, via the Sahara desert, into  Libya.
      The appellant then travelled from Libya, via Italy to the UK, where he
      claimed asylum. The respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim on
      the basis that it was not accepted that he was a national of  Eritrea,
      nor was it accepted that the appellant was  a  Pentecostal  Christian,
      and it was not accepted that he left Eritrea illegally. It  was  found
      that he was a national of Ethiopia.




   5. The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber), which appeal was  heard  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony on the 13th March 2015. Her decision
      was promulgated on the  7th  April  2015.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Anthony allowed the appellant's appeal under  the  Refugee  Convention
      and also under Article  3  of  the  ECHR.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Anthony  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine   Pentecostal
      Christian and that he was an Eritrean national, who was of  draft  age
      and who had  left  Eritrea  illegally.  She  further  found  that  the
      appellant had some listening skills in Tigrinya, but limited  speaking
      skills and that the appellant spoke Amharic. The  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge accepted, given the appellant's evidence that he  only  spent  a
      limited amount of time in Eritrea, that  therefore  he  could  not  be
      expected to give correct answers to all  the  questions  that  he  was
      asked during the interview, pertaining to his nationality and that  he
      was only a minor when he was living in  Eritrea.  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Anthony accepted that at the time  of  the  interview  with  the
      respondent, the appellant had not  lived  in  Eritrea  for  nearly  10
      years. She found that she did not accept that all families  will  have
      been split up when being deported back to  Eritrea  and  that  as  the
      appellant was only 11 years old at the time, this explained why he was
      unable to recall what provisions or support he  and  his  family  were
      provided with, when they were deported back to Eritrea.




   6.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  it  was  plausible  or
      reasonably likely for many ethnic  Eritreans  to  only  speak  Ahmaric
      fluently and that in the appellant's case he  had  moved  to  Ethiopia
      when he was very young and was schooled in  Ethiopia.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge accepted to the lower standard of proof  applicable  in
      asylum claims the  appellant  had  proved  that  he  was  of  Eritrean
      nationality and that as a result of his religion and because he was of
      draft age, had not completed national service  and  had  left  Eritrea
      illegally, that the appellant was at a real risk of  persecution  upon
      return, such that he was entitled to asylum.




   7. On the 15th April 2015, the respondent made an in time application for
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It was argued  within  the
      grounds of appeal that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  give
      adequate reasons for  her  findings  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
      language abilities and that was unclear what was meant by the Judge in
      her finding at paragraph [23] that the appellant had  "some  listening
      skills in Tigrinya". It is argued that the Judge has relied in  making
      her language findings upon the evidence of Mr Asgodom, the appellant's
      pastor, despite him not being a language expert and that the Judge has
      made a material error of law. It is further argued in grounds  two  of
      the grounds of appeal, that the Judge erred in  law  in  applying  the
      case law of ST (Ethnic Eritrea-nationality-return) Ethiopian CG [2011]
      UKUT 00252 (AIC).




        Submissions




   8. In his submissions on behalf of the respondent Mr  Smart  relied  upon
      the grounds of appeal. He referred specifically to the refusal  letter
      wherein the question of the appellant's  nationality  was  dealt  with
      between paragraphs [25] and [50] inclusive. Mr Smart  referred  us  in
      particular paragraphs [33] and [35]  and  to  the  extracts  from  the
      Country of Origin  Information  Report  on  Eritrea,  dated  the  18th
      September 2013 in respect of the  languages  spoken  in  Eritrea,  and
      argued that it was stated that Amharic was not listed as  one  of  the
      major language groups in Eritrea, but was a principal language,  which
      was widely spoken in Ethiopia.




   9. Mr Smart referred specifically to the findings of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge  Anthony  at  paragraph  [23]  of  her   decision   that   "both
      representatives were unable to refer me to  any  material  within  the
      background material which confirms that ethnic Eritreans are  able  to
      speak at least one other language other than Amharic. In  the  absence
      of such evidence, I find that it is  plausible  or  reasonably  likely
      that many ethnic Eritreans only  speak  Amharic  fluently,  given  the
      Eritrea did not become independent from Ethiopia until 1991." This, he
      argued, was contrary to  the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report
      information referred to within the Notice of Refusal. He  argued  that
      in that regard, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had specifically  relied
      upon the evidence of Mr Asgodom, the pastor, who told the  Judge  that
      "most Eritreans once lived in Ethiopia and will therefore be  able  to
      speak Amharic" (paragraph [15] of the decision). Mr Smart argued  that
      as  this  information  had  not  come  from  the  Country  of   Origin
      Information Report, the Judge must have relied upon Mr Asgodom in that
      regard, despite the fact that Mr Asgodom was not a language expert.




  10. Mr Smart further argued that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  finding
      at paragraph [23] that "I find the appellant does have some  listening
      skills in Tigrinya and accept his evidence and that of Mr Asgodom that
      he is not fluent in  Tigrinya"  again  placed  undue  weight  upon  Mr
      Asgodom's evidence regarding the appellant's  language  abilities.  He
      further argued that the findings of the Judge regarding what was meant
      by the appellant  having  "some  listening  skills  in  Tigrinya"  was
      unclear. He argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred
      in law. He argued that it was not possible to separate out the  extent
      to which the First-tier Tribunal Judge relied upon  these  matters  in
      concluding the appellant was  of  Eritrean  nationality,  rather  than
      Ethiopian, and that the whole decision was thereby rendered unsafe.




  11. In respect of the second ground of appeal, Mr Smart  initially  argued
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to consider  what  steps
      the appellant had taken to prove his nationality following the country
      guidance case of ST (Ethnic Eritrea-nationality-return)  Ethiopian  CG
      [2011] UKUT 00252 (IAC).  However,  upon  closer  examination  of  the
      country guidance case, Mr Smart conceded that it was  a  case  dealing
      with the steps had to be taken by someone who has claimed that he  had
      been deprived of his Ethiopian nationality and the steps such a person
      would have to take in order to show that they had attempted  to  prove
      their nationality, as opposed to someone in the  appellant's  position
      who was not claiming that he was in Ethiopian national  who  had  been
      deprived of Ethiopian nationality, but who was claiming  that  he  had
      always been an Eritrea national. We therefore do not accept  that  the
      second ground  of  appeal  has  any  merit,  as  ST  (Ethnic  Eritrea-
      nationality-return) Ethiopian CG was not dealing with the  appellant's
      scenario. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  therefore  did  not  need  to
      consider the steps taken by him to prove "Ethiopian  nationality",  as
      he was never claiming that he was an Ethiopian national.




  12. In his submissions Mr Howard rely upon his Rule 24  reply.  He  argued
      that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  findings  in  respect  of  the
      appellant being an Eritrean national were not  solely  dependent  upon
      the Judge's assessment of his language ability.  He  argued  that  the
      Judge had accepted at paragraph [15] that the appellant was a  genuine
      Pentecostal Christian, who attended church services every  Friday.  He
      further argued that the Judge had  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
      given many correct answers in respect  of  the  nationality  questions
      asked during the asylum interview at [19] and that the Judge  properly
      weighed up all of the evidence before concluding the appellant was  an
      Eritrean national. He further argued  that  the  Judge  had  not  only
      considered the evidence Mr  Asgodom,  but  also  the  appellant's  own
      evidence regarding his language abilities, and the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge had borne in mind that the appellant had moved to Ethiopian when
      he was very young and was schooled in Ethiopia and that  for  most  of
      his adult life the appellant had lived  in  Sudan,  amongst  both  the
      Eritrean  and  Ethiopian  communities.  Mr  Howard  argued  that  when
      deported back to Eritrea, the appellant had been sent to Campo  Sudan,
      which he argued explained why the appellant spoke Ahmaric and that the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to rely upon  the  evidence  of
      the appellant that he spoke Ahmaric at home. He asked us to find  that
      there were no material errors of law and to dismiss the appeal.










        Findings on Error of Law and Materiality




  13. Mr Howard handed up a  copy  of  the  Country  of  Origin  Information
      Service report on Eritrea dated 18th September 2013, that  was  relied
      upon by the Respondent  in  the  Refusal  Notice  and  which  was  the
      relevant Country of Origin Information Service report, as at the  date
      of the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony.




  14. It was stated within the Country of Origin Information Service  report
      at paragraph 1.01 that "the major language groups in Eritrea are Afar,
      Bilien, Hedareb, Kunama, Nara, Rashaida,  Saho,  Tigre  and  Tigrinya.
      English is rapidly becoming the language of business and is the medium
      of instruction at secondary schools and  university.  Arabic  is  also
      widely spoken."




  15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony at paragraph [15] accepted  that  Mr
      Asgodom had been a pastor since 2005 and stated specifically  that  Mr
      Asgodom had told her that "most Eritreans once lived in  Ethiopia  and
      will therefore be able to speak Ahmaric. He speaks to the appellant in
      Ahmaric. He confirms that the appellant does understand  to  Tigrinya,
      but his spoken Tigrinya is not good and not fluent".   The  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge went on at paragraph [16] to find specifically that "in
      relation to his evidence regarding the  appellant's  understanding  of
      Tigrinya, I accept his evidence that the appellant has some  listening
      skills in Tigrinya,  but  limited  speaking  skills."  Given  that  in
      paragraphs  [15]  and  [16],  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   was
      considering evidence from sources other than  the  appellant,  as  was
      stated in the heading to those paragraphs, it seems clear and we  find
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has relied upon the evidence of  Mr
      Asgodom in reaching her conclusions regarding the appellant's language
      skills in Tigrinya. We find that she was wrong to do so, given that Mr
      Asgodom did not profess to have any expertise in language and was  not
      a recognised expert in linguistics.




  16. At paragraph [23] of the decision, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Anthony
      found specifically that "it is plausible or reasonably likely for many
      ethnic Eritreans to only speak Amharic fluently,  given  that  Eritrea
      did not become independent from Ethiopia until 1991". In reaching this
      finding First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony, we find has  again  wrongly
      relied upon the evidence of Mr Asgodom,  as  there  was  no  reference
      within the Country of Origin Information  Service  Report  before  the
      Judge, or elsewhere within  the  background  evidence  before  her  to
      indicate that many ethnic Eritreans only speak Ahmaric. The First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had specifically referred to the evidence of Mr Asgodom
      at [15]  that  "most  Eritreans  once  lived  in  Ethiopia  and  would
      therefore be able to speak Amharic", this  appeared  to  be  the  only
      source for that finding. Given that Mr Asgodom was a  pastor  and  did
      not profess to have any skills as an expert in language or  ethnology,
      we consider that to the extent that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
      relied upon his evidence  in  concluding  that  "it  is  plausible  or
      reasonably likely many ethnic Eritreans only speak  Amharic  fluently,
      given that Eritrea did not become independent Ethiopian  until  1991",
      that First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony has erred  in  law  in  relying
      upon evidence from Mr Asgodom of an expert nature,  when  he  was  not
      such an expert, and when that evidence was in  fact  contrary  to  the
      information provided within the Country of Origin Information  Report,
      wherein Amharic was not even listed as  a  principal  language  within
      Eritrea.




  17.  Further, given the contents of  the  Country  of  Origin  Information
      Report,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  wrong  to  take   into
      consideration at paragraph [23] that "Both representatives were unable
      to refer me to any  material  within  the  background  material  which
      confirmed that ethnic Eritreans are able to speak at least  one  other
      language other than Amharic". There was no expert evidence before  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge to show that in fact Eritreans would  be  to
      speak Amharic, and given that the Country of Origin Information Report
      did not list Amharic as one of the principal languages in Eritrea, her
      finding that there was no evidence to say that Eritreans would  be  to
      speak at least one other language other than  Amharic  was  a  finding
      that lacked any rational or proper evidential basis. Further, what  in
      fact was meant by the First-tier Tribunal Judge by  her  reference  to
      "ethnic Eritreans" in that context  is  not  clear.  Additionally,  in
      respect of her finding that many "ethnic Eritreans" would be able only
      able to speak Amharic, insufficient and inadequate reasons were  given
      by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in this regard,  as  either  she  has
      wrongly relied upon the evidence of Mr Asgodom  when  he  was  not  an
      expert in linguistics, or she has  failed  to  properly  set  out  the
      evidential basis for her finding. On either basis, the same amounts to
      an error of law.




  18. We find that the such errors in law are material,  in  that  they  may
      well have affected the outcome of the case, and that we find  that  is
      impossible  to  separate   out   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's
      consideration as to the languages which the appellant spoke  or  ought
      to have spoken, from her other findings regarding the answers that the
      appellant gave regarding nationality in interview, or  the  assistance
      that he and his family would have  been  provided  if  they  had  been
      deported back to Eritrea, or the fact that the appellant had  received
      some schooling in Ethiopia and had also lived in Sudan, in considering
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment of nationality. The  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge appears to have  taken  a  holistic  view  to  the
      evidence, such that it is impossible to conclude that  the  errors  of
      law in her approach to language would  have  been  immaterial  to  her
      finding on the lower standard of  proof  that  the  appellant  was  an
      Eritrean national  and  her  consequent  assessment  and  findings  in
      respect of risk upon return. The decision therefore discloses material
      errors of law and is set aside in its entirety.  The  case  is  to  be
      remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham for  rehearing,
      to be heard before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Anthony. The respondent's appeal is allowed.


   Notice of Decision


      The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Anthony  did   contain
      materials errors material errors of law and is thereby set  aside  and
      the respondent's appeal is allowed. The case is remitted back  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge for rehearing, to  be  heard  at  Birmingham
      before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Anthony.




      The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  13  of
      the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order was made
      before us. No such order is made.



      Signed
                                            Dated 19th July 2015



      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

