
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/07671/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Resumed Hearing                           |  On 20 May 2016                  |
|On 26 April 2016                          |                                  |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

               DEPUTY JUDGE of the UPPER TRIBUNAL Ms G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                   mrs ST
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                        Decision & reasons following resumed hearing

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones (Counsel instructed by Tamil Welfare
Association)
For the Respondent:    Miss Fijiwala (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is a resumed hearing following a decision and reasons  promulgated
    on 26 February 2016 in which I found an error of law by the  First-tier
    Tribunal and set aside the decision.  Directions  were  made  for  oral
    submissions on all issues relevant to Article 8 and Article 3  and  for
    the production of any further medical evidence  as  necessary  and  for
    evidence as to suitability of accommodation  in  a  care  home  in  Sri
    Lanka.

2.   At the  resumed  hearing  the  appellant's  representative  produced  a
    skeleton argument and a psychiatric report prepared by Dr G C Fox, Home
    Office guidance re medical evidence, case study: Sri Lanka, letters  of
    appointment at Whipps Cross Hospital, GJ and  Others  (Post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), PP (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1828.  The respondent's representative  produced  three
    information sheets on care homes in Sri Lanka and relied  on  Rajendran
    (Section 117B - family life) [2006] UKUT 138 IAC.

Issues

3.   The background facts are not disputed. The details are set out  in  the
    decision and reasons promulgated on 26 February 2006 on which  I  rely.
    The issues to be considered were Article 3/humanitarian protection  and
    Article 8/family life. I proceed on the basis that the appellant has no
    close family members able to care for her in Sri Lanka,  and  that  she
    has chronic physical and mental health needs.

Submissions

4.    The respondent relied on evidence showing  the  availability  of  care
    homes for the elderly and for those  suffering  with  dementia  in  Sri
    Lanka arguing that Articles 3, Article 8 rules,  paragraph  276ADE  are
    not met and Article 8 outside of the Rules is not engaged.  The factors
    listed in Section 117B are of relevance and  reliance  placed   on  the
    recent Upper Tribunal decision of Rajendran.  It was submitted that the
    factors in PP  (Sri  Lanka)  (paragraph  14)  did  not  apply  to  this
    appellant. The medical evidence did not  support  any  claimed  suicide
    risk.

5.   Ms Jones relies on her skeleton argument.  She submits that  such  care
    whilst  being  available  does  not  meet  the   appellant's   specific
    requirements. The appellant is at risk as a lone female in PP, and  her
    particular physical and mental health needs are such  that  Articles  3
    and/or 8 apply.

Discussion and Decision

6.    I accept Ms Jones' submission that the appellant's circumstances  must
    be considered in the context  of  risk  on  return  following  PP  (Sri
    Lanka).  In so doing it is necessary to consider the evidence as to the
    appellant's vulnerabilities.  I find that she is an elderly woman  with
    multiple health difficulties and moderate cognitive impairment  due  to
    depression and/or age related dementia.  She is receiving treatment for
    type 2 diabetes, hypertension and respiratory difficulties.   I  accept
    the conclusion reached by consultant psychiatric Dr  S  Dhumad  in  his
    report  dated  25  October  2015  and  which  is  unchallenged  by  the
    respondent.  Dr Dhumad considered risk of suicide and found a  moderate
    risk but rising to be a significant risk in the event of a  deportation
    to Sri Lanka.  She would be at risk of isolation and loneliness in  Sri
    Lanka leading to a significant  deterioration  in  her  mental  health,
    increasing her vulnerability and her risk of committing  suicide.    Dr
    Dhumad found the appellant was unfit to attend  the  court  hearing  or
    give oral  evidence.   He  stated,  "She  is  depressed,  hopeless  and
    cognitively impaired; her concentration is poor and  is  likely  to  be
    worse if she were to be cross-examined".  He concluded that she is:


         "A very vulnerable elderly lady  with  serious  mental  social  and
         physical health needs.  She is not currently treated for depression
         or properly investigated for dementia: therefore prognosis  depends
         on her response to  treatment  and  the  outcome  of  the  dementia
         diagnosis.  In my opinion the prognosis  would  be  good  when  she
         receives the appropriate treatment and maintains the  psychological
         and social support by her children; on the other hand the prognosis
         will be very poor if she were  to  be  deported  to  Sri  Lanka  or
         India."

7.  Dr Dhumad agreed with the independent social worker Mr  Horrocks  as  to
the level of care required by the  appellant  and  concluded  that  "support
from her children is essential  and  exceptional  to  promote  and  aid  her
recovery from her current mental and physical ill health".


8.  I further place weight on the unchallenged report of Mr P  Horrocks  who
concluded that the appellant required support with all aspects of her  daily
living, aspects of her personal care and that she was unable  to  leave  the
house alone.  He found that there had been a  deterioration  in  her  health
and functioning since her arrival in the UK.  Mr Horrocks further  expressed
the view that:


         "Given the difficulties caused by her practical  care  needs,  this
         will in all likelihood be the  least  of  her  problems  given  the
         problems and risks she will face in terms of her  most  basic  care
         needs and the impact this will have on her  deteriorating  physical
         health",




9.  A more recent report dated 18 April 2016  by  Dr  G  C  Fox,  consultant
psychiatrist specialising in old age and adult  psychiatry,  summarised  the
appellant's care needs at paragraph 3.1.1.1. I accept and  place  weight  on
this expert evidence. Dr Fox was of the view  that  the  appellant's  memory
had deteriorated since the assessments made by Mr Horrocks  and  Mr  Dhumad.
He diagnosed that she was suffering from vascular dementia with evidence  of
depressive symptomology.  He found that she was increasingly  dependent  and
at risk of becoming increasingly frail in the near  future.   Whilst  having
difficulty in recalling events she was nevertheless frightened to return  to
Sri Lanka. This together with the diminishing  recollection  of  separation,
were at the present time still contributing factors to her emotional  needs.
 Crucially Dr Fox formed the view that the added stress  associated  with  a
return to Sri Lanka  would  be  likely  to  cause  a  deterioration  in  her
cognitive state and her dementia.  He also pointed out  the  risk  of  abuse
and neglect if she  were  to  be  placed  in  a  care  home  without  family
supervision.  He stated that entry  into  a  care  home  would  shorten  her
lifespan and precipitate a significant deterioration in her  mental  health.


10.  Having considered all of the  evidence  in  the  round  I  am  entirely
    satisfied that the appellant is a highly vulnerable elderly  woman.   I
    have considered her characteristics  in the light of the UNHC  guidance
    and PP and conclude that she:

    (1)  is of Tamil ethnicity;


    (2)  originates from Jaffna in the Northern Province;


    (3)  is a widow;


    (4)  will be living alone as a lone female head of her household in the
         militarised zone;


    (5)  will be in a weak economic position given her level  of  education
         and multiple health problems; and


    (6)  is highly vulnerable by reason of her age and characteristics  (1)
         to (4) above.


    I also take into  account  that  prior  to  residence  in  the  UK  the
    appellant lived in India and had in fact only resided in Sri Lanka  for
    a few years. She  is  not  very  familiar  with  the  country  and  her
    deteriorated health will impact on her ability to reintegrate.  I  also
    concur with the Ms Jones' submission that the analysis  under  PP  must
    start from the position that the appellant would be  returning  to  her
    home area where she would be at risk as a lone elderly  woman.  I  also
    accept that she cannot be excluded from the risk of  sexual  harassment
    or abuse notwithstanding her age.


11.  It is conceded that there is suitable care available in Sri  Lanka  for
    the  elderly  and  those  suffering  from  dementia.   However  it  was
    submitted by Ms Jones that none of  the  material  provided  explicitly
    stated that they would accept and be able to  treat  persons  who  also
    have serious mental health problems.  Further she submitted that in the
    absence of friends and family available in Sri  Lanka  to  monitor  the
    care provided to the appellant, it was not reasonable and/or  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect her to return to a  care  home.   I  agree  with
    those submissions. Furthermore I accept that institutional  care  would
    not reach the emotional needs of the appellant in being  surrounded  by
    her family members. The  expert  evidence  showed  she  was  in  danger
    emotionally and mentally of a further deterioration. In  the  light  of
    the appellant's particular needs I find no evidence to show that  those
    needs would be met by suitable and available care in Sri Lanka.

12.  As to suicide risk I am not satisfied that the evidence meets the  high
    test set out in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and Y (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 362, so as to engage obligations under Article 3  ECHR.



13.  I now consider paragraph 276ADE and  I  am  satisfied  that  there  are
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into  the  country
    to which she would have to go if required to leave the UK.  I  rely  on
    the expert medical and social worker evidence and place weight  on  the
    appellant's significant level of vulnerability given her mental  health
    disorder,  physical  illness  and  recently  diagnosed  dementia.   The
    appellant would either be returning to her home area where in  my  view
    she would be considerably at risk because of her vulnerabilities or she
    would be living in a care home for which there  is  no  clear  evidence
    that all of her needs and medical treatment needs  would  be  met.   In
    view of the appellant's deteriorating mental and physical health  where
    her emotional needs are closely connected to her mental  health,  there
    would be significant obstacles  to  her  integration  into  Sri  Lanka.
    Further and of significance is the fact, emphasised by Dr Fox,  of  her
    failing memory of Sri Lanka but that one factor still  present  is  the
    level of fear associated with Sri Lanka.  I conclude  that  this  is  a
    case where a return of the appellant to Sri  Lanka  where  she  has  no
    established long-term past residence and no  existing  family  support,
    meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules in terms of significant
    obstacles test.

14.  In the alternative, I conclude that Article 8 outside of the  Rules  is
    engaged.  There are compelling circumstances  justifying  consideration
    of this appeal  outside  of  the  Rules.   Specifically  they  are  the
    appellant's high level of vulnerability and  her  recent  diagnosis  of
    dementia.  The Razgar steps are applicable.

15.  It was accepted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  family  life  was
    established.  Ms Fijiwala  relies  on  Rajendran  arguing  that  little
    weight should be placed on family life  established  during  precarious
    circumstances in the UK.  Following that principle I accept  that  some
    consideration must be given to the Article 8 jurisprudence as  to  what
    weight is to be attached to any family life where it is established  in
    precarious circumstances and/or during unlawful residence in the UK.

16.   The family life involves elements  of  dependency  beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties between adult relatives (Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ
    31).  The appellant  relies  on  her  daughter  for  meal  preparation,
    personal care, provision of medication and healthcare and mobilisation.



17.   I find that there would be an interference  with  family  and  private
    life were the appellant to be  removed  to  Sri  Lanka.  She  would  be
    without practical and emotional links with family members.  For someone
    in the appellant's circumstances she would  not  be  able  to  rely  on
    "modern  methods  of  communication".   It  is   accepted   that   such
    interference would be unlawful and in accordance with  the  maintenance
    of immigration control. In terms of proportionality I am satisfied that
    not only would the appellant's Article 8 rights be  affected  but  also
    those of her children and grandchildren.  The negative  impact  of  her
    removal on the emotional wellbeing of the entire extended family and in
    particular  her  children  is   a   relevant   consideration   in   the
    proportionality balancing exercise, as acknowledged by Mr  Horrocks  in
    his report. I have also been guided by the approach in Dasgupta  (error
    of law- proportionality- correct approach)[2016] UKUT 00028(IAC).

18.  In terms of public interest factors I consider Section  117A  and  117B
    of the 2002 Act (as amended).  It is accepted that the  appellant  does
    not speak English and her family provides financially for  all  of  her
    care needs.  I accept that she does receive medical  treatment  on  the
    NHS bringing her within Section 117B(2)  and  (3).   However,  she  has
    never been in the UK unlawfully and claimed asylum within the  currency
    of her visitor's visa.  Whilst following the principle in Rajendran  it
    is fair to say that  the  appellant  has  established  her  family  and
    private life during a time when her circumstances  were  precarious  in
    the UK.  However, her  mental  health  had  not  deteriorated  or  been
    diagnosed to the extent that it has been as  at  the  date  of  hearing
    before me and there are factors such as the appellant's  age,  physical
    and mental ill health, that need to be balanced  in  this  context.   I
    have considered these factors and the appellant's  circumstances  given
    that she as a very elderly sick person living with her immediate family
    and being cared for and financially supported by them at this stage  of
    her life.  Those factors in my view allow the private interests of  the
    appellant and her family members to outweigh  any  public  interest  in
    immigration control justifying the need for the return of the appellant
    to Sri Lanka given the foreseeable significant consequences of  removal
    to her mental, physical and emotional health.



Notice of Decision

I allow the appeal.

Anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed                                  Date 13.5.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as a hearing was necessary.




Signed                                  Date 13.5.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
