
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07830/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 18 December 2014                  |On 29 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                        NADARASASUNDARAM JEYATHEEPAN
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan Tamil born on 15  October  1990.   On  or
    about 22 June 2013  he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  a  false
    passport.  On 25 June 2013 he sought international surrogate protection
    on the basis that he feared return to Sri Lanka  because  he  had  been
    detained and tortured by the authorities by reason of  his  involvement
    or perceived involvement with  the  Liberation  Tigers  of  Tamil  Elam
    (LTTE).

 2. On 3 August 2013 the Respondent refused the Appellant's application and
    proposed to make directions for his removal to Sri Lanka.

 3. The  Appellant  lodged  notice  of  appeal  under  Section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).
     The grounds re-assert his fear of return as a young Tamil who had been
    involved with the LTTE.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 4. By a determination sent by way of service on 27 September 2013 Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Hanes dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  She
    made some adverse credibility findings at paragraph 16 and  18  of  her
    determination.  At paragraph 17 she also made some  positive  findings,
    principally that the Appellant had been tortured while detained in  Sri
    Lanka.

 5. She referred to the then recent country guidance  determination  of  GJ
    and Others (Post-civil war: returnees) [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and went
    on at paragraph 22 to find that the Appellant would not be at real risk
    on return to Sri Lanka.

 6. On 8 November 2013 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davidge refused the
    Appellant permission to  appeal.   The  grounds  for  appeal  had  been
    drafted by Counsel and complained that Judge Hanes had  not  adequately
    engaged with the risk categories  identified  in  GJ  and  Others.  The
    application on the same grounds was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal  and
    on 3 December 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge  Reeds  granted  the  Appellant
    permission to appeal because she considered that  while  the  Appellant
    maintained he fell within the risk  categories  identified  in  GJ  and
    Others, in the light of the observations of the Court of Appeal  in  MP
    (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829  the  grounds  disclosed  an
    arguable error of law. There  was  no  further  identification  of  the
    arguable error.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. The hearing was set for 10am on Thursday  18  December  2014  at  Field
    House.   By  shortly  before  11am  neither  the  Appellant   nor   any
    representative for him had appeared.  Searches were made in the waiting
    areas of Field House which  did  not  disclose  the  Appellant  or  any
    representative for him.  No message had been left at the reception desk
    at Field House.  I was satisfied that notice  of  the  time,  date  and
    place set for the hearing had been properly given to the Appellant  and
    Mr Avery for the Respondent confirmed the Respondent had no more recent
    address for the Appellant than the  Tribunal.   I  noted  there  was  a
    letter  of   29   October   2014   from   the   Appellant's   erstwhile
    representatives stating they had ceased to represent him  because  they
    were unable to contact him and they had been informed by  a  friend  of
    the Appellant that the Appellant had left the United Kingdom.   However
    I was not satisfied this was sufficient evidence that the Appellant had
    left the United Kingdom so as to permit his appeal to be considered  as
    abandoned under Section 104 of the 2002 Act.

 8. I have carefully considered the grounds for appeal.  The Appellant  was
    represented by Counsel at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.   The
    Judge set out the Appellant's evidence at some considerable length  and
    made findings of fact and credibility for which  she  gave  sustainable
    reasons.  In particular she was satisfied he had been released  by  the
    authorities from detention after he had been tortured in  circumstances
    which made it clear he was no longer of any interest to them.   He  had
    not been involved in any LTTE activities in the  United  Kingdom  which
    might cause the Sri Lankan authorities to perceive him as a  threat  on
    return.  She went on to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

 9. Given the nature and extent of the Judge's fact-finding and  especially
    on the issue of risk on return, whether at the airport or after passing
    through the airport, for which she gave sustainable reasons, I  do  not
    find the grounds disclose an error of law such that  the  determination
    should be set aside in whole or in part.  It follows that  the  grounds
    do not disclose an error of law and the determination  shall  therefore
    stand.  Noting that the Appellant is  now  unrepresented  I  have  also
    carefully  considered  the   whole   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination to see if it discloses any error of law and find that  it
    does not.

Anonymity

10. There was no request before the First-tier Tribunal  for  an  anonymity
    direction or order.  Having considered the documents  in  the  Tribunal
    file, I do not find that one is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
    of law and shall stand.  The effect is that:-


    The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.
    The decision of the Respondent is upheld.


Signed/Official Crest      Date 29. xii. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD
No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed/Official Crest      Date 29. xii. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
