
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: aa/07730/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 April 2016                                 |On 3 June 2016             |
|                                                 |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                          MRS NABILA MULDIA MANSOR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Libya, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse her  application
    for asylum in the UK. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley  dismissed  the
    appeal and the appellant appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. In advance of the hearing the appellant's representatives informed  the
    Upper Tribunal in a letter dated 12 April 2016 that the  appellant  had
    returned to Libya on 7 April 2016 under the Voluntary Return Scheme. At
    the hearing Ms Johnstone submitted a copy of a Notice of Withdrawal  of
    asylum application/appeal signed by the appellant on 5 March 2016.

 3. I am satisfied on  the  basis  of  this  evidence  that  the  appellant
    withdrew her outstanding appeal before leaving the UK  voluntarily.  In
    these circumstances I consent to  the  withdrawal  of  the  appellant's
    appeal in accordance with Rule 17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 4. In this case the Secretary of State  was  also  granted  Permission  to
    Appeal on the basis of her  application  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision to be amended under Rule 31 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. This
    application was  made  because,  in  what  has  been  accepted  by  the
    appellant in paragraph 2 of her grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    as a mistake, the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated  under  the  heading
    'Notice of Decision'  that  the  appeal  was  allowed  on  humanitarian
    grounds. In light of the fact that  the  appellant's  appeal  has  been
    withdrawn the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  be
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for consideration of the  Secretary
    of State's application to correct the decision under Rule 31.

 5. I hereby record that the appellant appeal against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal has been withdrawn under Rule 17  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. There  is  therefore  no  appeal
    before the Upper Tribunal.


Signed
                       Date: 14 April 2016


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


