
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA074422013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 May 2016                                |On 25 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    C E I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant a national of Nigeria, date of birth [  ]  1970,  appealed
    against removal decisions made under Section 10 of the Immigration  and
    Asylum Act  1999  dated  22  July  2013,  a  form  IS151A  having  been
    previously served on 20 July 2011  and  an  asylum/human  rights  based
    claim having been refused.  The basis of that refusal was found in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter made by the Secretary of State  on  19  July
    2013.

3.   In a somewhat chequered passage of time in terms  of  events  involving
    the Tribunal to one degree or another, the claim came to be reheard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kim Foudy (the Judge) who on 9 February  2016
    promulgated a decision in which she allowed the  Claimant's  appeal  on
    Refugee Convention grounds and in respect of Articles 2 and  3  of  the
    ECHR.  The Secretary of State appealed that decision quite specifically
    challenging the judge's findings of the risk of re-trafficking and made
    no reference to the claim that the Claimant's young child  would  face,
    without protection, the real risk of being subject to FGM.

4.   Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page on 25 February 2016 upon for reasons which were  essentially
    the risk of  re-trafficking  and/or  the  extent  to  which  there  was
    domestic protection to which the Claimant could have recourse.

5.   Somewhat surprisingly, it might be thought, the judge did  not  address
    in any meaningful way internal relocation or its reasonableness bearing
    in mind the Claimant was from the area of Benin city and of course  the
    highly populous and varied areas which make up the  state  of  Nigeria.
    Be that as it may  Miss  Johnstone  says  that  although  there  is  no
    reference and no challenge to the judge's decision about  the  risk  of
    FGM faced by the Claimant's child, that was, as the judge expressed it,
    entirely contingent upon the risk of re-trafficking.  If  there  is  no
    such risk then there is no such  risk  of  FGM.   Whilst  I  have  some
    sympathy with that point it seemed to me that the person  settling  the
    grounds on behalf of the Secretary of State  would  clearly  have  been
    able to articulate the risk of  FGM  issue  without  relying  upon  the
    Claimant's claim of re-trafficking.  Nevertheless for the  purposes  of
    considering whether there was a material error of law I have  proceeded
    on the basis that the FGM claim was at least for these purposes related
    to if not determined by the risk of re-trafficking.  The  Secretary  of
    State's  grounds  essentially  argued  that  the  judge  has  got  this
    assessment of risk wrong and that the Claimant is no longer at any risk
    of being re-trafficked.

6.   I concluded that I might well have reached a  different  decision  from
    that of the judge but that of course is not the basis for finding  that
    an error of law has been established. Rather it seemed to me  that  the
    Secretary of State for understandable reasons did not  agree  with  the
    judge's findings and essentially was seeking to reargue,  by  reference
    to the case law, that that risk(s)  did  not,  as  a  fact,  exist.   I
    readily understand why the Secretary of  State  takes  that  view,  the
    issue was considered fully by the judge.  It is not suggested the judge
    made any material omissions about the evidence  or  took  into  account
    matters which should not have been or  demonstrated  an  irrational  or
    unlawful decision has been arrived at. Therefore, in the light  of  the
    decisions in R Iran [2005] EWCA Civ 982 and E & R [2004] QB 1044 CA,  I
    emphasise that I would not by any means necessarily  have  reached  the
    same view as the judge did. However, I do not see  that  that  forms  a
    proper basis to conclude that the Original Tribunal's  decision  cannot
    stand.

7.   The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

8.   An  anonymity  order  was  not  made  by  the  judge  although  it  had
    previously been made by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson on 6 January 2015.
    In my view it is given the age of the Claimant's child and  the  issues
    raised about her claim it is appropriate and necessary for there to  be
    an anonymity order.



DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Dated 22 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
