
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA079832015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd May 2016                              |On 8th June 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                    SASS
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
         Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Mr S Chelvan, Counsel; Hackney Law Centre
Respondent:   Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

          Framework of Appeal

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (the "FtT") dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision  of
    1 May 2015 refusing to grant  asylum  and  to  remove  him  by  way  of
    directions pursuant to section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.






 2.  Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:


         "It is arguable that (the FtT Judge) may  have  erred  in  reaching
         (its)  finding  that  the  appellant  was  not  at  real  risk   of
         persecution as a gay person in Sri Lanka. All the  grounds  may  be
         argued".





 3. The permitted grounds of appeal may be summarised as follows:


      i) Arguable error of law in the  FtT's  finding  on  risk  from  state
         actors in Colombo.


     ii) Arguable error of law in failing to address the


    iii) Arguable error of law in the  assessment  of  the  forced  marriage
         issue.





 4. Pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and by the agreement of both  parties,  I  admitted  certain
    fresh evidence namely the US State Department Reports for 2013 and 2014
    (hereinafter the "USD Reports") which, were not before the  FtT.  These
    reports provided source material for information contained  within  the
    Home Office's "Country Information and Guidance for Sri  Lanka:  Sexual
    Orientation and Gender Identity" of September 2015.






 5. Mr Chelvan, on behalf of the Appellant, developed all three grounds  of
    appeal. On behalf of the Secretary of State Ms  Fijiwala,  in  summary,
    sought to uphold the decision of the FtT on the basis of the  governing
    previous Country Guidance decision of LH and IP  (gay  men:  risk)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC) hereinafter "LH  &  IP"),  contending
    further  that  the  missing  persons  report  was  immaterial  and  the
    assessment of forced marriage was within the bounds of rationality.





    Error of Law


 6. At the close of submissions, I reserved my decision which I now give. I
    find that the decision of the FtT suffers from errors of law such  that
    it must be set aside. My reasons for so finding are as follows.






 7. In respect of the first ground in respect of  the  assessment  of  risk
    from state actors, the FtT stated at [107]:


         "I find that there is discrimination from state actors against  gay
         people in Sri Lanka, and Colombo, on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
         placed before me by the appellant, but I do not find it  to  be  of
         such a level that it amounts to persecution..."






 8. The FtT recorded the respondent's  acceptance  that  the  Appellant  is
    homosexual and had been threatened by his brother  on  account  of  his
    sexual orientation. The evidence included the  Home  Office's  "Country
    Information and Guidance for Sri Lanka: Sexual Orientation  and  Gender
    Identity" publication of September 2015 (hereinafter the  "CIG").  This
    postdates the decision in LH &  IP.  The  CIG  documents  state  actors
    perpetrating acts that would be persecutory, specifically acts  by  the
    police, particularly  in  Colombo,  of  harassing  and  assaulting  and
    demanding bribes from LGBTI persons (at 2.5.1).






 9. This was important evidence upon which the Appellant  relied.  However,
    it is not assessed or weighed anywhere in  the  decision  of  the  FtT.
    Given its obvious importance, the decision is untenable on this  ground
    alone.






10. As regards the second ground, concerning the  missing  persons  report,
    the FtT's failure to examine the risk arising out  of  the  authorities
    stopping the Appellant at the  airport  was  not  in  dispute.  It  was
    argued, however, that it would be open to the Appellant to  prevaricate
    if questioned about  the  missing  persons  report.   I  consider  this
    submission most unattractive. Furthermore, this species of argument was
    rejected by the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2011] 1 AC 596, at [21-22] especially (in  support  of
    Hysi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ  711,
    [2005] INLR 602).






11. I conclude that the FtT's aforementioned  failure  constitutes  a  free
    standing error of law of unmistakable materiality to me and I  was  not
    persuaded that a person could be expected to avoid risk  to  themselves
    by lying to the authorities  when  questioned  as  to  the  reason  for
    fleeing Sri Lanka, or as to why they were reported as a missing person.
    The omission is one of concern and in conjunction with the first ground
    points to a material  omission  that  renders  the  judge's  conclusion
    unsound.






12. I turn to consider the third ground, concerning  the  issue  of  forced
    marriage. The FtT expressly accepted, at [105], that  "forced  marriage
    is persecutory". The finding which follows, namely  that  the  marriage
    proposed for the Appellant was not forced, is irreconcilable  with  the
    preceding findings  at [59] which include that the Appellant -


         "... feels great pressure to do as  his  father  requires  of  him,
         which was to marry ... He has fled his father's wrath by coming  to
         the UK. It is easier for him being so far away from his father, but
         defy his father he has".





13. In that light, the finding that the marriage is arranged and not forced
    is unsustainable to the point of irrationality.






14. It follows that the decision of the FtT must be set aside.






    Remaking the Decision






15. I preserve the findings of fact of the FtT,  save  those  contained  in
    [105-115] that I have set aside. I  remake  the  decision  of  the  FtT
    allowing the Appellant's appeal for the reasons that follow.






16. The Appellant bears the burden of establishing that  there  is  a  real
    risk or reasonable likelihood of persecution for a  Convention  reason.
    In HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  1  AC
    596 (hereinafter "HJ (Iran)"), the Supreme Court considered  the  legal
    framework in relation to gay men claiming to be at risk of  persecution
    because of their sexual orientation on return to  their  home  country.
    Lord Rodger set out at [82] the approach to be followed, in such cases:


         "82. When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality. If  so,  the  tribunal  must  then  ask
         itself whether it is satisfied on the available evidence  that  gay
         people who lived openly would  be  liable  to  persecution  in  the
         applicant's country of nationality. If so, the tribunal must go  on
         to consider what the individual  applicant  would  do  if  he  were
         returned to that country. If  the  applicant  would  in  fact  live
         openly and thereby be exposed to a real risk of  persecution,  then
         he has a well-founded fear of persecution - even if he could  avoid
         the risk by  living  "discreetly".  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
         tribunal concludes that the applicant would in fact live discreetly
         and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he  would
         do so. If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose to
         live discreetly simply because that was how he himself  would  wish
         to live, or because of  social  pressures,  e  g,  not  wanting  to
         distress his parents or embarrass his friends, then his application
         should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he  is  gay.
         If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."






17. All of the Supreme Court justices concurred in this approach: see  Lord
    Hope at [35]; Lord Walker at [86]; Lord Collins at [100] and Lord Dyson
    at [108].






18. Thus a decision maker  should  consider  the  following  questions  and
    issues:


       (1) Is it established that the individual is a gay man  or  would  be
       perceived as gay in his own country?


       (2) Is it established from the evidence  that  if  a  gay  man  lived
       openly he would be liable to persecution in his own country?


       (3) Is it established that  the  individual  would  live  openly  and
       thereby be exposed to a real risk of persecution even if  that  could
       be avoided by living "discreetly"?


       If so, the individual is a refugee.


       (4) However, if the individual would live  discreetly  and  so  avoid
       persecution, the decision maker must ask why he would do so?


       If he would choose  to  live  discreetly  simply  because  of  social
       pressures or other factors not  connected  to  persecution  then  the
       individual will not be a refugee. On the other hand,  if  a  material
       reason  for  the  individual  living  discreetly  is  his   fear   of
       persecution if he were  to  live  openly  as  a  gay  man,  then  the
       individual has a well-founded fear of  persecution  and,  all  things
       being equal, is a refugee.





19. The question of discreet conduct was discussed in  HJ  (Iran)  by  Lord
    Hope at [11, 18], by Lord Roger at [82] (ante) and  by  Lord  Dyson  at
    [109-110]. The  justices  approved  the  Court  of  Appeal's  unanimous
    decision in Ahmed v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [1999]
    EWCA Civ 3003. See per Lord Hope's judgment at [18]:

         "18. In  Ahmed  (Iftikhar)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department, [2000] INLR 1, 7-8 Simon Brown LJ said:


             "In all asylum claims there is ultimately a single question to
             be asked: is there a serious risk that on return the applicant
             will be persecuted for a Convention reason? ...  The  critical
             question [is]: if returned, would the asylum  seeker  in  fact
             act  in  the  way  he  says  he  would  and   thereby   suffer
             persecution? If he would, then, however unreasonable he  might
             be thought for refusing to accept the necessary  restraint  on
             his liberties, in my judgment he would be entitled to asylum."


         Nobody has suggested  that  there  is  anything  wrong  with  these
         observations, as far as they go, and I would  respectfully  endorse
         them. They contain two propositions which the Secretary of State in
         this case accepts, and which I do not think can  be  disputed.  The
         first is that attention must be focused on what the applicant  will
         actually do if he is returned to his country  of  nationality.  The
         second is that  the  fact  that  he  could  take  action  to  avoid
         persecution does not disentitle him from asylum if in fact he  will
         not act in such a way as to avoid it."





20. The decision in HJ (Iran) was considered recently by this  Tribunal  in
    MSM (journalists; political opinion; risk) Somalia  [2015]  UKUT  00413
    (IAC) at [35-48] in particular. That decision contains a  focussed  and
    in-depth  discussion  of  the  concept  of  'forced  modification'   or
    'discreet' behaviour of an asylum-seeker on return  to  their  country.
    The Upper Tribunal considered that Ahmed was in harmony with the CJEU's
    decision in the joined cases of C-199-201/12 X, Y and  Z,  wherein  the
    following was stated at [75]:


         "It follows that the person must  be  granted  refugee  status,  in
         accordance  with  Article  13  of  the  Directive,  where   it   is
         established  that  on  return  to  his  country   of   origin   his
         homosexuality would expose him to a  genuine  risk  of  persecution
         within the meaning of Article 9(1) thereof. The fact that he  could
         avoid that risk by exercising greater restraint than a heterosexual
         in expressing his sexual  orientation  is  not  to  be  taken  into
         account in that respect."





21. The Upper Tribunal stated as follows at [45]:


         "In short, the possibility of conduct entailing  the  avoidance  of
         modification of certain types of behaviour related directly to  the
         right  engaged  is  irrelevant.  Thus  this  possibility  must   be
         disregarded."





  22. I give effect to the legal framework rehearsed above in the following
      way. I begin with the Respondent's acceptance that the Appellant is a
      person whose sexual identity is that of a gay or homosexual person.
      The Appellant did not previously wish to be an openly gay Muslim in
      Sri Lanka and so decided to leave the country and enrolled on a degree
      programme in France where he openly expressed his sexual identity and
      enjoyed a relationship with a bisexual male partner. The Appellant's
      marriage had been arranged for him when he returned to Sri Lanka to
      the daughter of a maternal uncle. The Appellant confessed his
      homosexuality to his mother. He did not wish to enter into the
      marriage as his father was pressuring him to do, and so he fled to the
      UK. The Appellant states that he cannot now return to Sri Lanka,
      either to live in Colombo or his village, because he has been outed as
      a gay man (see the previous findings at paragraph 83 of the First-tier
      Tribunal's determination).






  23. Although the judge mentions the complaint raised by the Appellant that
      his sexual identity would be known by congregants at the mosque in
      Colombo, the judge does not grapple with this issue other than to
      observe that it is unfortunate that the Appellant's faith is
      intolerant of his sexuality and that he could equally encounter
      intolerant persons at mosques in the UK. Consequently, there is no
      finding on this issue at ��98-103. To my mind, the judge was not
      averse to the proposition that the Appellant would be recognised by
      congregants at mosques in Colombo given the Appellant's village was
      only 110km from the capital and given that the community was small,
      the family was well to do, and the community was a small and close
      knit one. This in harmony with my view that as the Appellant has been
      outed to his family and the religious community, he would not be able
      to live openly in Colombo (or practice his faith freely) given that
      his sexual identity is no longer secret.






  24. My finding on this issue is fortified by the Appellant's evidence in
      interview, and in the above context, I observe the questions put to
      the Appellant at Q164-166 if his Asylum Interview Record and his
      answer which read as follows:


         Q164: Could you not return to Sri Lanka and relocate to Colombo?


         A164: No


         Q165: Why?


         A165: Because I cannot have a life, because I cannot continue my
         religious activities, who are going to see me.


         Q166: So you can't relocate because you can't live openly as a
         homosexual?


         A166: Yes - no way, and I don't want to do that again.






  25. Consequently, it is clear from the previous findings and my own
      findings concerning the Appellant's evidence, that the first limb of
      HJ (Iran), namely, "whether the individual is a gay man or would be
      perceived as gay in his own country", is met.






  26. In relation to the second limb and whether the Appellant could live
      openly without being liable to persecution in his own country I find
      that the Appellant could not do so. As noted by the First-tier
      Tribunal, the most recent Country Guidance decision of LH and IP (gay
      men: risk) Sri Lanka CG [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC) makes clear in its
      third headnote that "in general, the treatment of gay men in Sri Lanka
      does not reach the standard of persecution or serious harm".






  27. Mr Chelvan highlights that LH & IP was promulgated on 18 February 2015
      and that its annex revealed that the panel's assessment within that
      Country Guidance case was made on the basis of evidence which included
      the US State Department Report of 2013 (published on 27 February 2013)
      and importantly the material considered included at the latest,
      material up to 8 August 2014, which was the final possible date for
      evidence and/or submissions. Therefore, the Tribunal's decision is
      correct as at that date. However, as with all matters and the passage
      of time, country situations can and do change. Mr Chelvan points out
      that the evidence he relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal post-
      dated the 8 August 2014, and could not have been before the panel in
      LH & IP, nor considered by it. He also highlights that the
      "Ravichandran guidelines" (see Ravichandran v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [1996] Imm AR 97) would apply to this scenario,
      namely that the appellate authority shall act on the up-to-date
      information about country conditions pertaining at the time of the
      appeal. Indeed this submission is in keeping with the Practice
      Directions of the First-tier and Upper Tribunal of this Chamber that I
      am bound by, in particular, paragraphs 12.1 and 12.2 which state as
      follows:

         12.1 Reported determinations of the Tribunal, the AIT and the IAT
         which are "starred" shall be treated by the Tribunal as
         authoritative in respect of the matter to which the "starring"
         relates, unless inconsistent with other authority that is binding
         on the Tribunal.


         12.2 A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT
         bearing the letters "CG" shall be treated as an authoritative
         finding on the country guidance issue identified in the
         determination, based upon the evidence before the members of the
         Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that determine the appeal. As a
         result, unless it has been expressly superseded or replaced by any
         later "CG" determination, or is inconsistent with other authority
         that is binding on the Tribunal, such a country guidance case is
         authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal:
         (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and
         (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.





  28. In light of the above Practice Directions, in the present scenario,
      whilst paragraph 12.2(a) is met, 12.2(b) is not as the appeal does not
      depend upon the "same or similar evidence" as the Appellant's
      contention is that the country situation has either moved on or is
      made clear to the extent that LH & IP is not the final word on this
      matter. This is further supported by the previous decision of the
      Tribunal in SI (reported cases as evidence) Ethiopia [2007] UKAIT
      00012 which states inter alia as follows in its headnotes:

         Subject to one exception, country guidance cases continue to give
         authoritative guidance on the country guidance issue(s) identified
         for so long as they remain on the AIT website as CG cases.
         However, the AIT Practice Directions make clear that a country
         guidance case may be departed from by an immigration judge, albeit
         only in strictly limited circumstances relating to fresh evidence.





  29. The Appellant highlights that the US State Department's Human Rights
      Report for Sri Lanka 2013 which was before LH & IP contains a solitary
      paragraph under section 6 (which deals with Discrimination, Societal
      abuses and Trafficking in Persons) which concerns abuse against gay
      persons at page 51 of the Report. That paragraph states as follows:

         Societal Abuses, Discrimination, and Acts of Violence Based on
         Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
         Same-sex sexual activity is punishable by a prison sentence of up
         to 10 years, and there were no legal safeguards to prevent
         discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity. In
         practical terms the criminal provisions were very rarely enforced.
         In recent years human rights organizations reported that, while not
         actively arresting and prosecuting members of the LGBT community,
         police harassed and extorted money or sexual favors from LGBT
         individuals with impunity and assaulted gays and lesbians in
         Colombo and other areas. Crimes and harassment against LGBT
         individuals were a problem, although such incidents often went
         unreported. Social stigma against LGBT persons remained a problem.
         There were reports that persons undergoing gender-reassignment
         procedures had difficulty amending government documents to reflect
         those changes. A civil society group that worked to advance LGBT
         rights reported close monitoring by security and intelligence
         forces.





  30. In light of that evidence it is clear why the Upper Tribunal did not
      consider this a sufficient level of abuse to amount to persecution and
      due to its analysis at [110, 115] of LH & IP.






  31. The Appellant, before the First-tier Tribunal and before me, relies
      upon the subsequent US State Department's Human Rights Report for Sri
      Lanka 2014 (USSD Report) which was not before the panel in LH & IP.
      Pages 62-63 of that Report now contain a similar first paragraph to
      the previous year's edition, but also a further two paragraphs, which
      all state as follows:

         Acts of Violence, Discrimination, and Other Abuses Based on Sexual
         Orientation and Gender Identity
         Same-sex sexual activity is punishable by a prison sentence of up
         to 10 years, and there were no legal safeguards to prevent
         discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
         Authorities very rarely enforced the criminal provisions. In recent
         years human rights organizations reported that, while not actively
         arresting and prosecuting members of the LGBT community, police
         harassed and extorted money or sexual favors from LGBT individuals
         with impunity and assaulted gay men and lesbians in Colombo and
         other areas. Crimes and harassment against LGBT individuals were a
         problem, although such incidents often went unreported. Social
         stigma against LGBT persons remained a problem. There were reports
         that persons undergoing gender-reassignment procedures had
         difficulty amending government documents to reflect those changes.
         A civil society group that worked to advance LGBT rights reported
         close monitoring by security and intelligence forces.


         In a March report by the Women's Support Group, "Sri Lanka: Not
         Gonna Take it Lying Down," 13 of 33 LGBT persons interviewed in the
         country between 2010 and 2012 admitted to having been the victim of
         some kind of violence at the hands of state agents. Interviewees
         noted police often utilized existing laws, such as the 1842
         Vagrants Ordinance, to detain any individual deemed to be
         "loitering," which generally led to detention and at times physical
         and sexual abuse. Interviewees also noted that police and antigay
         groups also used penal code sections on "gross indecency" and
         "cheating by personation" to brand LGBT persons as "perverts and
         criminals." There was also a general perception in the LGBT
         community that police officers used blackmail and violence against
         persons they perceived to be homosexual, bisexual, or transgender.
         The report concluded that incidents of physical violence, both in
         the public and private spheres, remained underreported and
         undocumented and that LGBT persons who experienced physical
         violence "rarely seek compensation, redress or even counselling."
         Members of the LGBT community, the study stressed, felt they had
         "no access to redress."


         In September the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights
         Commission released a "shadow report" on the conditions confronting
         the country's LGBT community as part of the review of the
         application and implementation of the ICCPR in Sri Lanka conducted
         by the OHCHR's Human Rights Committee. The report was based upon
         the previously cited Women's Support Group interviews. On September
         3, the government issued a written response to the Human Rights
         Committee that addressed the protection of the rights of the LGBT
         community in the country, noting the constitution "protects persons
         from stigmatization and discrimination on the basis of sexual
         orientation and gender identities." The Human Rights Committee
         pursued the issue and asked the government to clarify what it had
         done to amend the constitution to include explicit protections
         based on sexual orientation and gender identities. In response
         Bimba Jayasinghe Thilakeratne, additional solicitor general with
         the Attorney General's Department, observed that the constitution
         "ensures equality for sexual orientation and gender identity" and
         stated "laws discriminating on the grounds of sexual orientation
         and gender identity are unconstitutional."





  32. The Appellant prayed in aid the second paragraph in particular,
      highlighting that state agents now use violence and other unrelated
      legislative powers, such as the Vagrants Ordinance (which is distinct
      from section 377 of Sri Lankan Penal Code concerning anti-sodomy
      legislation) to target and persecute LGBT persons including gays. It
      was also contended that the evidence showed that physical and sexual
      abuse of gay men by state agents occurred and that the penal code was
      used to level criminal charges for gross indecency and cheating by
      personation. It was also highlighted that state agents act with
      impunity and that there was no redress for LGBT persons, alongside
      inequality in law for gay persons due to section 377 of the Sri Lankan
      Penal Code. Consequently, the law was being used to blackmail and
      commit violence against gays. These submissions are uncontroversial
      and rehearse what the above material says, which is more than was
      previously known when the Upper Tribunal promulgated LH & IP. I accept
      those submissions as unvarnished extrapolations of the text to which I
      have referred.






  33. Furthermore, it is the fact that these excerpts are relied upon by the
      Respondent in her latest Country Information and Guidance for Sri
      Lanka on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity of September 2015,
      that the Appellant submits places the background and objective
      material beyond question and firmly in the Appellant's favour. I am
      persuaded by this submission for the following reasons.






  34. Whilst there is no complaint that the Respondent failed to consider
      the content of her Country Information and Guidance on the specific
      topic of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity within her refusal
      letter, it is clear that the content of that guidance should be a
      matter of some bearing for both the decision-maker and an independent
      Tribunal on appeal, when considering the very topic that the guidance
      seeks to discuss. This is trite in view of Lumba (WL) v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 12, wherein Lord Dyson
      stated as follows at [35]:

          "The individual has a basic public law right to have his  or  her
         case considered under whatever policy the  executive  sees  fit  to
         adopt provided that the adopted policy is a lawful exercise of  the
         discretion conferred by the statute...".





  35. This is supported by the guidance of the Court of Appeal in ZH
      (Bangladesh v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA
      Civ 8 at [33] where Sedley, LJ reiterated "the legal obligation of
      government not to act inconsistently with its own policy unless there
      is some good reason for doing so: see British Oxygen v Board of
      Trade [1971] AC 610".






  36. The status of the Respondent's Country of Origin Information Guidance
      and Reports were the subject of comment coincidentally within MSM
      (journalists; political opinion; risk) Somalia [2015] UKUT 00413 (IAC)
      wherein the Presidential panel stated inter alia as follows at
      headnote 4 and [23] of that reported decision:

         "We consider that documents such as  the  CIG[1],  the  COI[2]  and
         kindred reports should not be forensically construed by the kind of
         exercise  more  appropriate  a  contract,  deed  or   other   legal
         instrument. Reports of this kind are written by laymen, in layman's
         language, to be read and understood  by  laymen.  Thus  courts  and
         tribunals must beware an overly formal or  legalistic  approach  in
         construing  them.  Furthermore,  reports  of  this  type  must   be
         evaluated and construed in their full context, which - as
         in this case - includes previous and related reports upon which the
         text in question draws. Thus, in construing the  relevant  passages
         of this particular report, we must consider also the COI report...,
         the USSD report reproduced in part in the COI report and the  other
         information sources identified.... These are  all  strands  of  the
         same web. We also take into account  that  reports  of  this  kind,
         dealing as they do with matters of life and death and rights  under
         Articles 2 and 3 ECHR, are generally prepared with care and couched
         in carefully selected terms. Approached in this  way,  we  construe
         the Secretary of State's  decision  letter  as  acknowledging  that
         journalists as a group in Somalia  are,  at  present,  at  risk  of
         persecution and/or treatment infringing Articles 2 and 3 ECHR".





  37. In that context, it is interesting to note that the Country
      Information and Guidance on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
      (CIG) in the instant appeal also contains the above-mentioned excerpt
      from the USSD Report for 2014, which is telling of the importance
      given by the Respondent to that independent evidence from the USSD and
      that passage is presumably also "generally prepared with care and
      couched in carefully selected terms".






  38. With that in mind, I remind myself that the panel in LH & IP stated in
      Appendix B at paragraphs 40-41 that the only documents issued by the
      Respondent that they possessed were her 2013 and July 2014 Operational
      Guidance Notes, which summarised the Respondent's position concerning
      risk emanating in Sri Lanka at that time. That is in stark contrast to
      her position today where she has discovered up-to-date evidence
      concerning the risk to LGBT persons in Sri Lanka and has taken the
      voluntary and correct position of explicitly adopting that evidence by
      inclusion at paragraph 2.4.2 of her CIG. That is a distinction that
      should not be taken lightly given the difference between OGNs and
      Country Information material, as noted by a panel of the Upper
      Tribunal in MD (Women) Ivory Coast CG [2010] UKUT 215 (IAC) at [264]
      wherein the following was stated inter alia:

         "...The Country Information and Policy Unit of the Home Office last
         prepared an Assessment in October 2001.  These were followed by a
         series of Bulletins, the last of which was published in June 2005.
         Since then, the Home Office's own material has been in the form of
         Operational Guidance Notes.  These OGNs are not produced by the
         Country of Information Service.  The current COIS reports are a
         selection of background material provided from sources other than
         the Home Office and without comment or analysis.  Whilst the
         editorial selection of the passages is a matter of choice for the
         editor of the Report, (and therefore potentially liable to
         subjectivity), he comes from a part of the Home Office, RDS, that
         is independent of policymakers and caseworkers.  The Research,
         Development, Statistics section of the Home Office describes itself
         as made up of specialist staff, communication professionals and
         scientists.  The selection of material is subject to peer review
         and the overall scrutiny of the Chief Inspector of the Border
         Agency acting through the Independent Advisory Group on Country
         Information, formerly the Secretary of State's Advisory Panel on
         Country Information, (APCI). "




  39. As is stated in the preamble to most CIGs, the guidance makes clear
      that the Respondent has vetted the source information contained within
      and "(c)onsideration has been given to the relevance, reliability,
      accuracy, objectivity, currency, transparency and traceability of the
      information and wherever possible attempts have been made to
      corroborate the information used across independent sources, to ensure
      accuracy".






  40. The passages of direct relevance within the guidance to the instant
      appeal given the preserved findings and my own above appear to be as
      follows:

         2.2 Do LGBTI persons from Sri Lanka constitute a particular social
         group (PSG)?
         2.2.1 The Upper Tribunal (UT) in LH and IP (gay men: risk) Sri
         Lanka CG [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC) (18 February 2015), having
         regarded the provisions of articles 365 and 365A of the Sri Lankan
         Penal Code, recognised that gay men in Sri Lanka do constitute a
         particular social group (PSG) within the meaning of the Refugee
         Convention (para 123 (1)).


         2.2.2 Whilst LH and IP found specifically that gay men constitute a
         PSG, all LGBTI persons in Sri Lanka should be regarded as forming a
         PSG because they share a common characteristic that cannot be
         changed and have a distinct identity in Sri Lanka which is
         perceived as being different by the surrounding society.


         2.2.3 Although LGBTI persons in Sri Lanka form a PSG, this does not
         mean that establishing such membership will be sufficient to make
         out a case to be recognised as a refugee. The question to be
         addressed in each case will be whether the particular person will
         face a real risk of persecution on account of their membership of
         such a group.


         2.3 Are LGBTI persons at risk of persecution or serious harm in Sri
         Lanka?
         2.3.1 Although same-sex sexual activity is criminalised in Sri
         Lanka there have been no successful prosecutions and very few
         charges during the 50 years of the Sri Lankan state.


         2.3.2 In general the level of discrimination and abuse faced by
         LGBTI persons in Sri Lanka is not such that it will reach the level
         of being persecutory or otherwise inhuman or degrading treatment.
         This was confirmed for gay men in the country guidance case of LH
         and IP (gay men: risk) Sri Lanka CG [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC) where
         the Upper Tribunal found that in general the treatment of gay men
         in Sri Lanka does not reach the standard of persecution or serious
         harm (para 123(3)).


         2.3.3 The Upper Tribunal in LH and IP found that there is a
         'significant population of homosexuals and other LGBT individuals
         in Sri Lanka, in particular in Colombo' and that 'While there is
         more risk for lesbian and bisexual women in rural areas, because of
         the control exercised by families on unmarried women, and for
         transgender individuals and sex workers in the cities, it will be a
         question of fact whether for a particular individual the risk
         reaches the international protection standard, and in particular,
         whether it extends beyond their home area.'(Para 123(4))


         2.3.6 There are reports that some LGBTI Sri Lankans can suffer
         sexual violence, emotional violence and physical violence at home
         and in public spaces. Examples of such incidents include: death
         threats, sexual assault, rape, physical attacks, kidnappings, as
         well as emotional and psychological abuse by public and private
         actors including, verbal humiliation, threats of family abandonment
         and being forced to end same-sex relationships (see Societal
         attitudes).


         2.5 Are those at risk able to seek effective protection?
         2.5.1 There are no legal safeguards to prevent discrimination based
         on sexual orientation or gender identity. Incidents of homophobia
         go unreported due to individuals wanting to protect their
         identities. Police often misinterpret the laws on the basis of a
         person's appearance or behaviour and there have been reports of
         police assaulting, harassing and extorting money or sexual favours
         from LGBTI individuals with impunity, particularly in Colombo as
         well as other areas (See Attitudes of state officials, Societal
         attitudes and State protection).


         2.5.2 The lack of anti-discrimination legislation to protect the
         rights of LGBTI individuals has meant that they have no recourse to
         a remedy when particular laws are used against LGBTI persons in a
         discriminatory manner. Such discrimination is further enabled and
         promoted by the continued criminalisation, and therefore
         stigmatisation, of LGBTI persons. LGBTI individuals who are the
         victims of violence or hate crimes cannot report these crimes to
         the police without fear that their sexual orientation or gender
         identity will be exposed or highlighted, leading to further
         discrimination and marginalization and, potentially, in theory, to
         prosecution under articles 365 and 365A of the Constitution. LBGTI
         people who experience physical violence rarely seek compensation,
         redress or counselling from service providers who work with women
         who have experienced violence (See State protection).


         2.5.3 There is a general perception in the LGBTI community that
         police officers used blackmail and violence against persons they
         perceived to be homosexual, bisexual, or transgender. If the
         person's fear is of serious harm/persecution at the hands of the
         state, it is unreasonable to consider they would be able to avail
         themselves of the protection of the authorities.

         (My emphases supplied in bold)






  41. In light of the above emphases, in my view it is clear that the
      evidence points to the authorities having demonstrated unlawful and
      criminal behaviour towards LGBTI individuals with impunity, most
      troubling of all being violence. The Report does not suggest that
      these acts are for any reason other than the sexual identity of the
      individuals harmed. In particular, I am troubled by the stance that
      there is an insufficiency of state protection for an LGBTI person whom
      fears persecution from the authorities. To my mind, that potential
      risk must flow to those who share that fear as a future risk of
      persecution or due to previous instances of persecution.






  42. The guidance goes further and discusses the Attitudes of the state at
      section 4. The passages of direct relevance appear to be the
      following:

         4.1.1 The US State Department's 2014 Country Report on Human Rights
         Practices (USSD Report 2014), Sri Lanka, published on 25 June 2015,
         noted that, 'Authorities very rarely enforced the criminal
         provisions. In recent years human rights organizations reported
         that, while not actively arresting and prosecuting members of the
         LGBT community, police harassed and extorted money or sexual favors
         from LGBT individuals with impunity and assaulted gay men and
         lesbians in Colombo and other areas. ... '.


         4.1.2 The same source further noted that:
         'A civil society group that worked to advance LGBT rights reported
         close monitoring by security and intelligence forces. In a March
         report by the Women's Support Group, "Sri Lanka: Not Gonna Take it
         Lying Down," 13 of 33 LGBT persons interviewed in the country
         between 2010 and 2012 admitted to having been the victim of some
         kind of violence at the hands of state agents. Interviewees noted
         police often utilized existing laws, such as the 1842 Vagrants
         Ordinance, to detain any individual deemed to be "loitering," which
         generally led to detention and at times physical and sexual abuse.
         Interviewees also noted that police and antigay groups also used
         penal code sections on "gross indecency" and "cheating by
         personation" to brand LGBT persons as "perverts and criminals."
         There was also a general perception in the LGBT community that
         police officers used blackmail and violence against persons they
         perceived to be homosexual, bisexual, or transgender.'


         4.1.3 A report by the Kaleidoscope trust, Speaking Out, The rights
         of LGBTI citizens from across the Commonwealth, 2014, stated that,
         'Although the law is rarely enforced it continues to be used to
         threaten and harass LGBTI people. A recent study by human rights
         organisation EQUAL GROUND found that 90 [percent] of trans people
         and 65 [percent] of gay men reported experiencing police violence
         based on their sexuality and/or gender identity. The law still
         retains widespread support amongst lawyers and the police.'


         4.1.4 A Shadow Report to the UN Human Rights Committee regarding
         Sri Lanka's protection of the Rights of LGBTI Persons (Response to
         List of Issues) Compiled by the Kaleidoscope Human Rights
         Foundation with the assistance of DLA Piper International LLP and
         Sri Lankan LGBTI Advocacy Groups, dated September 2014, stated:
         'There have been reports of arbitrary arrests and detention by law
         enforcement officials and violent and abusive police behaviour.
         Although arrested LGBTI individuals have thus far not been charged
         or prosecuted, there have been reports of subsequent blackmail,
         extortion, violence or coerced sexual acts of individuals by police
         officers. For example, in one reported cases two gay men were
         arrested by police in a public restroom in Colombo and taken to a
         police station. At the station, the police officers used derogatory
         terminology and accused the two men of having sex in the restroom.
         The police then drove the men to another location where the men
         were forced to pay a bribe to the police before being released. The
         transgender nachchi community is especially vulnerable to such
         victimisation, abuse and exploitation. The awareness that most
         LGBTI individuals will be unwilling and fearful to report such
         incidents and the subsequent lack of action by the State gives
         police officers the license to continue such practices.'

         (My emphases supplied in bold)





  43. Paragraph 4.1.1 represents the same information that was before the
      Upper Tribunal in LH & IP, whereas paragraphs 4.1.2 confirms the
      content of the most recent USSD Report of 2014.






  44. More troubling still is the statistic within 4.1.3 that 65% of gay men
      surveyed had reported police violence based on their sexuality/gender
      identity and the UNHRC findings of arbitrary arrests and detention,
      blackmail, extortion, violence and coerced sexual acts.






  45. Again, in light of the above emphases and my observations, it is clear
      that the evidence points to the authorities having demonstrated a
      worryingly high percentage of violence and other criminal acts against
      gay men due to their sexual identity, confirmed by two independent
      sources, and relied upon by the Respondent in her own CIG.






  46. Against that evidence she approves of, the Respondent would clearly
      need to show good reason why the Tribunal should not place weight upon
      the Respondent's own researched and carefully drafted CIG. Ms Fijiwala
      was unable to make any submission in this regard but instead stated
      that the evidence within the CIG was similar to that before the panel
      in LH & IP and was insufficient to cause departure from the position
      that the authorities actions did not amount to persecution. Ms
      Fijiwala further highlighted that in LH & IP the panel considered acts
      by the police but found that they fell short of persecution. She
      submitted that even if the Appellant was outed and others were aware
      of his sexual identity, he would not necessarily face persecution
      because there was a large gay community in Colombo, although she also
      accepted that this large community were not openly gay.






  47. I am unable to accept Ms Fijiwala's submissions in reply. Ms Fijiwala
      gave no reason why the fresh evidence should not carry weight other
      than the suggestion that it was the same as that before the panel in
      LH & IP. That submission is wholly untenable. That much is obvious
      from a bald comparison of the passage before the panel in LH & IP and
      the evidence before me as carefully excerpted above. A closer analysis
      reveals that the tone and content of the Country Information from the
      Respondent has changed given that she has published a CIG which
      discusses in detail the reliable and verifiable material available to
      her which, on that evidence, points to acts of violence by the police
      against gay men, and to a 65% history of violence by a survey of gay
      men as well as coerced sexual acts, which are synonymous with rape and
      sexual violence. Whilst there is continued mention of harassment and
      extortion, that is of insignificance on its own, but combined with the
      aforementioned difficulties represents a growing trend in hostility
      towards the gay community. It is further noteworthy that the panel in
      LH & IP did not accept the evidence before it of harassment of gay men
      (see [115] of that decision) whereas the Respondent has since accepted
      and referred to that evidence herself in her own CIG.






  48. Returning to the instant appeal, in the context of this appellant who
      has been outed to his family and the community, the second question in
      HJ (Iran), namely, if a gay man lived openly would he be liable to
      persecution in his own country, has been answered in the affirmative
      owing to the above background evidence.






  49. I am conscious of the fact that the evidence is partly-based upon
      statistical analysis, however, even on that basis, whether it be 13
      out of 33 people as stated in the USSD Report or 65% of persons as
      mentioned in the Kaleidoscope Trust Report, those figures far outstrip
      the 1 in 10 chance concept espoused by Lord Roger in HJ (Iran) at [91-
      92] based upon the judgment of Sedley, LJ in Batayav v Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1489 at [38].






  50. Turning to the remaining questions of HJ (Iran), Mr Chelvan argued
      that if the first two limbs of HJ (Iran) were met, then in light of
      MSM, the Tribunal would not need to consider the remaining questions
      of HJ (Iran).






  51. Whilst this submission appears correct, in light of the binding nature
      of CJEU jurisprudence in the form of X, Y and Z, which the
      Presidential panel stated in MSM, however should I prove wrong in this
      approach (given that MSM is under appeal to the Court of Appeal I am
      told), I shall go on to consider the remaining questions of HJ (Iran).






  52. As to the question of whether it has been established that the
      appellant would live openly and thereby be exposed to a real risk of
      persecution even if that could be avoided by living "discreetly"; in
      my view, the answer to this question is clearly in the affirmative
      given that the Appellant gave credible evidence and stated as early as
      his interview (referred to above) that he would not go back to living
      in secrecy anymore when this concept was put to him. Furthermore, to
      my mind, the Appellant would be unable to do so given that it was
      accepted that he has been outed.






  53. Consequently, the question of discreetness being answered in the
      Appellant's favour alongside the previous two questions under HJ
      (Iran), I find that there is a real risk or reasonable likelihood of
      persecution on return to Sri Lanka due to the Appellant's sexual
      identity as a gay man.






54. I do not propose to deal with the remaining issues and evidence  raised
    by the Appellant given my decision above.





    Decision


55. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.





56. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds and human rights grounds, under Article  3  of
    the ECHR involved the making of an error of law. That decision  is  set
    aside.






57. I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal under the Refugee
    Convention and, because it follows, Article 3 of the ECHR.





    Anonymity


58. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order pursuant to rule 13  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 which I maintain.










Signed                              Date 01/06/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

-----------------------
[1] (Country Information and Guidance)
[2] (Country of Origin Report)

