
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07916/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th January 2016                 |On 10th February 2016                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     m s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Amunwa of Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Samimi of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 3rd November 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Albanian citizen, born in July 1988, and is  17
    years of age.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  14  October  2014  and
    claimed asylum based upon his  fear  of  a  blood  feud  involving  his
    family.

 4. The Respondent refused the application on 16 April 2015, not  accepting
    that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  if  returned  to  Albania,  but
    discretionary leave to  remain  was  granted  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant was an unaccompanied minor.  He was therefore  granted  leave
    until 14th January 2016.

 5. The Appellant appealed pursuant  to  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and his appeal was heard
    by the FTT on 6th October 2015.  The FTT dismissed the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    relying upon five grounds which are summarised below;

    Ground 1

    Making perverse or irrational findings on a material matter by  finding
    that the Appellant stayed with  his  uncle  for  two  months.   It  was
    contended that the Appellant had never claimed this to be the case, and
    in making this finding the FTT wrongly reached adverse  conclusions  on
    the Appellant's credibility.

    Ground 2

    Perverse or irrational findings  and/or  giving  weight  to  immaterial
    matters  by  finding  that  the  Respondent's  failure  to  trace   the
    Appellant's family in Albania led to no prejudice.

    Ground 3

    Failure to consider the  Respondent's  breach  of  section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's interview which did  not  comply  with  UNHCR  guidance  on
    interviewing minors.

    Ground 4

    Making a material misdirection in law, by failing to follow  the  Joint
    Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010  relating  to   children,
    vulnerable adults and sensitive Appellants.  It was contended that  the
    FTT had not followed this guidance  when  considering  the  Appellant's
    credibility.

    Ground 5

    Giving weight to immaterial matters.  It was contended the FTT erred by
    making reference to AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT
    80 (IAC) when this was not relevant, and the FTT had failed to  explain
    the relevance of quoting three paragraphs from that decision.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.  Following  the  grant
    of permission the Respondent lodged a response pursuant to rule  24  of
    The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   In  summary  the
    Respondent did not accept that the FTT had materially  erred.   It  was
    noted that the FTT was aware that the Appellant was  a  minor  and  had
    been consistent about his reasons for fleeing, but had failed  to  make
    out a case  that  the  blood  feud  continued  or  that  he  could  not
    internally relocate.  It was specifically noted that the  Appellant  is
    from Tirana which is an area where blood feuds and Kanun Law  does  not
    operate.

 8. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FTT  decision
    should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 9. Mr Amunwa relied and expanded upon the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.  I was asked to note that the FTT
    had made a mistake of fact by finding that the Appellant had lived with
    his uncle for a  period  of  two  months,  in  Tirana,  before  fleeing
    Albania.  This mistake was relevant because it led to  the  FTT  making
    adverse credibility findings, and was relevant as to whether there  was
    an active blood feud or  not,  and  whether  there  was  an  option  of
    reasonable internal relocation.

10. I was asked to note that the FTT had made reference  to  the  Appellant
    being an adult, which was incorrect.  The FTT had not recorded  whether
    the Appellant was a vulnerable witness and in that respect reliance was
    placed upon paragraphs 26 and 27 of JL China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC).

11. Mr Amunwa submitted that the FTT had made no finding as to whether  the
    Appellant had lost contact with his family, and was wrong to state that
    the Appellant had not suffered prejudice by the Respondent's failure to
    attempt to trace his family.

The Respondent's Submissions

12. Mr Kandola relied  upon  the  rule  24  response.   He  submitted  that
    paragraph 83  of  the  Respondent's  refusal  decision  indicated  that
    tracing of the Appellant's family had been carried out.

13. In relation to section 55 of the 2009 Act it  was  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's interests had been protected by the grant of  discretionary
    leave.

14. Mr Kandola submitted that the FTT's mistake of fact in  recording  that
    the Appellant had lived with his uncle was not material and neither was
    the error in making reference to the Appellant as an adult.

15. Mr Kandola submitted that the FTT had  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    grandfather had killed a member of the other family, but did not accept
    there was an ongoing blood feud that put the Appellant at risk.

The Appellant's Response

16. Mr Amunwa submitted that it was not clear  from  paragraph  20  of  the
    decision that the FTT accepted that  the  Appellant's  grandfather  had
    been  killed.   It  was  clear  that  the  Appellant  had  stated  when
    interviewed that he had not had any contact with his family in  Albania
    since he came to the United Kingdom.

17. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

Ground 1

18. The FTT was factually incorrect  to  find  in  paragraph  21  that  the
    Appellant hid in his uncle's home in Tirana prior to  leaving  Albania.
    The Appellant had never claimed to have lived with his uncle in  Tirana
    for two months prior  to  leaving  Albania.   This  however  is  not  a
    material error.  The Appellant's evidence was that he  remained  living
    at his family home in their village which is just outside the  city  of
    Tirana, until his uncle arranged his  departure  from  Albania  on  1st
    October 2014.

19. The Appellant explained that his home was between eight and ten minutes
    walk away from the aggressor family.  This  was  confirmed  by  him  at
    question 68 of his  interview,  and  in  his  witness  statement.   The
    Appellant's evidence was that a blood feud was declared  in  July  2014
    when he reached 16 years of age,  but  the  aggressor  family  made  no
    attempt to contact him at his family home, between the blood feud being
    declared, and his departure from Albania on 1st October 2014.

20. Therefore the finding by the FTT that the other family did not  attempt
    to contact him at his uncle's house in Tirana, is not a material error,
    as the Appellant's own case is that the family did not try and  contact
    him at his family home, which was closer to their home,  than  was  his
    uncle's home in Tirana.

Ground 2

21. The FTT, in my view, erred  in  paragraph  23  in  recording  that  the
    Respondent failed to trace the Appellant's family in a "reasonable  and
    timely manner."  Paragraph 83  of  the  Respondent's  refusal  decision
    confirms that attempts were made to trace  the  Appellant's  family  in
    Albania, and a response was received on  16th  April  2015,  confirming
    that  the  Appellant  lived  with  his  father,  mother,   grandfather,
    grandmother, and brother and that the family currently still  lived  in
    Albania.  Although the FTT erred in finding  that  there  had  been  no
    attempt to trace the Appellant's family, this is not a material  error.
    The FTT did not  err  in  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    prejudiced, and that if there was a breach of the Respondent's  tracing
    obligation, this would only be relevant if prejudice had been caused to
    the Appellant.

22. The Appellant made no mention in either of his  witness  statements  of
    losing  contact  with  his  family,  but  when  interviewed  (questions
    105/106), confirmed that he had not had contact with his  family  since
    leaving Albania.  If  the  Appellant  had  alleged  that  he  had  been
    prejudiced by the Respondent's failure, it was open to him  to  explain
    how, as he had the benefit of legal representation, and assistance from
    Social Services.   This was not raised as a ground of appeal before the
    FTT, neither was it mentioned in the Appellant's skeleton argument.

Ground 3

23. I do not find that the grounds or submissions disclose a material error
    on this issue.  It is  apparent  that  complaint  was  made  about  the
    conduct   of   the   Appellant's   interview   and   the    Appellant's
    representatives wrote to the Respondent, and a copy of their letter  is
    contained in the Appellant's bundle at 8A - 8B.  Some relatively  minor
    clarifications were made to the answers, and it was contended that  the
    interviewing  officer  had  not  been  properly  trained  to  interview
    children, and that a number of questions were "not  asked  in  a  child
    friendly manner."  It is not clear how  this  was  portrayed  as  being
    relevant  before  the  FTT.   The  Appellant  submitted   two   witness
    statements, one of which comments upon  the  Respondent's  reasons  for
    refusal, but made no further comments in  relation  to  the  interview.
    The Appellant, with  the  benefit  of  legal  representation,  had  the
    opportunity to correct or clarify anything that  had  occurred  in  the
    interview which may have adversely affected his  claim.   There  is  no
    evidence that the FTT disregarded any representations or submissions on
    this point, and I conclude that this ground discloses no error  of  law
    by the FTT.

Ground 4

24. The FTT does not specifically refer to the Presidential  guidance  note
    regarding children and vulnerable witnesses.  The FTT referred  to  the
    Appellant as a child in paragraph 10(a)  and  (h),  but  was  wrong  in
    paragraph 22 to state that "he is now an adult."  I do not however find
    that this is relevant to the FTT assessment of credibility.  It appears
    that the FTT accepted in paragraph 20 that the Appellant's  grandfather
    had killed the member of another family, but what is  not  accepted  is
    the claim that the Appellant had been  targeted.   This  conclusion  is
    based, in the main, upon the Appellant's own evidence that  even  after
    he claims that he was made a target of the blood feud in July 2014,  he
    remained living at the family home in  close  proximity  to  the  other
    family they made no attempts to threaten or harm him, or contact him in
    any way.  The Appellant remained living at his  family  home  until  he
    left Albania on 1 October 2014.  This ground discloses no error.

Ground 5

25. The FTT referred to the correct case law in relation  to  blood  feuds,
    that being EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC), and  it
    does not appear to have been necessary to make any reference AM and BM.
      Although it may not have been necessary to refer to this decision,  I
    do not find that the grounds or submissions disclose any material error
    of law in making such a reference, which had no material  relevance  to
    the decision made by the FTT.

26. I therefore conclude that although there are mistakes in the  decision,
    there are no material errors of law.  The grounds  seeking  permission,
    evidence disagreement with the findings made by the  FTT,  but  do  not
    disclose material errors of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  I do not set  aside  the  decision.   The
appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

An anonymity direction was made by  the  FTT.   I  continue  that  direction
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    29th January 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    29th January 2016
