
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07177/2015
      AA/07178/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Decision Promulgated     |
|On 18 July 2016                        |On 17 October 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                  FS and FS
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson (for Elder Rahimi Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. These are the appeals of two sisters whose initials are both FS (born
       respectively 19 July 1991 and 15 September 1990: we  shall  refer  to
       them as FS1 and FS2 according to  those  birth  dates),  citizens  of
       Iran, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal of 17 May  2016
       dismissing their appeals against the Secretary of State's refusal  of
       their asylum and Humanitarian Protection claims (of 9 April 2015).


    2. Their asylum  claims  are  conveniently  summarised  in  the  refusal
       letters. Their father NS was  detained  for  political  reasons,  and
       spent five years in prison after the revolution. Their mother FA is a
       British citizen having been granted asylum here in 2000. The  sisters
       are both non-practicising Muslims, having feigned adherence to  Islam
       when in Iran.


    3. FS2 had attended Ahvaz University for some years, during  which  time
       she  demonstrated  against  the  government;  numerous  people   were
       arrested during those demonstrations but she managed  to  avoid  this
       herself. She had become a supporter of  the  Iran-Paad  International
       Organisation during her time at university, in around 2009,  inspired
       by her own beliefs and the teachings of her parents.  She  researched
       the group and secretly  passed  information  about  them  around  her
       friends. She  disseminated  information  about  the  cruelty  of  the
       government on four occasions.


    4. Some two years earlier the sisters had been  walking  on  the  street
       when they were told by Basij militia members that they  were  dressed
       inappropriately, taken  to  a  van,  and  told  to  sign  a  document
       promising to dress more conservatively in future;  they  refused  and
       made a scene, and passers-by intervened in their  favour:  the  Basij
       then allowed them to leave.


    5. In April 2014 they were again stopped  for  the  same  reasons.  They
       believed the accusation was  bogus  and  they  were  in  truth  being
       targeted because of their  father's  political  activity.  They  were
       taken to Vanak, and slapped and verbally abused en route.  They  were
       and told threatened with the possibility that their state  of  attire
       would be cited against them in legal proceedings; the  penalty  might
       be 74 lashes. They begged to speak to their family, and  subsequently
       their father and uncle paid a bribe to secure their release.


    6. Their father was last arrested in May 2014. Plain-clothed members  of
       the security forces showed up at the family home and took  him  to  a
       detention centre. She was unaware of where he was being  held.  Their
       uncle Hussein told them that their family home was now being  watched
       by the authorities. He subsequently found out their father's location
       by bribing an official. Their uncle learned, upon visiting him,  that
       he had been tortured though he had not been given  any  clear  reason
       for his arrest, but nevertheless he had been threatened with the rape
       of his daughters if he did not satisfy the authorities' wishes.


    7. They last saw their father during a  brief  visit  to  his  place  of
       detention; he had had  a  heart  attack  as  his  condition  was  not
       adequately treated whilst detained. FS2 argued with the guards  about
       his situation and  was  herself  detained  for  two  days,  insulted,
       kicked, beaten and threatened with rape, and  told  that  her  sister
       was, meanwhile, being tortured in another room. A female  guard  beat
       her, saying the authorities had enough information on them to  ensure
       they were imprisoned for the rest of their lives. Her  uncle  paid  a
       bribe to secure her  release  from  detention.  Her  belongings  were
       returned to her except for her mobile phone and she was asked to sign
       a few documents before being allowed to leave.


    8. Her father had asked their uncle to ensure  that  both  sisters  were
       safe and arrangements were made for them to leave the  country.  They
       travelled to the United Kingdom. Her agent attempted to blackmail her
       into spending the night with him, but she refused,  paying  him  more
       money instead. Since arriving in the United Kingdom, she feared  that
       her  telephone  conversations  with  Iran   were   being   monitored:
       nevertheless she occasionally spoke to their uncle,  who  had  warned
       them not to return there.


    9. FS1 advanced a similar personal history, and  her  witness  statement
       was generally consistent with that of  her  sister.  Each  gave  oral
       evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and was cross examined. Their
       mother, FA, gave evidence too, saying  that  her  daughters  had  not
       involved themselves in political activities  in  the  United  Kingdom
       beyond joining Iran-PAAD here following their arrival, and  that  the
       organisation was now inactive in the United Kingdom: it maintained no
       website. They had been arrested in Iran when  visiting  their  father
       and threatened with rape. Had they been in danger sooner,  she  would
       have made greater efforts to bring them here.


   10.  Their  applications  were  supported  by  a  letter  from  Iran-Paad
       International  of  October  2014  stating   that   the   organisation
       understood that the sisters had been involved in skirmishes with  the
       security forces because of their mode of dress; they escaped  on  the
       first occasion via the interest taken by passers-by, and  the  second
       time via a one million toman bribe. The organisation was  aware  that
       the sisters had visited their father whilst  he  was  held  in  in  a
       political prison and had been advised to leave the country  by  their
       uncle.


   11. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed their appeals, finding them not  to
       be credible witnesses, because:

         a) Their oral evidence was vague and evasive;


         b) Their explanation that their father had not shared information
            about his political activities to avoid creating risks of harm
            for them was not credible given that they were already studying
            at university;


         c) It was not plausible that they would not be familiar with the
            website of Iran-Paad;


         d) Their evidence was discrepant, FS1 saying they had continued
            with their own activities from 2009 to 2014, FS2 saying that
            they had decreased their level of involvement;


         e) They could not recall the level of bribe paid to secure their
            release from them detention before their father's arrest;


         f) It was not plausible that the authorities would have delayed in
            so long before acting against the family had they truly been of
            interest.

   12. The First-tier Tribunal did not accept  they  would  be  at  risk  of
       return once their individual asserted history had been rejected.


   13. Grounds of appeal challenged those findings on the basis that

         a) A prior favourable determination by an Immigration  Adjudicator
            on the mother's asylum claim (which had led to her  recognition
            as a refugee) had been given no attention;


         b) The relevant Country Guidelines on  risk  on  return  had  been
            overlooked;


         c)  Inadequate  reasons  had  been  given  for   rejecting   their
            credibility generally.

   14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Kelly on all three  grounds
       by Judge Kelly on 7 June 2016.


   15. Before us Mr Hodson contended the  decision  was  flawed.  He  sought
       permission to vary the grounds  of  appeal  lodged  by  the  previous
       representatives to additionally challenge the failure of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal to address the expert evidence; Mr Bramble  agreed  for
       the Secretary of State that this was an important potential oversight
       sufficiently allied to the  challenge  already  made  as  to  warrant
       expansion of the grounds. Mr Bramble acknowledged the  force  of  the
       failure to take account  of  Mr  Blake's  findings  on  the  mother's
       evidence in 2001.


      Findings and reasons


   16. The evidence of  the  Appellant's  mother  has  previously  been  the
       subject of appellate findings when Mr Blake sitting as an Adjudicator
       allowed her appeal on asylum grounds in December 2001.  Her  evidence
       had then been that she and her husband were members of a  small  pro-
       monarchist movement with some twenty other members; she used to  give
       talks to the others regarding the group's aims  and  objectives.  She
       was arrested,  detained  and  beaten.  She  curtailed  her  political
       activities. She was dismissed from her work. On 23 December 1999  the
       house where they held the monarchist group meetings was  raided:  she
       was warned by a nephew that she should now not return home.  She rang
       her husband to warn him too. They decided to  leave  the  country  in
       January 2000. She departed first. Subsequently  she  discovered  that
       her husband had been prevented from escaping  when  he  was  detained
       whilst seeking to cross the border  at  Bandar  Abbas.  She  provided
       supporting evidence including a letter from Iran-Paad confirming that
       she was a member of that organisation and would be at risk as a known
       monarchist and anti-regime activist.


   17. Mr Blake found that the medical evidence before him showed  that  the
       Appellant had suffered stressful and oppressive experiences which  he
       recognised might have taken a toll on her, which he took to  be  some
       corroboration of her detention and ill treatment; he doubted she  was
       ill-treated for reasons of her monarchist activities, which  he  felt
       that she had exaggerated, though he accepted that  she  was  involved
       with a small and  shadowy  group  which  had  monarchist  sympathies.
       Although he was doubtful that she would again come to  the  attention
       of the authorities,  he  accepted  that  the  authorities  were  very
       sensitive at that time to any monarchist activities, and so  accepted
       that she would face a real risk of persecution on a return given  she
       was a dissident who would speak her mind albeit at  a  low  level  of
       activity, noting it would be unusual for a mother of two near-teenage
       children to leave them behind having fled  their  country  of  origin
       without good reason.


   18. An expert report prepared for the hearing before Mr Blake noted  that
       Shapour Bakhtiar, a relative of the  family,  held  an  exceptionally
       high profile in  terms  of  close  association  with  a  former  pro-
       Monarchist President of Iran, having been the last Prime Minister  of
       Iran under Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.


   19. As is well known, Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  00702  holds  that  where
       before a later judicial decision maker an Appellant relies  on  facts
       that are not materially different from those put to an  earlier  one,
       and proposes to support the claim by what  is  in  essence  the  same
       evidence as that which was previously  available,  the  second  judge
       should regard the issues as settled by the original findings and make
       his findings in line with those rather than allowing the matter to be
       relitigated.


   20. The principle extends beyond repeat considerations  of  a  particular
       Appellant's case, and onto the evidence of witnesses called in  their
       support: thus findings upon the evidence of a material  witness  made
       in earlier immigration proceedings form a  firm  footing  upon  which
       later decision makers  should  make  their  determinations  regarding
       claims "that have arisen out of the same factual matrix, such as  the
       same relationship or the same event or series of events", though  not
       simply where there is a "material overlap of evidence": see  Carnwath
       LJ at [75] of AA (Somalia) [2007] EWCA Civ 1040. A similar point  was
       made in TK (consideration of prior determination, directions) Georgia
       [2004] UKIAT 00149 at [21] where the Tribunal concluded that  it  was
       consistent with  the  principles  in  Devaseelan  to  treat  a  prior
       determination of credibility as authoritative as to  the  credibility
       of an asylum seeker's husband's evidence.


   21. The findings  from  the  mother's  appeal  proceedings  were  plainly
       relevant here. Whilst they fall some  way  short  of  a  wholehearted
       acceptance of the father's role in political activities, nevertheless
       Mr Blake did accept that he and  his  wife  had  had  some  level  of
       monarchist involvement, and that his wife would be at risk of serious
       harm on return arising from that profile; he also accepted  that  the
       house at which they had attended meetings had been raided, which  had
       led to her sudden flight from the country.  As  was  set  out  in  TK
       Georgia, past findings on the evidence of family members are relevant
       subject to there being compelling new evidence that  casts  doubt  on
       their correctness.  However here the First-tier Tribunal  completely
       overlooked the prior judicial assessment of the mother's evidence.


   22. This oversight was clearly an error of law. We accept that it  was  a
       material error of law, as it bore on the central issue on the appeal,
       given that the First-tier Tribunal expressly found that the issue  of
       the family's past support for the monarchy lay at  the  core  of  the
       asylum claims. It was also wrong to overlook the expert  evidence  of
       the  prominence  of  the  family  given   their   relatives'   direct
       connections with the monarchy. The  First-tier  Tribunal  might  have
       taken a different view of the claims overall had it assessed them  in
       the light of this material consideration, and its overall  conclusion
       as to the veracity of the Appellants' testimony must therefore be set
       aside.


   23. In those circumstances it is unnecessary to address the other grounds
       of appeal in any detail. However it should be noted  that  given  the
       Appellants'  own  account  is  that  they  left  Iran  on  their  own
       passports, it is difficult to see that they would face any  risks  on
       return based on any  of  the  considerations  identified  within  the
       Country Guidelines decisions of SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:  failed
       asylum seeker [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) or SB (risk on return  -  illegal
       exit) Iran [2009] UKAIT 00053.  We  note  that  Mr  Hodson  drew  our
       attention to the mother's evidence that Iran-PAAD did not maintain an
       active website, which  might  well  explain  the  lack  of  knowledge
       thereof which the First-tier Tribunal found counted against them.


   24. This is not an appeal where there are meaningful findings upon  which
       the Upper Tribunal can build, and thus it is allowed  to  the  extent
       that it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

Decision

Appeal allowed and remitted for hearing afresh to the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                                       Date 26 July 2016

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes


ANONYMITY ORDER

The file suggests that anonymity has previously been  sought  in  this  case
and given the fact that the Appellant may have family remaining in  Iran  we
consider it is appropriate to make an anonymity order. Unless  and  until  a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or
any member of her family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                            Date: 26 July 2016


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

