
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/07215/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5th April 2016                        |   On 22nd April 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     Ss
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel, instructed by Sunrise
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan, born on  7th  May  1981.
    The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 9th August 2007 when  she  was
    given leave to enter as a student until 11th August 2009.  A number  of
    subsequent applications for leave to remain were refused, and following
    her arrest in January 2013, the Appellant applied  for  asylum  on  5th
    July 2013.  That application was refused for the reasons given  in  the
    Respondent's letter of 4th September 2014.  The Appellant appealed, and
    her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Mathews  (the
    Judge) sitting at Stoke-on-Trent on 24th August 2015.   He  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights
    grounds for the reasons given in  his  Decision  dated  13th  September
    2015.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  15th
    November 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant's case was that she had worked at a  firm  of  solicitors
    where the proprietor, Mr A, had been involved in  illegal  immigration.
    Following her arrest in January 2013, the Appellant had agreed to be  a
    witness against Mr A.  As a consequence, she had been harassed and  had
    received threats from him which she had reported to the police.   Mr  A
    was very well connected politically in Pakistan.  He was a best  friend
    of the former Prime Minister Rajah  Pervaiz  Ashraf.   The  Appellant's
    mother had been visited by a gang of men acting on behalf of Mr A.  The
    Appellant feared that if she returned to Pakistan, Mr A would  use  his
    political connections to seek revenge upon her with impunity.

 4. At the hearing before him, the Judge heard evidence from the Appellant,
    the Appellant's brother SKAA, and NL, a retired detective constable who
    had been involved in the prosecution of  Mr  A.   The  Judge  also  had
    before him expert evidence from Dr Ballard.  However, the  Judge  found
    much of the evidence lacking in credibility and was not satisfied  that
    Mr A had the  political  connections  claimed.   The  Judge  identified
    various discrepancies in the evidence, and noted that the Appellant had
    delayed considerably in seeking protection in the UK.   He  also  found
    some of the evidence implausible.  The Judge was satisfied  that  Mr  A
    had sought to intimidate witnesses in the UK, but the Judge found  that
    the Appellant would have recourse to adequate protection in Pakistan in
    accordance with the decision in KA and Others (Pakistan) CG [2010] UKUT
    216.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Turner argued that the Judge had erred  in
    law in coming to his decision.  The Judge had failed to  give  adequate
    reasons  for  his  adverse  credibility  finding.   He   had   attached
    insufficient weight to the evidence of  NL.  The Judge had also  failed
    to consider the Appellant's evidence in the  light  of  the  background
    country information  concerning  the  control  which  the  MQM  had  in
    Karachi.  Again, the Judge had failed to give sufficient weight to  the
    expert evidence of Dr Ballard, and had failed to properly evaluate  the
    FIR contained amongst the Appellant's documents.   The  Judge  had  not
    engaged with all of the evidence.

 6. In response, Mr Kandola referred to the Rule  24  response  and  argued
    there was no such error  of  law.   The  grounds  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant were no more than a disagreement with  the  findings  of  the
    Judge.  The Judge had considered the evidence comprehensively, and  had
    given adequate reasons for his finding.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  I agree with the argument of Mr  Kandola  that  the
    grounds relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  amount  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the  Judge's  findings.   The  Judge  carried  out  a
    thorough and careful analysis of all of the  evidence  before  him  and
    explained adequately why he found the Appellant not to be  at  risk  on
    return  to  Pakistan.   The  Judge  identified  discrepancies  in   the
    evidence, and was entitled to take into account the  Appellant's  delay
    in seeking protection.  The Judge dealt with  the  evidence  of  NL  at
    paragraph 23 of the Decision, and the FIR at paragraphs 28 to 31.   The
    Judge dealt with the expert evidence at paragraphs 33 to 37.  The Judge
    was entitled to take the view of that evidence which  he  did,  and  he
    explained why.  The Judge gave the correct burden and standard of proof
    at paragraph 10 of the Decision and it is  apparent  from  reading  his
    Decision that he applied it.

 8. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the  Judge.



Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside that decision.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue
    for the reasons given in paragraph 2 of the Judge's Decision.






Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


