

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: AA/07636/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 8 May 2015                          |On 3 June 2015            |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


                                  Mrs F H A
                       (ANONYMITY Direction CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Nollet, Authorised Representative
      (Migrant Legal Action)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, HOPO

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge  PJG  White  on  26  February  2015  against  the
           decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidson  made  in  a
           decision and reasons promulgated on 2 February  2015  dismissing
           the Appellant's asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights
           appeals.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Iran, born on 5 April 1980.   She
           had appealed against her removal  from  the  United  Kingdom,  a
           decision taken by the Respondent  on  15  September  2014.   She
           stated in bare summary that she feared to return to Iran because
           of her perceived association with her brother who was wanted  by
           the authorities, and because of her escape from prison.


      3.    When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           White considered that it was arguable that  Judge  Davidson  had
           erred in various significant ways,  including  failing  to  have
           regard to the Appellant's supplementary bundle of evidence which
           contained relevant country  background  evidence  about  Iranian
           divorce procedures, failing to have regard to the local cultural
           context and local calendar, had  speculated  about  how  a  raid
           might have been executed by the Iranian authorities, had  placed
           excess weight on answers  given  at  the  Appellant's  screening
           interview and had erred in finding that the Appellant had  given
           inconsistent answers about her brother at her  asylum  interview
           when compared to her witness statement.


      4.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
           appeal was  opposed.   Standard  directions  were  made  by  the
           tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of  whether
           or not there was a material error of law.




      Submissions


      5.    Ms Nollett for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal earlier submitted.  Ms Nollett took the tribunal  to  the
           evidence while developing the grounds  of  appeal  in  the  same
           order as the grant of permission to appeal.  There  had  been  a
           number of fundamental misunderstandings by the  judge,  cultural
           and otherwise, and the absence of any reference to the objective
           evidence about divorce procedures in Iran showed that the  judge
           had failed to take all of the evidence into account when  making
           adverse  credibility  findings.  The  judge's   findings   about
           inconsistencies   in   the   Appellant's   evidence   were   not
           sustainable.  The decision and reasons should be set  aside  and
           the appeal reheard before another First-tier Tribunal judge.


      6.     Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  for  the  Respondent   relied   on   the
           Respondent's rule 24 notice.  Candidly  she  accepted  that  the
           finding of inconsistency at [41] and [42] of  the  decision  and
           reasons  was  impossible  to  follow:  there   was   substantial
           consistency.




      Material error of law


      7.    The tribunal finds that  all  of  the  arguable  errors  of  law
           identified in the grant  of  permission  to  appeal  are  indeed
           errors of law and are so material that the decision and  reasons
           must be set aside and the appeal reheard before another judge.


      8.    There were two copies of the Appellant's supplementary bundle in
           the tribunal's file, one in the form of a disjointed  fax  which
           the Upper Tribunal has now discarded for  shredding,  the  other
           clear and complete.  Ordinarily the Upper  Tribunal  would  have
           had  little   difficult   in   inferring   that   the   complete
           supplementary bundle  had  been  considered  by  the  First-tier
           Tribunal  judge,  whether  or  not  it  had  been   specifically
           mentioned.  That inference unfortunately is not possible in  the
           present appeal, because the judge gave attention to the contents
           of the main appeal bundle to the extent of  mentioning  its  109
           pages, but failed entirely to  discuss  the  report  of  Amnesty
           International which was in the supplementary  bundle  and  which
           dealt extensively with divorce proceedings in Iran.   The  judge
           reached plausibility findings about the Appellant's evidence  as
           to her divorce at [47] and  [48]  of  the  decision,  but  those
           reasons might well be mistaken in the light of  the  AI  report.
           That in itself is a serious error or oversight which goes to the
           heart of the Appellant's case such that the decision and reasons
           must be regarded as unsafe.


      9.    Regrettably, that is not the only material error of law.  As  Ms
           Brocklesby-Weller   candidly   and   properly   conceded,    the
           discrepancy the judge purported to identify at [41] between  the
           record of the  asylum  interview  and  the  Appellant's  witness
           statement is not a discrepancy at all.   What she said about her
           brother is exactly the same in substance in  both  places.   The
           tribunal cannot understand why the judge suggested otherwise and
           there is nothing elsewhere in the  decision  and  reasons  which
           sheds any light on the matter.  This is also a serious error  or
           oversight which goes to the heart of the Appellant's case.


      9.    The other material errors have been sufficiently  identified  in
           the grant of permission to appeal and need not be repeated.   It
           is plain that these errors mean that the appeal must be  reheard
           ab initio before a differently constituted First-tier  Tribunal.
           As the Appellant has moved to Birmingham, it is appropriate that
           her appeal is reheard there.


      10.   It was agreed that the Appellant's appeal stood or fell  on  its
           asylum/humanitarian protection/human rights (Articles  2  and  3
           ECHR) component, and that there could be no sustainable  Article
           8 ECHR claim.


      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there  are  material  error  of  laws  in  the
original    decision, which is accordingly set aside.


      The appeal must be reheard before a differently constituted First-tier
      Tribunal


      The rehearing will take place at  Sheldon  House,  Birmingham,  on  24
June 2015, with a time estimate of 4 hours.


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




