
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07296/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On  19 June 2017                           |On 3 October 2017              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     JS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Collins instructed by Sentinel Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On the 27 January 2017, the Upper Tribunal  heard  the  appellant's
        challenge to a determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was
        found that the First-tier Tribunal had, on balance, erred in law as
        asserted by the appellant and that decision set aside.
     2. It was directed the appeal be listed for a further  hearing  before
        the Upper Tribunal to enable the appeal to be heard afresh  with  a
        view to that this Tribunal substituting a decision to either  allow
        or dismiss the appeal. It was further directed that the applicant's
        name, date of birth, nationality, immigration status  or  place  of
        origin in Albania are preserved finding as they are  not  disputed.
        Listing directions state  the  Upper  Tribunal  shall  examine  the
        merits of the claim to be at risk on return  as  a  result  of  the
        appellants sexual identity both in terms of any risk posed  by  the
        Albanian State and society and also by the applicant's  father,  if
        his claimed sexual identity is accepted, and whether his account of
        his father's reaction  on  a  previous  occasion  is  found  to  be
        credible.



Background


     3. The appellant is an Albanian national born on [  ]  1997  who  left
        Albania on or around 11 December 2013 arriving  in  the  UK  on  18
        December 2013. The appellant claimed asylum the following day which
        was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision dated 14  April
        2015. Although it is said the appellant was at the date of decision
        an unaccompanied minor he was not granted  a  period  of  Leave  to
        Remain.
     4. The procedural history shows the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
        initial refusal of his claim was heard by a judge at  Hatton  Cross
        on 11  December  2015  who  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
        promulgated on 22 December 2015. The appellant applied to the Upper
        Tribunal seeking permission  to  appeal  that  decision  which  was
        granted and the decision set aside.
     5. The case was remitted and heard by a different First-tier  Tribunal
        judge sitting at Hatton Cross on 7  September  2016.  The  decision
        promulgated on 27 September 2016  dismissing  the  appeal  is  that
        which the Upper Tribunal  found  was  infected  by  material  error
        resulting in it being set aside and this hearing being listed.
     6. In his skeleton argument dated 19 June 2017 Mr Collins confirms the
        Convention Reason relied upon by the appellant  is  that  he  is  a
        member of a Particular Social Group as a homosexual. The respondent
        accepts that such a claim engages the Refugee Convention  but  does
        not accept the appellant's claim as to his  sexual  orientation  or
        that a relationship with a named male is credible.
     7. At [6] of the skeleton argument Mr Collins poses a number of issues
        for the Tribunal to rule upon which he states are:

               i) is the appellant homosexual

              ii) is the appellant telling the truth about  past  events  as
                  claimed

             iii) if so does the  appellant  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
                  persecution or serious harm  from  his  and/or  the  named
                  individuals family

              iv) if so is there a sufficiency of protection

               v) if not  whether  there  exists  a  viable  and  reasonable
                  internal relocation option.
     8. Mr Collins confirmed at the outset of the hearing that  it  is  not
        the appellant's case that he can maintain his claim of  persecution
        in the capital of Albania Tirana although any risk to the appellant
        in his home area, the issue of internal relocation, and whether  it
        will be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to return  to  Albania
        pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(vi) are said to be live issues.



The law


     9. It is not disputed that if the appellant establishes he is a member
        of the particular social group relied upon he can found a claim for
        asylum provided he establishes a credible real risk on return as  a
        result of membership of that social group, in  relation  to  which,
        there is no sufficiency of protection  or  internal  flight  option
        available with his home state.  If so, there is no obligation  upon
        the Secretary of State to recognise the appellant as a  refugee  or
        person in need of international protection.
    10. The decisions of the Upper Tribunal IM (Risk - Objective Evidence -
        Homosexuals) Albania CG [2003] UKIAT 00067 is  referred  to  by  Mr
        Collins in his skeleton argument where it  is  submitted  that  the
        decision in IM is "of such a vintage that it is not, with  respect,
        of much  present  use  or  assistance".  The  difficulty  with  the
        submission, per se, is that IM remains a country guidance case.  In
        IM the Tribunal said that homosexuals caught in  flagrante  delicto
        are not at risk in Albania.
    11. A later decision of MK (Lesbians) Albania [2009]  UKAIT  00036  has
        been removed as a country guidance case in accordance with an order
        of the Court of Appeal dated 10 October 2011.
    12. This Tribunal can  depart  from  a  country  guidance  decision  if
        evidence is adduced making it appropriate to do so. In SG (Iraq)  v
        SSHD; OR (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 the Court of Appeal said
        that the CG procedure was aimed  at  arriving  at  a  reliable  and
        accurate determination and it was for those reasons, as well as the
        desirability of  consistency,  that  decision-makers  and  tribunal
        judges were required to take country guidance  determinations  into
        account, and to follow them unless very strong grounds supported by
        cogent evidence, were adduced justifying their not doing so  (paras
        43 - 50). Passage of time, per se, does not arguably amount such  a
        ground without  more.  There  are  a  number  of  country  guidance
        decisions of similar vintage relating to other countries  appearing
        in the Upper Tribunal country guidance authority list which  remain
        good law.
    13. A matter of more importance is that all  decisions  prior  to  2010
        must also be read in light of the Supreme Court's  comments  in  HJ
        (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31.
    14. In HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2010]
        UKSC 31 Lord Rodgers said "When an applicant applies for asylum  on
        the ground of a well-founded fear of persecution because he is gay,
        the tribunal must first ask itself whether it is satisfied  on  the
        evidence that he is gay, or that he would  be  treated  as  gay  by
        potential persecutors in his country of  nationality.  If  so,  the
        tribunal must then ask  itself  whether  it  is  satisfied  on  the
        available evidence that gay people who lived openly would be liable
        to persecution in the applicant's country of  nationality.  If  so,
        the tribunal must go on to consider what the  individual  applicant
        would do if he were returned to  that  country.  If  the  applicant
        would in fact live openly and thereby be exposed to a real risk  of
        persecution, then he has a well-founded fear of persecution -  even
        if he could avoid the risk by living "discreetly". If, on the other
        hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant would in fact  live
        discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must go on  to  ask  itself
        why he would do so. If the tribunal concludes  that  the  applicant
        would choose to live discreetly simply  because  that  was  how  he
        himself would wish to live, or because of social  pressures,  e  g,
        not wanting to distress his parents or embarrass his friends,  then
        his application should be rejected. Social pressures of  that  kind
        do not amount to persecution and  the  Convention  does  not  offer
        protection against them. Such a person has no well-founded fear  of
        persecution because, for reasons that have nothing to do  with  any
        fear of persecution, he himself chooses to  adopt  a  way  of  life
        which means that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted  because
        he is gay. If, on the other hand, the  tribunal  concludes  that  a
        material reason for the applicant living discreetly on  his  return
        would be a fear of the persecution which would follow if he were to
        live openly as a gay man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,  his
        application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
        fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
        he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
        defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
        right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
        persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
        freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
        receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
        applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
        country of nationality should have afforded him".  Lord  Hope  said
        "It is necessary to proceed in stages.  (i)  The  first  stage,  of
        course, is to consider  whether  the  applicant  is    indeed  gay.
        Unless he can establish that he is  of  that  orientation  he  will
        not be entitled to be treated as a member of the particular  social
        group. But I would regard this part of  the  test  as  having  been
        satisfied if the  applicant's  case  is  that  he  is  at  risk  of
        persecution because he is suspected  of  being  gay,  if  his  past
        history shows that this is in fact the case. (ii) The next stage is
        to examine a group of questions which  are  directed  to  what  his
        situation will be on return. This part of the inquiry  is  directed
        to what will happen in the future. The  Home  Office's  Country  of
        Origin report will provide the background.  There  will  be  little
        difficulty in holding that in countries such as Iran  and  Cameroon
        gays or persons who are believed to be gay are persecuted and  that
        persecution  is  something  that  may  reasonably  be  feared.  The
        question is  how  each  applicant,  looked  at  individually,  will
        conduct himself if returned and how others will react  to  what  he
        does. Those others will include everyone with whom he will come  in
        contact, in private as well as  in  public.  The  way  he  conducts
        himself may vary  from  one  situation  to  another,  with  varying
        degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to  conceal
        aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
        even from those whom he knows may disapprove of  it.  If  he  fears
        persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he  will  be
        entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal  to  resort  to
        concealment may be. The question what is reasonably  tolerable  has
        no part in this inquiry. (iii) On the other hand, the fact that the
        applicant will not be able to do in the country of his  nationality
        everything that he can do openly in the country whose protection he
        seeks is not the test.  As  I  said  earlier  (see  para  15),  the
        Convention was not directed to reforming the level of rights in the
        country of origin. So it would be wrong to approach  the  issue  on
        the basis that the purpose of the Convention is to guarantee to  an
        applicant who is gay that he can live as freely and as openly as  a
        gay person as he would be able to do if he were  not  returned.  It
        does not guarantee to everyone the human rights standards that  are
        applied by the receiving country  within  its  own  territory.  The
        focus throughout must be on what will  happen  in  the  country  of
        origin. (iv) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will
        in fact conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if  returned,  is
        to consider why he will do so. If this will simply be  in  response
        to social pressures or for cultural or religious reasons of his own
        choosing and not because of a fear of persecution,  his  claim  for
        asylum must be rejected. But if the reason why he  will  resort  to
        concealment is that he genuinely fears that otherwise  he  will  be
        persecuted, it will be necessary to consider whether that  fear  is
        well founded. (v) This is the final and conclusive  question:  does
        he have a well-founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he  has,
        the causative condition that Lord Bingham referred to in  Januzi  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426, para  5
        will have been established.  The  applicant  will  be  entitled  to
        asylum.
    15.  In HL (Malaysia) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
        [2012] EWCA Civ 834 it was held that  there  was  no  inconsistency
        between the guidance given by Lord Hope and by Lord  Rodger  in  HJ
        (Iran).  Lord  Rodger's  conclusion  that  the  Refugee  Convention
        protected an asylum seekers right to live freely and  openly  as  a
        gay man without fear of persecution was  entirely  consistent  with
        Lord Hope's statement that the Refugee Convention did not guarantee
        universal human rights.
    16. In LC (Albania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department & Anor
        [2017] EWCA Civ 351 it was held that the guidance set out in HJ  on
        the  approach  to  sexual  orientation  asylum  claims,   including
        consideration of whether a gay asylum seeker  would  conceal  their
        sexual orientation upon return to their country of origin  and  the
        reasons for concealment, was compatible with Directive 2004/83. The
        argument, which was not accepted, had been that if a person was gay
        or would be treated as gay by potential persecutors and if  someone
        who was openly gay would have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
        then the person should succeed, i.e. it was  wrong  to  proceed  to
        consider steps (iii) and (iv) of the HJ test as adumbrated by  Lord
        Rodger.



Discussion



The evidence


    17. The appellant  has  provided  three  witness  statements  dated  24
        January 2014, 5 November 2015 and 19 August 2016  the  contents  of
        which he stated are true.
    18. In his initial statement, the appellant stated he  originates  from
        Kukus. He has two siblings and an elder brother then aged 19 and  a
        sister.  He attended primary school in Kukes from 2004 to June 2013
        and a local secondary school from September 2013.
    19. The appellant states that from the age of 13/14 he started "feeling
        strange". He would play with his mother's make-up and lipstick  and
        on occasion even try on his mother's clothes and shoes describing a
        fascination in such matters and feeling  extremely  happy  when  he
        wore his mother's clothes, make-up and shoes. The appellant  stated
        his mother thought that was funny and would laugh at  him  but  his
        father was not amused and would get extremely cross with him, would
        slap him on occasions, and become extremely angry with him.
    20. The appellant stated he used to help his father in his cafe bar. He
        also  started  fantasising  about  boys  and  obtained  a  'strange
        fascination' when he wore his  mother's  clothes  and  make-up.  He
        stated that whenever his parents were not around and at least a few
        times a fortnight, in any event, he would undertake such activities
        which he would do so after locking the door.
    21. The appellant claims he was sexually  attracted  by  boys  although
        liked spending time with girls but  was  never  attracted  to  them
        sexually. The appellant states that whilst at secondary  school  he
        spent more time with a boy named Julian who he describes  as  being
        different from other boys and to  whom  he  became  attracted.  The
        appellant  claimed  in  November  2012  they  started  a   physical
        relationship.
    22. The appellant claimed that after he started the  relationship  with
        Julian he would often go to his house as they had more  privacy  as
        his parents were working. The appellant states that they would look
        at gay websites and gay porn on the Internet and that on 5 December
        2013,  while  surfing  the  Internet,  they  started  fondling  and
        caressing each other's private parts.  The  appellant  states  that
        suddenly, after they had taken off their clothes and were  fondling
        each other, the boy's father came in and caught them. The appellant
        stated they were both naked at the time  and  therefore  the  other
        boy's father immediately understood what they were doing.
    23. Julian's father is said to have started to shout and scream at them
        and started beating them with fists and hands. The appellant claims
        he was able to run away as Julian's  father  had  grabbed  his  son
        providing the opportunity. The appellant states that he immediately
        understood that since homosexuality is unacceptable in  Albania  he
        will be required to run away from Albania in order to save himself.
    24. The appellant states he went to his father's caf� bar to take  some
        money but when he went there he found his father by  the  front  of
        the restaurant. The appellant therefore went to the back  door  and
        open the drawer of the counter where money was  normally  kept  and
        took about 3000 New Lek from the drawer. The appellant  states  his
        father suddenly called his name, grabbed the appellant  around  his
        neck, and started to beat him. The appellant stated he attempted to
        strangle him and that his father was totally hysteric and  swearing
        at him and being abusive and accusing him of  humiliating  him  and
        bring a bad name to him and to the family by his activities.
    25. The appellant states his father told him that Julian's  father  had
        telephoned him and advised him what  he  had  seen.  The  appellant
        states his father then grabbed a knife and attacked him which  tore
        his jacket although the people in the coffee shop held  his  father
        back, otherwise the appellant asserts he would have killed him.
    26. The appellant stated he ran from the shop and went to the house  of
        another friend in a village where he  stayed  for  five  days.  The
        appellant claims the news of what happened spread and the family of
        his friend came to know about it and made him  leave  their  house.
        The appellant states he walked  to  Kukes  where  he  went  to  the
        Registry Office and applied  for  a  birth  certificate  which  was
        granted, after which, on 11 December 2013 (the same day) he crossed
        the border into Kosovo.
    27. The appellant claims the driver of the  minivan  in  which  he  was
        travelling told him about a place where  lorries  are  parked.  The
        appellant remained in Kosovo for two days and on 13  December  2013
        left Kosovo by lorry. The appellant claimed he would sneak  into  a
        lorry which travelled for three days before  reaching  the  Belgian
        border. The lorry stopped on the way but the appellant did not  get
        out. After reaching Belgium the appellant left the  lorry  and  got
        into  another  lorry  which  brought  him  to  the  United  Kingdom
        following which he claimed asylum.
    28. In his second witness statement, the appellant  comments  upon  the
        reasons for refusal letter and claims to have  had  two  homosexual
        relationships in the UK first with a man from Romania  lasting  two
        months and the second with a British man lasting  two  weeks  which
        the appellant claimed were sexual. The appellant stated he attended
        gay bars and clubs when he could afford to do so but avoided making
        friends with Albanians as classmates at the school he attends  pick
        on him for not having a girlfriend. The appellant claims he  cannot
        be open about his sexuality with Albanians in  the  UK  because  he
        fears he will be attacked.
    29. In the third statement of 19 August  2016  the  appellant  confirms
        that since making his second  witness  statement  he  has  had  one
        further same-sex relationship with an Italian man he met in  a  bar
        in Leicester Square in London.  The  relationship  was  sexual  and
        lasted for three months. The appellant states  there  has  been  no
        change in circumstances in Albania.
    30. In reply to questions put in examination in  chief,  the  appellant
        was asked about his mother's  reaction  to  his  activities  within
        their home which he claimed she seemed to  think  were  funny.  The
        appellant was asked  why  he  didn't  tell  his  mother  about  his
        feelings which the appellant confirmed was because he did not think
        it is acceptable.
    31. When asked about relationships other than those  disclosed  in  the
        witness statements the appellant stated he had had two others,  one
        in November 2016 which ended and the second one which lasted a week
        with a Greek national around Christmas time. Since  Christmas  2016
        the appellant confirmed he had not been in a relationship.
    32. The appellant handed a letter in on the day of the  hearing  headed
        'Peepal Tree - Developing Futures', dated 16  June  2017  which  is
        written by a Support Service Manager. The letter  states  that  the
        organisation currently supports and accommodate the  appellant  who
        was referred to their offices by the London Borough of Richmond  by
        whom he was initially supported as a 'Looked After Child' under the
        Children's Act 1989. The fourth paragraph of that letter states:

              "J is a very sensible  and  hard-working  young  person,  and
             throughout J's stay with our organisation  he  has  been  very
             well behaved. His engagement with staff has been very good and
             he enjoys a good  relationship  with  support  staff.  He  has
             always remained polite and respectful at his placement and  we
             have never had any concerns around him breaching the placement
             rules. Unfortunately, J has  experienced  difficulties  around
             his emotional well-being, and there are  times  when  he  will
             become quite  low.  His  worries  have  been  related  to  his
             previous experiences in Albania.  We  are  aware  that  J  had
             troubles due to his sexual orientation, and this continues  to
             play on his mind. We have identified local support groups  and
             have discussed this with J. Although he would dearly  like  to
             attend, he has been unable to do so as  he  fears  that  other
             Albanian young people may become aware that he is gay and this
             will upset the stability he has found. We  have  continued  to
             offer him support and guidance as we have found that there are
             times when he come become quite withdrawn and isolated"

    33. The letter refers to the excellent progress the appellant is making
        on a motor mechanics course as a  result  of  which  he  was  asked
        whether it meant he will be able to live in Tirana.  The  appellant
        asserts that in Tirana there is discrimination  against  people  of
        different sexual orientations and that he could not move there  and
        that they would disregard his education. The appellant claimed that
        the  community  did  not  accept  people  with   different   sexual
        orientations. Although the appellant has been educated  in  Albania
        he stated he had never known anyone to support gay rights or anyone
        coming to school to say they support such.
    34. It was put to the appellant that there  was  material  which  shows
        there are support groups, but not in the appellant's home area, and
        he was asked why he could not move and seek support in Tirana.  The
        appellant's response was that Tirana is not a big city and he would
        have to register there and that  his  family  will  find  out.  The
        appellant maintained he would have no support  and  kept  repeating
        that even if there were groups and organisations, they did not come
        to school to offer help and he had not heard of any groups as such.
    35. The appellant was asked why  there  was  nobody  in  attendance  to
        support him before the tribunal in cross examination by  Mr  Tufan.
        The appellant responded by stating that when he went to school last
        year many of his friends knew he was gay but that  he  discontinued
        the course as he was not allowed to continue to study. When it  was
        pointed out to the appellant that  there  had  been  two  or  three
        previous hearings before the tribunal and that it  did  not  appear
        that anyone was prepared to give evidence to  support  him  on  any
        other  occasion,  the  appellant  maintained  that  if  he  was  in
        education he would tell his friends and ask them to  give  evidence
        but that as he is not in education he did not have any friends.
    36. The appellant's evidence  had  been  previously  that  he  was  not
        interested in sport and that he preferred the company of girls  and
        dressing up in his  mother's  clothing  which  was  stated  by  the
        Presenting Officer to be contradicted by a letter  from  the  Royal
        Borough of Kingston  and  Richmond  dated  20  January  2017  which
        describe the appellant as keeping active and  having  expressed  an
        interest in football. The appellant's response was to state he  was
        not interested in playing football but said he was so he  would  be
        active and could go out with friends.
    37. The appellant claims not to have contacted anybody in Albania since
        he left the country which he stated was because he was  settled  in
        the UK. The appellant has not attempted to  contact  the  boy  with
        whom he claims to have been discovered in a  compromising  position
        in Albania.
    38. The appellant was asked by Mr Tufan why he was not able to give the
        surname of Julian. The appellant claimed he could not give it as he
        had not asked this individual his name and  that  they  would  just
        talk of his personal problems. The appellant was asked  whether  he
        knew the individuals father which he claimed he did, but when asked
        for the surname stated he did not know it. When asked  whether  the
        boy's father knew the appellant's father the appellant stated  that
        they had contact as the man was a builder and  did  work  on  their
        premises.
    39. The appellant was asked whether when  he  was  caught  by  Julian's
        father they had locked the door. The  appellant  claimed  the  main
        door to the house was locked but not the door  of  the  room  which
        they were in as they thought Julian's father was at work.
    40. The appellant confirmed when he was caught he had no clothes on and
        when asked how he was able to escape without any clothes he claimed
        that he grabbed his things as  the  man  was  dealing  with  Julian
        first.  When asked whether he ran out  of  the  house  without  any
        clothes the appellant claimed he put them on first.
    41. The appellant was asked about the time  it  took  him  to  get  his
        father's cafe and his claim that having arrived at the cafe he took
        300,000 Lak.  The appellant said he had lied, claiming that he  had
        stolen the money before, not for this person as he  had  taken  the
        money to go out. The appellant alleged his father told him  he  did
        not need the money and that he should take it.
    42. The appellant claimed his father did not see  him  take  the  money
        from the cafe as there were other workers there and his father  was
        not near the cash register.
    43. When asked about whether he worked in his  father's  cafe  and  the
        cost of a glass of coffee in the cafe the appellant claimed was  50
        new lac. It was put to the appellant that  with  a  cup  of  coffee
        costing 50Lac, the 3,000 new Lac he had taken would represent a lot
        of money being held on the premises, the appellant claimed  that  a
        cup of coffee cost the equivalent of 30p and 3,000 new Lac  equated
        to approximately �20.
    44. The appellant confirmed he has a cousin and relatives in Tirana who
        he had met previously but did not meet them in the house in Tirana.
        When asked whether the cousins wanted to  kill  him  the  appellant
        stated all members of the extended family held the same views.
    45. The appellant answered a number of  questions  in  a  detailed  re-
        examination before submissions were received from the advocates.


The country reports

    46. The appellant sought to rely upon an expert report  written  by  Ms
        Vickers who describes herself as an expert in Albanian affairs.
    47. In relation to any risk faced by the appellant, and from  whom,  Ms
        Vickers refers  to  the  significance  of  the  appellant's  family
        originating in the North-Eastern District of Kukes near the  border
        with Kosovo which is described as one  of  the  most  socially  and
        economically  deprived  areas  of  Albania  as  well  as  the  most
        culturally conservative. It  is  stated  the  predominantly  Muslim
        population still staunchly  adhere  to  strict  moral  codes  which
        strongly condemn all forms of homosexuality. Given the  social  and
        cultural background of the claimant's family it was stated it would
        not be unusual for his father to disown his son and  threatened  to
        kill him if he became  aware  of  the  appellant  having  a  sexual
        relationship with his friend Julian. It is said that  although  the
        reaction of the appellant's father may appear extreme,  within  the
        context of northern Albanian society and culture it is plausible.
    48. Ms Vickers states that such is the stigma attached to homosexuality
        that the claimant's actions would have severe ramifications for all
        members of his family.  If the community discovered  his  sexuality
        it was likely to become impossible for any unmarried  members  such
        as his brother and sister to find  an  acceptable  spouse  and  the
        whole family would be socially ostracised.
    49. It is written that one of the most prominent and  important  values
        of Albanian society  is  the  protection  of  personal  honour  and
        dignity that the good reputation of the  family  depends  upon  the
        respect of the community.
    50. The expert states that those bringing dishonour may be shunned  for
        work opportunities, not visited by other  families,  and  that  the
        appellant would be hounded from the family home  and  that  certain
        relatives would feel honour bound to try and kill him to "wash away
        the shame".
    51. The expert notes there is no legal limitation  for  gay  people  in
        Albania although  those  who  are  open  about  their  LGBT  sexual
        orientation have faced job loss, discrimination, threats  and  hate
        speech. Such persons are vitally invisible in  the  workplace.  The
        expert states that in the appellant's circumstances he will find it
        difficult to make a living given that unemployment is high and jobs
        are found through family and social connections rather  than  based
        upon merit. Ms Vickers notes that  in  2016  forty-three  cases  of
        discrimination  in  workplaces   and/or   discrimination   in   job
        recruitment and selection were reported to Aleanca LGBT. The expert
        states she is unaware of anywhere in  Albania  where  gay  men  can
        openly  socialise  and   conduct   relationships   and   that   all
        relationships have to be conducted clandestinely to avoid detection
        by family members or various forms of abuse and discrimination from
        society  at  large.  It  is  stated  there  are  no  gay  clubs  or
        neighbourhoods in Albania and virtually  no  one  is  public  about
        being LGBT. The expert  states  she  is  aware  of  groups  of  gay
        individuals meeting in Tirana but  they  do  so  in  a  secure  and
        discreet location away from outsiders although there is one bar  in
        Tirana called "Bunker 44" which  is  known  to  be  "gay  friendly"
        although is stated to be  frequented  by  mostly  by  tourists  and
        foreign expats who live in Tirana and is  in  the  area  where  the
        wealthiest and best educated Albanians socialise.
    52. A representative of the NGO Aleanca LGBT has stated hate  crime  is
        not widespread because it is difficult to  identify  most  gay  and
        lesbian people but when they    come out the  risk  of  becoming  a
        victim of hate crime is very  high.  Civil  society  groups  report
        regular incidents of homophobic violence and examples in 2009, 2011
        and 2013 are provided in the report.
    53. The expert states that while the Albanian government is under great
        international  pressure  and  has  taken  steps  to  improve  state
        protection those steps do not yet provide sufficient protection for
        an individual who feel they will be  harmed  by  non-state  actors.
        Discrimination against homosexuals by the police is said to  remain
        strong and there is  an  inherent  belief  among  the  majority  of
        Albanians that the police are not there to help  ordinary  citizens
        but merely instruments to assist control by the State.
    54. Hate crimes have been admitted to the criminal code but  there  has
        been almost no research or data collected on LGBT issues  for  hate
        crimes in Albania and much of the mistreatment or violence faced by
        LGBT people is not officially documented.
    55. It is noted that whether there is a willingness to implement  anti-
        gay discrimination laws remains questionable as Albanian  laws  are
        often not implemented.
    56. The author of the report notes at page 6:

              "Official support services for LGBT  people  in  Albania  are
             very limited with no social support networks  such  as  social
             workers or councillors and they are of little  assistance  for
             people facing difficulty. There are  four  NGO  organisations,
             all based in Tirana, which work specifically on  LGBT  issues:
             Aleanca, LGBT Pro, the Albanian Lesbian Bay  Association,  and
             Society for Gay Albania, although the latter two organisations
             are involved mainly  in  condom  distribution.  The  country's
             first and only residential shelter has been set up  in  Tirana
             for young LGBT people  who  are  victims  of  or  at  risk  of
             domestic violence, physical or  psychological.  However,  this
             one shelter with only eight beds (for four women and four  for
             men)  can  only  accommodate  a  virulent  limited  number  of
             individuals aged between 18 to 25 for a maximum period of  six
             months each. There are no LGBT  organisations  outside  Tirana
             and the current LGBT organisations have little capacity to  do
             out reach beyond Tirana. Thus the situation for  LGBT  persons
             outside the capital is bleak, but also within Tirana there  is
             little protection available for LGBT people."

    57. There is reference  to  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  suffered
        violent abuse at the hands of his father in relation to  which  the
        expert reports that alongside the rise in the  number  of  domestic
        abuse reports is the gradual development of activities  working  to
        guarantee protection for victims. There have been laws passed which
        authorise specific government bodies to directly  address  domestic
        violence for the first time in Albanian history.  In  the  expert's
        opinion, however, the effective  application  of  the  law  remains
        problematic since passing  there  have  been  challenges  regarding
        implementation as well  as  gaining  popular  cultural  acceptance,
        especially in northern and central Albania, where  the  problem  of
        domestic violence is both underreported yet widespread  and  deeply
        ingrained in traditional views on family  and  honour.  The  expert
        reports that despite measures being  taken  incidents  of  domestic
        violence are increasing and facilities to  deal  with  the  problem
        wholly inadequate with  only  a  handful  of  refuge  shelters.  In
        relation to the appellant the expert writes:

             "In theory, should the claimant return to Albania he would  be
             able to access various forms of social/welfare assistance,  in
             practice, however, he is likely to face numerous obstacles  in
             accessing any social services, support or protection available
             to him. Whilst domestic abuse NGO's are in place, the lack  of
             funding on every front severely limits their efforts. Much  of
             the current programming is funded solely by international NGOs
             and its sustainability is unpredictable.  The  Albanian  state
             provides a small amount of social assistance to nearly 20%  of
             its population to a system that allows a degree  of  community
             discretion in determining distribution. Nevertheless, a  large
             number of poor are excluded from social assistance. The system
             is hampered by the absence of a clear objective  criterion  to
             determine the size of the grants from the  centre  to  Commons
             and limited information that might be used to  implement  this
             criterion. Albania still has a subsistence-based culture  with
             high unemployment and access to housing and  employment  would
             be difficult for a relatively uneducated gay man such  as  the
             claimant with no family support."

    58. When considering sufficiency of protection, the expert writes:

             "Putting aside the issue of  corruption,  LGBT  people  remain
             reluctant to go to the police with their problems and view the
             police as a source of harassment rather  than  protection.  As
             with the general public,  apart  from  a  small  well-educated
             group in Tirana, there is low awareness of LGBT rights amongst
             the LGBT community itself. Therefore there are  no  guarantees
             that the claimant will be afforded assistance from  the  state
             if he is attacked and, short of him being actually killed, the
             police are unlikely to take any meaningful action  to  protect
             him."

    59. In the expert's opinion, it will be unwise  for  the  appellant  to
        return to his home area although also asserting the appellant would
        encounter problems in Tirana where he also  has  family  relatives.
        The expert, when discussing settlement relocation within Albania to
        Tirana refers to communities developing based  upon  neighbourhoods
        backing their own original district  and  that  it  would  be  very
        difficult for a person to remain  anonymous  and  being  gay  would
        considerably worsen the appellant's chances of been able to  settle
        anywhere outside Tirana where there is the  only,  albeit  limited,
        support network for LGBT people. The expert asserts  that  even  if
        the appellant returned to Tirana there was the risk that you  would
        be identified by other residents from the Kukes region as a  result
        of which he would run a high risk of been located by his father and
        other family members.
    60. The appellant raised in his own evidence the  issue  of  relocation
        and registration which the expert confirms the  appellant  will  be
        obliged to do, as every Albanian citizen must, if he relocated.  It
        is stated that the register is open to all and can be  accessed  by
        anyone and that as soon as the appellant registered in  a  shelter,
        home or college, the requirement to update the Civil Register would
        mean that he will be easily traced by anyone wishing  to  find  him
        making finding a safe and secure shelter at an undisclosed location
        where confidentiality will be maintained is very difficult.
    61. Country Information from the  UNHCR  has  also  been  provided  and
        considered.


Findings

    62. In relation to the first question posed by Mr  Collins  and  in  HJ
        (Iran), is the  appellant  homosexual?  The  only  direct  evidence
        available to the Tribunal is the oral evidence  of  the  appellant.
        There is  no  corroborative  evidence  made  available  today  from
        individuals with whom the appellant claims to  have  had  a  sexual
        relationship or evidence from classmates  or  those  he  has  known
        previously who he states are aware he is gay.
    63. I do not accept as plausible the appellant's  explanation  for  not
        approaching his previous  classmates,  who  he  claims  would  have
        corroborative information, on the basis that he was  no  longer  in
        education as he was unable to continue his course as  a  result  of
        his immigration status. This is the fourth hearing of this  appeal,
        at  various  levels,   the   appellant   is   assisted   by   legal
        representation, yet no effort appears to have been made to approach
        individuals who are likely to have been contactable either  through
        the course which the appellant wanted to attend but could not which
        they had attended, or via telephone numbers or any other  available
        means of  communication,  including  the  appellant  visiting  such
        individuals. Applications for orders compelling the  attendance  of
        such  persons  could  have  been  arranged  but  nothing  has  been
        forthcoming.
    64. It also appears that notwithstanding evidence of  support  services
        being available for the appellant in the United Kingdom  no  effort
        has been made by the appellant to engage such  services  to  assist
        with  any  specific  issues  that  may  arise  relating  to  sexual
        identity. There is no evidence that  seeking  such  services  would
        have compromised his position with Albanians in the United  Kingdom
        are such services are, by their nature, confidential.
    65. The appellant claims he was aware  of  his  sexuality  as  a  young
        teenager and it is plausible as  he  describes  that  he  may  have
        experienced not only physical but also  emotional  changes  through
        puberty  which  may  have  led  to  a  developing  attraction.  The
        difficulty for any court or tribunal in  a  case  involving  sexual
        orientation or religious belief is that what a  judicial  body  has
        been asked to do is to look into a person's heart or  soul  to  try
        and ascertain that what they claim about their feelings and beliefs
        is true. Proceedings in this jurisdiction are, however, adversarial
        and the burden falls upon the appellant in this case  to  establish
        to the required lower standards that what he says about his  sexual
        self-identity is true.
    66. A  person  does  not  establish  their  inner  feelings  solely  by
        reference to physical sexual conduct.  A  lot  of  the  appellant's
        evidence referred to physical acts of putting up make up,  dressing
        up in his mother's clothing and entering into sexual  relationships
        when organisations such  as  Stonewall  make  it  clear  that  such
        activities are not determinative of  a  person's  sexual  identity.
        There are many examples of  people  both  within  public  life  and
        elsewhere either revealing their sexual orientation  as  a  gay  or
        lesbian person at a later date or being 'outed' by members  of  the
        press when previously they have  led  what  many  assess  as  being
        'perfectly normal lives' with no indication to  the  outside  world
        that they have engaged in  the  type  of  behaviour  the  appellant
        refers to.
    67. The appellant also claims on the one hand to act discreetly  as  he
        does not want Albanian nationals in the UK to know of his  sexually
        orientation yet also claims to have attended gay bars in London and
        have met individuals with whom he has engaged in same-sex activity.
        The chance of being discovered in places like Leicester  Square,  a
        popular area within London, is real and questions whether these are
        the actions of a person claiming  to  need  to  conduct  themselves
        discreetly as a result of a credible real  risk  of  discovery  may
        arise.
    68. Mr Tufan's point regarding the appellant claiming not to like sport
        or to be active yet advising others that he liked football is not a
        determinative point but perhaps a minor issue that arose  from  the
        evidence as there is no published literature to indicate  a  person
        who claims to be homosexual cannot at a later date develop a liking
        for sporting activities such as football, especially as  they  grow
        mature and may have changed interests and may have  greater  access
        to  sports  activities  on  television  than  they  may  have   had
        previously.
    69. The First-tier judge referred to the claim by the appellant that he
        went with Julian when the door to their room was  not  locked.  The
        appellant's evidence was that he did not tell his mother about  his
        feelings as he knew that how he felt was "wrong" and was  concerned
        about the consequences, yet claims not to have taken  the  simplest
        of precautions, which was to lock the door of  the  room  in  which
        these activities were taking place. The appellant describes  having
        taken measures  to  prevent  discovery  when  looking  at  material
        previously, elsewhere, but not on the occasion where he claims  the
        events arose that give rise to the alleged real risk on  return  to
        Albania.
    70. The appellant when questioned  about  this  in  his  oral  evidence
        claimed that the front door to the  property  was  locked  but  the
        bedroom door they were in was not which suggests an awareness of  a
        real risk yet with only minimal precautions  being  taken.  Locking
        the door suggest that what occurred was not a "heat of the  moment"
        event where such thoughts may have not entered  the  minds  of  the
        individuals concerned but rather an activity that it was known  was
        going to occur in relation to which precautions needed to be taken.
        Notwithstanding this the appellant claim such precautions were  not
        taken.
    71. The appellant claims they were discovered by  Julian's  father  who
        beat them both but that he was able to escape when the man  grabbed
        his son. It is  not  implausible  in  such  a  situation  that  the
        appellant would have been able to escape but it must be  remembered
        that the appellant claimed that he was naked at  the  time  he  was
        discovered. The  appellant  claims  to  have  run  in  his  earlier
        statement when discovered  but  in  reply  to  questions  in  cross
        examination today claimed that he was able to stop and get  dressed
        and then escape. There is an arguable contradiction between a claim
        to have run for a fear of one's life and the need to get out of the
        property but also being able to pause to get dressed before running
        without any adverse consequences being suffered at that point  from
        this angry parent.
    72. Mr Tufan in his submissions also referred to the point in  evidence
        regarding the  money  the  appellant  claims  was  taken  from  his
        father's till. Previously the appellant claimed he took  the  money
        from the till before his  father  attacked  him  yet  in  his  oral
        evidence he changed his account.
    73. It was also submitted that the appellant claims  to  have  been  at
        school with Julian and that Julian's father, a local  builder,  had
        worked for his father, yet the appellant was unable to confirm  the
        surname of these individuals was itself damaging to the appellant's
        credibility.
    74. In response, it was submitted that  the  reasons  provided  by  the
        Secretary of State in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  are  not
        consistent with the alleged relationship and a misunderstanding  as
        asserted. It is also alleged the refusal does not engage  with  the
        claim made by the appellant. The core  of  the  claim  was  that  a
        relationship developed in September  which  became  physical  on  5
        December when they were  discovered  by  Julian's  father.  It  was
        asserted on the appellant's behalf that his  account  was  credible
        and the appellant  had  discharged  the  burden  upon  him  to  the
        required standard to prove the truth of what he was saying.
    75. The naming issue is a relevant aspect of the  evidence.  Whilst  it
        would be easy in cases of this nature to accept what the  appellant
        says is what he feels without more, there is still the  requirement
        for any decision-maker to consider all the evidence relied upon  by
        both parties and to ascertain how  the  individual  pieces  of  the
        jigsaw fit together. There is nothing to say that  an  individual's
        statement  regarding  their  feelings  and   attractions   is   the
        determinative factor although it may  be  a  matter  that  warrants
        great weight being placed upon such a statement in the  absence  of
        evidence that might show less weight should be attached.
    76. The appellant was asked about Julian. Whilst it is accepted that as
        a Christian name, as that term is understood in the United Kingdom,
        it is not disputed that Albanian nationals may have this first name
        as indeed a well-known Albanian footballer does.  It  is  unlikely,
        and has not been made out, that a person's identity as a member  of
        a family group in Albania is established by their first name.  What
        may be of more importance is their family name as strong  families,
        through marriage, home, and children are of importance  in  Albania
        especially in the more traditional northern regions from where  the
        appellant claims to originate. It has been said  that  "the  family
        unit is a ribbon that runs through the unique tapestry of Albania's
        social fabric".  It is also important to consider the importance of
        a family identity if a dispute arises. Since the 15th century, many
        people  in  Albania,  and  particularly  in  the  more  traditional
        northern area, have lived their lives by a social code  called  the
        Kanun, which instructs  followers  on  issues  including  marriage,
        religion and ownership.  When  someone  suffers  a  humiliation  or
        dishonour, the code allows killing - or  blood  revenge.  The  code
        traditionally directs that male members of the  family  in  dispute
        are those against whom revenge may be taken making it important  to
        identify who  such  members  are.   Family  or  clan  identity  are
        therefore key issues.
    77. Who a person is and with which family or clan they  are  identified
        is itself part of the fabric of Albanian society and a matter  that
        one would anticipate would be known to  those  in  an  individual's
        area. Without such knowledge, how could a  person  know  they  were
        speaking to associating with or proposing to  marry  an  individual
        from an opposing clan who may be the subject of a blood feud and in
        relation to whom any such association could  bring  dishonour  upon
        themselves or their own family. Without knowing the identity of  an
        individual how could a person know that they  are  not  associating
        with persons that may put their own safety or lives at risk.
    78. Despite the issue of personal identity being of such importance the
        appellant claimed not to know Julian's full name claiming  he  only
        know him by his first name. This was  despite  being  in  the  same
        class at school in an area with a relatively small population where
        it is not arguably unreasonable to have expected the  appellant  to
        have known these details. This lack of knowledge was reinforced  by
        an answer in cross examination in which the appellant  claimed  not
        to know the family name or second name of Julian's  father  despite
        this person  being  a  builder  in  their  local  area  and  having
        undertaken work for his father. Indeed, without knowing the  family
        name or family ties how would  a  person  in  Albania  be  able  to
        establish between the family connections of  two  people  with  the
        first name 'Julian'.
    79. The importance of such personal  identity  is  that  the  appellant
        identifies the real risk as arising  through  his  connection  with
        Julian and  that  his  involvement  with  this  individual  is  the
        manifestation of his true feelings. This is therefore a cornerstone
        of his claim which, if not credible, arguably casts doubt upon  the
        core aspect.
    80. It may be in the United Kingdom there has been a change  in  social
        attitudes with less formality  concerning  naming  conventions  and
        more use of Christian  names  even  on  initial  meetings  in  some
        commercial organisations, but the importance of the  surname  still
        remains the means of identifying family connections and a  person's
        identity.
    81. It also arguably irrational for the  appellant  to  have  responded
        that he did not know Julian's full name as all they did  was  speak
        about his problems. Part of the appellant's case is  that  he  knew
        that how he felt and what he was doing was wrong as  it  is  common
        knowledge in the traditional areas in Albania, where Islam  is  the
        dominant faith, that  same-sex  relationships  are  forbidden.  The
        appellant claims that rather than establish who the person actually
        is and family connections they spoke about private matters together
        which could, in a society such of Albania, itself give  rise  to  a
        real risk of serious harm especially  if  such  conversations  were
        undertaken with the "wrong family" member.
    82. Mr Collins at the error of law hearing was critical of  the  First-
        tier Judge for not factoring into the assessment  of  the  evidence
        the feelings that may have  existed  in  young  people  discovering
        their sexual identity and how that would factor  into  the  factual
        matrix  rather  than  approaching  the  matter  on  an  unemotional
        evidential basis. It is accepted that emotions are  strong  driving
        forces and that with any young couple or  individual  growing  from
        childhood into maturity and eventually adulthood these are  factors
        that  must  be  properly  considered.  They  cannot,  however,   be
        considered in isolation and but must be  considered  together  with
        all the other aspects of the evidence.
    83. It is not found to be credible that the appellant  would  not  know
        the full family  identity  of  the  individual  concerned  if  they
        associated in the school environment for some  time  prior  to  the
        events the appellant claims gives rise to a real risk occurred, and
        were as close in terms of attraction as alleged.
    84. It is also noted above  that  in  cross-examination  the  appellant
        changed his evidence in relation to the money that was  taken  from
        his father's till. What is not  explained  is  how  the  relatively
        small amount of money the appellant claims he had  in  his  initial
        evidence was sufficient to allow him to leave Albania and travel to
        the United Kingdom in terms of even  meeting  the  costs  of  basic
        necessities. The amount of money taken, by reference to the cost of
        a cup of coffee, does not establish how the appellant was even able
        to survive with so little money. I find his account of this journey
        to the United Kingdom also raises credibility issues.
    85. The first question, is the appellant telling the truth  about  past
        events as claimed, can perhaps be rephrased in an evidential  sense
        and replaced by the question  "has  the  appellant  discharged  the
        burden of proof upon  him  to  the  lower  standard  applicable  to
        appeals of this nature to establish the truth about past events  as
        claimed". My finding on this particular issue is that although  the
        appellant has maintained  his  claim  in  relation  to  his  sexual
        identity and the  incident  with  Julian  there  are  a  number  of
        evidential concerns which when taken together lead to  the  primary
        finding that the requisite burden of proof has not been  discharged
        to prove the appellant is gay, as claimed,  or  that  he  would  be
        treated  as  gay  by  potential  persecutors  in  his  country   of
        nationality.
    86.  Whilst  others  have  recorded  the  appellant  facing   emotional
        difficulties since arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  reasons
        advanced for the same by the appellant have not been  shown  to  be
        made out to the required standard.
    87. Some  organisations  suggest  that  as  proof  of  an  individual's
        sexually orientation is difficult to  establish  on  an  evidential
        basis, based upon the concept of  difficulty  in  proving  how  one
        feels, this first step should be bypassed and  the  focus  be  upon
        whether a person would face a real risk on return if what they  are
        claiming is true. Whilst such an approach may simplify the  process
        and be attractive to some, in adversarial proceedings such as those
        before the Immigration Tribunal it is  necessary  to  maintain  the
        structured approach to these cases set out in HJ (Iran) and  answer
        the  questions  posed  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  that  important
        decision.
    88. The second question  posed  by  Mr  Collins  is  dependent  upon  a
        precedent finding namely that first question  is  answered  in  the
        appellant's favour. This is the importance of  the  words  "if  so"
        before "does the appellant have a well-founded fear of  persecution
        or serious harm from his and/or the named individual's family".  As
        the primary finding is not in the appellant's favour this  question
        does not arise as the appellant has failed to establish  the  basis
        on which he claims to face a real risk of harm return is  credible.
        As no other cause of risk was established  the  appellant  has  not
        discharged the burden of proof upon him to the required standard to
        show a well-founded fear of  serious  harm  from  his  or  Julian's
        families.
    89. The issue of sufficiency of protection was  clearly  considered  in
        the earlier Country Guidance case and whilst not a relevant  factor
        in this case where no real risk in a home area has been established
        requiring the protection of the authorities, it  is  accepted  that
        the police may in the more traditional areas  be  less  willing  to
        intervene and assist than in areas such as Tirana. The  appellant's
        expert sets out her own observations in relation to the attitude of
        the police but whether there is an adequacy of  protection  to  the
        Horvath  standard  will  have  to  be  considered  in  a  different
        decision.
    90. What this Tribunal will comment upon by way of observation  is  the
        comment by the country expert in relation to  internal  flight  and
        options available to those who do face a threat from family members
        as a result of sexual orientation and whether there exists a viable
        and reasonable internal relocation option.  In any case this  is  a
        fact specific assessment. The country material speaks of  same  sex
        individuals facing harassment and discrimination  from  members  of
        the population  and  the  greater  risk  faced  by  those  who  are
        transgender possibly because the appearance  of  some  makes  their
        position and self-identity more visible to others. It  is  accepted
        that some politicians have openly expressed hostility against  LGBT
        individuals, one particularly vocal politician having  appeared  on
        television expressing views that in many countries would  have  him
        arrested   for   inciting   hatred,   violence,   and    expressing
        discriminatory views and opinions.
    91. The fact action has been taken is demonstrated by the reference  in
        the appellant's expert report to the  activities  of  the  Albanian
        State, which is seeking EU membership, including the creation of  a
        shelter. Whilst the author of the  report  seems  to  minimise  the
        importance of this facility,  providing  information  that  is  not
        wholly accurate, it is an important development.  The  shelter  was
        set up in December 2014 at an undisclosed  location  within  Tirana
        with the support of the  United  States  Agency  for  International
        Development, the British Embassy in Tirana and the  Albert  Kennedy
        Trust. A plaque on the building also confirms that it has been made
        possible through Assist Impact and in partnership with  the  Aleaca
        LGBT and ProlGBT.
    92. Whilst the shelter may have a limited number of beds its purpose is
        to enable young people aged 18 to 25 facing rejection and  violence
        at the hands of  members  of  their  family  due  to  their  sexual
        orientation to avoid having to face homelessness and to live within
        a supportive and protective environment. Comment by the expert that
        there is no assistance is factually incorrect as the shelter has an
        allocated social worker  responsible  for  assisting  young  people
        staying there in obtaining accommodation, employment,  and  medical
        and other assistance with a view to  enabling  them  to  leave  the
        shelter and live within Albanian society, more likely than  not  to
        be within Tirana, free from harm. Funding is  provided  by  the  US
        Department for International Development.
    93. Those  in  the  shelter  include  individuals  abandoned  by  their
        families and provides  medical  referrals  for  both  physical  and
        psychological issues. Its stated aim is to support provide  support
        to enable people to go out into the community  and  live  a  normal
        life.
    94. Mr Collinson's initial submissions accepted the appellant would not
        face a real risk in Tirana and it was not made out that an approach
        through the respondent and connections  with  the  British  Embassy
        would not enable the appellant to  be  allocated  a  place  at  the
        shelter or for appropriate facilities to be made available  if  his
        claim was found to be credible. It  was  not  therefore,  arguably,
        made out that even if the appellant faced a real risk in  his  home
        area that there will not be a viable internal relocation option  to
        Tirana that it is reasonably for him to avail himself of in all the
        circumstances. Although the appellant claimed he had  a  cousin  in
        Tirana his evidence in relation to any real risk arising  from  the
        same was not at all persuasive and appears to have been  introduced
        solely as a means of trying to exclude Tirana as a  possible  place
        of relocation. The appellant did not establish any real risk in the
        Albanian capital from family members or associates or any real risk
        of harm sufficient  to  amount  to  persecution  entitling  to  the
        appellant to a grant of international protection for any reason.
    95. The alleged risk of being discovered as a result  of  the  need  to
        register on the civil register is a matter  that  would  have  been
        considered by those running the shelter who provide facilities  and
        systems to specifically protect individuals from their families.
    96. The appellant's assertion that skills he has developed as  a  motor
        mechanic and training in the United Kingdom will be of  no  benefit
        has no arguable merit as Albania, like many European countries, has
        cars and lorries and it is not made out the appellant does not have
        transferable skills. These are, also, areas in  relation  to  which
        support services are available.
    97. The appellant has not established an  entitlement  to  a  grant  of
        international  protection  based  upon  a  real  risk  of   serious
        suffering serious harm from the Albanian State or from  individuals
        from which the State is unable or unwilling to provide an  adequacy
        of protection or that it will be unreasonable for the appellant  to
        return  to  Albania  pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE(vi)   of   the
        Immigration Rules.
    98. Having considered the matter with the required  degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny and having  reflected  upon  both  the  submissions  made,
        country conditions, and evidence received, in light of the  failure
        of  the  appellant  to  substantiate  his  case,  this  appeal   is
        dismissed.

Decision

    99. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remake  the  decision
        as follows. This appeal is dismissed.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 3 October 2017

