

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/07687/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        | Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 October 2016                      | On 19 October 2016                |



                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    H F N
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G P McGowan, of Quinn, Martin & Langan,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bannerman, promulgated on 11 August 2016, dismissing his appeal against
    refusal of recognition as a refugee from Iran, as a gay man.

 2. The gist of the 1st ground is as follows.  The judge focused solely  on
    the appellant not being a practising homosexual in the UK,  overlooking
    his evidence of the process of discovering his sexuality  in  Iran  and
    his explanations for  not  disclosing  his  sexuality  in  the  UK.  At
    paragraph 51 the judge said there  was  "no  evidence  at  all  of  any
    involvement of [the appellant] in any homosexual community or attending
    any gay clubs etc. in the UK.  This  finding  is  predicated  upon  the
    judge's personal assumptions that to be gay requires to  be  constantly
    practising sexuality, part of a  homogenous  homosexual  community  and
    attend specific venues which is not only a worrying  assumption  for  a
    judge to make but... entirely  irrational...  so  unreasonable  and  so
    beyond any range of reasonable findings available to  judge  that  they
    must be considered to constitute an error of law".

 3. The 2nd ground criticises paragraph 56  of  the  decision,  thus.   The
    judge found that the appellant was unable  to  provide  details  of  an
    arrest warrant and did not find his claim that the police attended  his
    house credible "particularly in the complete absence  of  any  evidence
    other than its own claim that this  happened".  This  placed  upon  the
    appellant a standard of proof requiring  him  to  corroborate  his  own
    evidence by evidence from a secondary source, and failed to  take  into
    account the appellant's evidence and the background evidence  regarding
    the raid on his house, lack of certainty as  to  whether  warrants  are
    handed to family members, and absence of fairness  within  the  Iranian
    judiciary, particularly in relation to  homosexual  cases.   There  was
    clear evidence to support the appellant's lack of knowledge  about  the
    warrant, failure to take account of which amounted to error of law.

 4. In a rule 24 response respondent submits as follows.  It  was  open  to
    judge to conclude the appellant's lack of engagement with anyone in the
    UK on the subject of his  sexual  orientation  for  the  near  two-year
    period since his arrival was  damaging  to  his  credibility  when  set
    against his allegedly risk-taking behaviour in  Iran.  The  judge  took
    further adverse credibility points at paragraphs 54 and 55  which  were
    clearly  open  to  him.  The  appellant  was  not  obliged  to  provide
    corroborative evidence, "but  given  his  claim  that  his  father  was
    prepared to assist him to avoid coming to harm it was open to the judge
    to conclude that corroborative evidence could have  been...  provided".
    The determination contained a number of well-reasoned findings  and  no
    material errors of law were identified.

 5. Under rule 25 the appellant replies on these lines.  HJ (Iran)  v  SSHD
    [2010] UKSC 31 is relied upon in relation to stereotyping.  On  further
    credibility maters, it was  not  necessarily  incredible  that  someone
    presenting at Accident and Emergency might be seen  immediately;  there
    was no evidence or examination by the respondent on how far the  police
    station was from the hospital, or whether police officers were  in  the
    vicinity, or whether the  appellant's  friend  alleged  assault;  these
    matters were not within the appellant's knowledge; it was the  duty  of
    the judge "to speculate favourably for the appellant rather than simply
    to treat the evidence as incredible"; the evidence was not  beyond  the
    realms of possibility.  The judge said  that  had  the  appellant  been
    found credible that would have led to an entirely  different  decision,
    so the question was whether the judge erred in his reasons for  finding
    the appellant not to be homosexual.

 6. The oral submissions by Mr McGowan followed the lines  above.  He  said
    that the damage was done at paragraph 51, where the judge founded  upon
    5 issues, all of which were of the nature condemned as stereotyping  in
    HJ at paragraph 78. The judge had been referred to Dutch  authority  to
    similar effect, and also for the proposition that the appellant  should
    not be found to lack credibility merely because he did not rely on  his
    declared sexual orientation on the 1st occasion he was given to set out
    his claim for protection. Ground 2 disclosed that it was quite possible
    that an arrest warrant might exist for the appellant as he claimed. The
    judge had engaged in speculation.

 7. Mr Mullen submitted that everything the judge set out at  paragraph  51
    was factually  correct.   Although  those  remarks  followed  upon  the
    statement  of  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  not
    credible, they were not to be read as his reasons, or sole reasons, for
    reaching that conclusion. That was clear from reading the determination
    as a whole, particularly paragraphs 53 to 58.  The  appellant  did  not
    challenge the specific reasons the judge gave in those  paragraphs  for
    not  accepting  the  appellant's  evidence.  The  grounds,   on   close
    inspection, were only challenges to the relative weight the judge  gave
    to items of evidence and disagreement with his conclusion,  dressed  up
    under  the  heading  of  legal  error.  The  judge  did  not  rely   on
    stereotyping, but  simply  recorded  matters  of  which  there  was  no
    evidence, quite correctly.  The  grounds  overstated  the  significance
    given to that. No error of law was demonstrated.

 8. Mr McGowan in response said that the appellant had given reasons why he
    did not engage in any homosexual activity in the UK. He  was  concerned
    that information might make its way back to  Iran,  and  worried  about
    homophobia within the Iranian community in Glasgow. The judge  did  not
    deal with these matters in this decision, nor with  how  the  appellant
    came to realise in Iran that he is gay. His consideration therefore was
    based on stereotypical assumptions. If the judge  did  not  think  that
    these matters were the reason for his negative decision, they need  not
    have been mentioned. They were not simply in the background.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. The grounds and submissions for the appellant in my view do not  fairly
    represent the FtT's decision, and they overstate the judge's duties  in
    his favour.

11. It is correct that a judge should not found upon stereotypes, but  that
    is not the issue with which Lord Rodger was concerned at  paragraph  78
    of HJ.  He was dealing there with the right to live freely  and  openly
    as a gay man, a point which he went on to "illustrate ... with  trivial
    stereotypical examples from British society".

12. The judge did not say  or  imply  that  gay  men  must  be  "constantly
    practising sexuality, part of a  homogenous  homosexual  community  and
    attend specific venues".  The assumptions alleged by the grounds  might
    amount to error of law, perhaps even to irrationality as  alleged,  but
    the grounds read into the decision matters which are simply not there.

13. The judge was dealing with those aspects of the case in the context not
    only of credibility but also of the  submission  that  the  appellant's
    conduct was such that he would face no  persecution  in  Iran  even  if
    homosexual (paragraph 31; an alternative on which the  judge  makes  no
    ultimate finding, but which he does say would likely have gone  in  the
    appellant's favour; paragraphs 52 and 59).  The judge's remarks are all
    a correct reflection of the evidence.

14. There is no duty on a judge to "speculate favourably" for an appellant.
     Appellants may in some circumstances be entitled  to  the  benefit  of
    doubt, but judges generally are tasked with explaining whether  or  not
    appellants have established their case, to the low standard applicable.

15. The decision is to be read fairly and as a whole.  The conclusion  that
    the appellant is not credible is explained over several paragraphs, not
    only paragraph 51.  It is optional  whether  to  state  the  conclusion
    before or after the reasons.

16. The appellant was found to be an unreliable witness  on  all  essential
    aspects of his claim, including his alleged homosexuality.   The  judge
    did not misconceive there to be any legal requirement of corroboration.
     He gave several sensible reasons  for  his  adverse  conclusion.   The
    grounds in my opinion fail to show that conclusion to have involved the
    making of any error on a point of law.  They do not amount to more than
    a valiant reassertion of the case on the facts.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


            [pic]


            18 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




