

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/07149/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |  Decision Promulgated           |
|On 3rd May 2016                           |  On 6th June 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                   s a m s
                         (AnonymiTY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A M Ismail, Eurasia Legal Services (Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction  in  relation  to  the
appellant because of the nature of the case.  I consider it  appropriate  to
make a similar order in the Upper Tribunal under Procedural  Rule  14(1)  to
prohibit the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  members
of the public to identify the appellant.  To give effect to this  order  the
appellant is to be referred to by the initials above.



 1. Before I can discuss the substance of this appeal I  must  address  two
    preliminary matters.

 2. The appellant sought to recover her costs in relation  to  the  aborted
    hearing that was due to take place on 21 March 2016.  I have  no  power
    to award such costs because the appeal was adjourned as  no  judge  was
    available, the judge who was due to hear the  appeal  being  unable  to
    attend at very short notice.

 3. The appellant sought an adjournment of the hearing on 3 May 2016 so she
    could be represented by counsel of choice, Mr Jafferji.  The reason for
    the request was to save  the  appellant  additional  expense  since  Mr
    Jafferji had been instructed previously and was familiar with the case.
     An earlier application was refused on  papers  because  there  was  no
    reason why the appellant should have counsel of choice  and  there  was
    time to instruct another advocate.  The repeat application was  opposed
    by Mr Mills on the grounds that Mr Ismail was capable of presenting the
    appellant's case and he was present at the hearing.

 4. I refused to adjourn for the following combination of  reasons.  I  was
    not satisfied that the appellant's legal representatives have  properly
    searched for an alternative advocate following the earlier  refusal  to
    adjourn.  Mr Ismail confirmed he had approached only one or  two  other
    preferred  counsel  rather  than  making  wider  and  more  appropriate
    enquiries.   I  was  not  satisfied,  therefore,  that  no  alternative
    advocate could be found.   I  was  satisfied  Mr  Ismail  was  able  to
    represent the appellant, having had conduct of the appeal in the First-
    tier Tribunal.  Further delay would not be in the interests  of  either
    the appellant or the respondent.  After announcing my decision, I  gave
    Mr  Ismail  time  to  liaise  with  his  client  and  to  finalise  his
    preparations.

 5. The appellant was born  on  5  September  2001  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.  She came to the UK on 17 July 2013  as  a  child  visitor.
    She came to the UK with her  mother.   Since  coming  to  the  UK,  the
    appellant's mother has established that she is  a  British  citizen  by
    descent and therefore has a  right  of  abode.   The  appellant  sought
    asylum to remain in  the  UK  and  at  the  same  time  relied  on  her
    relationship with her mother.

 6. On 10 April 2015 the respondent refused the appellant's protection  and
    human rights claims.  Her appeal against those decisions was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham in a decision and reasons statement
    that was promulgated on 24 September 2015.

 7. It is against this decision the appellant applies, permission to appeal
    having been granted by Designated Judge Garratt on 22 October 2015.

 8. I turn to the grounds of  appeal.   The  appellant  does  not  seek  to
    challenge Judge  Graham's  findings  that  she  is  not  a  refugee  or
    otherwise in need of international protection.  The appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal centres on  three  issues,  which  are  interrelated  to  some
    extent.  The first is that the judge erred in  her  assessment  of  the
    best interests of the appellant who was (and is)  a  child.   Secondly,
    that the judge erred in finding that article  8  of  the  human  rights
    convention was not engaged.  Finally, the judge erred by not making any
    findings in relation  to  whether  the  appellant  benefited  from  the
    Zambrano principle.

 9. Having heard from Mr Ismail and Mr Mills, I have reached the  following
    conclusions.

10. The appellant raises two specific criticisms of Judge Graham's findings
    in relation to the assessment of the appellant's best  interests.   The
    first is that the judge was wrong to  limit  herself  to  the  approach
    taken by the Upper Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed.   Although  I  acknowledge
    that the case law of the Upper Tribunal and senior courts  in  relation
    to best interests of children is extensive, there is nothing to suggest
    that the approach set out in Azimi-Moayed is not  a  good  approach  to
    adopt.  In fact, it identifies an approach  which  is  consistent  with
    that suggested by the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) & Ors v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  In light of these considerations,  I  reject  the
    appellant's claim that the judge should not have followed Azimi-Moayed.
     It sets out general principles and is consistent in  approach  with  a
    litany of cases dealing with such issues.

11. The second complaint is that  the  judge  failed  to  give  appropriate
    weight to the nature of the relationship between the appellant and  her
    mother, who is a British citizen  living  in  the  UK.   The  appellant
    argues that her mother has been her primary carer throughout  her  life
    and that to expect the appellant to return to Bangladesh into the  care
    of her father disregards this.  In light of how  the  argument  is  now
    presented, the issue is whether Judge Graham was right to find that the
    appellant had failed to establish that her relationship to  her  mother
    was particularly strong (see paragraph 45 of Judge Graham's decision).

12. I am satisfied there is nothing in this complaint because it  was  open
    to Judge Graham to reach the conclusions she  drew  from  the  lack  of
    evidence provided.  The appellant had failed to show that it was in her
    best interests to remain with her mother.  Although the  appellant  has
    been in the care of her mother since arriving  in  the  UK,  there  was
    nothing to establish that this was  the  case  when  the  family  lived
    together in Bangladesh or that  her  father  in  Bangladesh  could  not
    adequately care for her there.  This was a case where the  parents  had
    chosen to live in separate countries and this gave rise to the question
    of with whom the child should live.  The  evidence  did  not  show  she
    should remain in the care of her mother.

13. It follows from the above that I do not find any error of  law  in  the
    way Judge Graham assessed the best interests of the appellant  and  how
    she decided the appeal in relation to those issues.  Recalling that the
    appellant entered the UK on  17  July  2013  as  a  child  visitor  and
    therefore she could not benefit from paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), the issue
    of her removal had to be considered under article 8  directly.   It  is
    clear from paragraphs 42 to 49 of her decision  and  reasons  statement
    that this is exactly what Judge Graham did and that  she  followed  all
    relevant legal guidance.

14.  I  accept,  however,  that  Judge  Graham  did  not  engage  with  the
    appellant's argument relating to Zambrano.  Although it  is  not  clear
    this argument  was  actively  pursued  at  the  hearing,  there  is  no
    indication that it was withdrawn.  The points appear in paragraph 16 of
    the appellant's skeleton argument dated 7 August 2015 and  I  can  only
    conclude that Judge Graham did not have regard to  that  argument  even
    though she indicates  at  paragraph  27  that  she  took  the  skeleton
    argument fully into account.

15. Failing to engage with a relevant argument is an error  of  law.   This
    conclusion does not mean that the decision and reasons statement is set
    aside.  It falls to me to decide whether the failure is material to the
    outcome.

16. It is difficult to see how the principles established by the  Court  of
    Justice in Zambrano can benefit the appellant.  The  Court  of  Justice
    concluded that a Union citizen should not  be  required  to  leave  the
    territory of the EU if doing so would  deprive  them  of  enjoyment  of
    their rights as Union citizens.  In the specific  case,  the  Court  of
    Justice concluded that expelling the parents of Union citizens children
    (who were not themselves Union citizens) would amount  to  constructive
    deportation of the Union  citizen  children  as  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the children to be  with  their  parents.   The  Court  of
    Appeal  has  indicated  that  the  Zambrano  doctrine  has   a   narrow
    application (see Damion Harrison (Jamaica) and another  v  SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1736).

17. In the present case, it is the mother who is a Union  citizen  and  not
    the child.  The child has no rights under the Treaty on the Functioning
    of the European Union as she is not a Union citizen and her  mother  is
    not exercising a right of residence in the UK, the UK being the country
    of nationality.  There is nothing to show that the  appellant's  mother
    could not continue living in the UK even if the appellant is  expelled.
    As indicated, I have upheld Judge Graham's findings in relation to  the
    best interests of the appellant and  there  is  no  reason  she  cannot
    return to Bangladesh into the care of her father.  Bearing in mind  the
    Court of Justice's finding in Shirley McCarthy,  this  is  not  a  case
    where the appellant's mother would be required to give up her rights of
    citizenship were the appellant removed.

18. For these reasons, I conclude that  the  failure  of  Judge  Graham  to
    consider the arguments relating to  Zambrano,  on  the  findings  made,
    means she could only conclude that there was no merit in  the  argument
    presented.  For this reason I find there was no material error  of  law
    and her decision stands.



Decision

Any error on a point of law in the decision and reasons statement of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Graham is not material to the outcome  and  therefore  I
have decided the decision should not  be  set  aside  and  her  decision  is
upheld.


                               Signed                     Date 6 June 16


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
