
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA075572015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th April 2016                            |On 24th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     AI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza of Sultan Lloyd
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1988.  He first
    arrived in the UK on 6th May 2011 when he was given leave to enter as a
    Tier 4 (Student) Migrant.  On 25th April 2012 that leave was  curtailed
    as the Respondent had information that the  Appellant  had  ceased  his
    studies.  On 11th September 2013  the  Appellant  applied  for  asylum.
    That  application  was  refused  for  the  reasons  set  out   in   the
    Respondent's letter of 22nd April 2015.  The  Appellant  appealed,  and
    his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Asjad  (the
    Judge) sitting at Birmingham on  20th  August  2015.   She  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal for the reasons given in  her  Decision  dated  14th
    September 2015.  The Appellant sought leave to  appeal  that  decision,
    and on 9th October 2015 such permission  was  granted  limited  to  the
    Article 8, ECHR dismissal.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge had dismissed the appeal on Article 8, ECHR  grounds  because
    she found that the Appellant did  not  have  a  family  life  with  his
    claimed partner SA but that he did have such  a  life  with  their  two
    children, namely AI born on 8th May 2013 and  AI  born  on  27th  April
    2014.  The Appellant also had a private life in the UK.  The Judge  was
    satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  amounted   to   an
    interference with that private and family life  to  such  a  degree  of
    gravity as to engage the Appellant's Article 8  rights.   However,  she
    also found that such interference was proportionate.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Reza referred to his Skeleton Argument and submitted
    that the Judge had erred in law in  coming  to  that  conclusion.   The
    Judge had failed to  take  into  account  the  best  interests  of  the
    children and had not treated them  as  a  primary  consideration.   The
    Judge had not referred to the duty  imposed  by  Section  55,  Borders,
    Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.   The  Judge's  omission  was
    particularly relevant as the children were British citizens.  The Judge
    had further erred by not considering the position  of  the  Appellant's
    children in the light of the decision in Zambrano.

 5. In reply, Mr Diwnycz referred to the Rule 24 response and  argued  that
    there were no such errors of law.  The Judge had not stated that he had
    considered the best interests of the children, but from what he  wrote,
    starting at paragraph 68 of the Decision it is clear that she  had  had
    them uppermost in her mind when making her  decision.   The  Judge  had
    come to a conclusion about proportionality which was one  open  to  her
    upon her findings of credibility.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  The grant of leave to appeal is  restricted  to  the
    Appellant's Article 8, ECHR decision and in particular  the  assessment
    of proportionality.  The Judge found that the Appellant  had  a  family
    life with his children, and that he had a private life in the  UK.   It
    appears that  there  was  little  evidence  before  the  Judge  of  the
    Appellant's private life, and earlier at paragraph 60 of  the  Decision
    when considering Appendix FM of HC 395, the Judge found that there  was
    "very little evidence to show that he  (the  Appellant)  is  taking  or
    intends to take an active role in the children's  upbringing.   Indeed,
    the Judge had doubts as to whether the  Appellant  lived  in  the  same
    household as his claimed partner and their children.

 7. It is unfortunate that the Judge did not specifically refer to the best
    interests of the children and the obligations imposed by Section 55  of
    the 2009 Act.  However, it is apparent that the Judge carried  out  the
    balancing exercise necessary for any assessment of proportionality  and
    it is apparent from what  the  Judge  wrote  at  paragraph  72  of  the
    Decision that in doing so he took into account  the  interests  of  the
    children.  In this paragraph the Judge stated that the  children  could
    not be expected to leave the UK, and therefore the decision in Zambrano
    has no application.

 8. Again  at  paragraph  72  of  the  Decision  the  Judge  explained  the
    considerable weight to be attached to the public interest, and she  was
    entitled  to  conclude  that  such  factors  outweighed  the   personal
    circumstances of the Appellant even taking account of the interests  of
    the children.

 9. For these reasons, I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.



Notice of Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

11. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue
    for the reasons given by the First-tier Judge in her Decision.






Signed                              Dated  24th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

