
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07370/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2 November 2017                    |On 6 November 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        RT HON LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                     and
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MS H K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Draycott, counsel (instructed by Ison Harrison
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. In  these  proceedings  we
    shall refer to the respondent as the appellant as she  was  before  the
    FTT.

 2. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  India  born  21  January  1990.  Her
    immigration history is set out  at  paragraphs  2,  3  and  4  of  FTTJ
    Warnock's determination dated 30 July 2015. In short she came  to  this
    country under a Tier 4 student visa on 30 November 2010  and  has  been
    here ever since.  On 24 October 2014 she claimed asylum. The  basis  of
    the claim is that she fears that if she  were  returned  to  India  she
    would face mistreatment from her father, her husband or  her  husband's
    family because she left her husband in the UK and was  responsible  for
    his arrest.

 3. The claim for asylum  was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  The
    appellant appealed to the FTT and the  appeal  was  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds. Judge Warnock found that the appellant had a well founded fear
    of persecution. He noted that according  to  the  Home  Office  Country
    Information   and   Guidance   India;   Women   fearing    gender-based
    harm/violence - April 2015, women in India are  considered  to  form  a
    Particular Social Group (PSG) for the purposes of the 1951  UN  Refugee
    Convention. He considered that the issues in the case were whether  the
    appellant would be at risk of attack  from  her  husband  and  her  own
    family in the event of her return to India  and  if  so  whether  there
    would be sufficiency of protection for  her  taking  into  account  the
    possibility of internal relocation. Having considered the  evidence  at
    some length he concluded that she would be  at  risk  of  attack,  that
    internal relocation was not open to  her  and  that  there  was  not  a
    sufficiency of protection.

 4. The Secretary of State appealed that decision. The appeal  was  allowed
    by Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts in a decision promulgated on  13
    April 2016.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal.
    That was granted on 9 May 2017. On 21 July 2017 the Court, by  consent,
    quashed the determination of the Upper Tribunal and remitted the matter
    back  "for  reconsideration  of  the  sole  outstanding  issue  in  the
    Appellant's case, namely the sufficiency of protection upon return".

 6. In granting permission to appeal Sir Kenneth Harper sitting as a  judge
    of the Court of Appeal observed that there was force in the  contention
    that it was not open to the Upper Tribunal to reconsider  the  question
    of relocation. That was agreed by  the  parties  in  the  statement  of
    reasons. Accordingly the issue for us is whether there  is  sufficiency
    of protection were she to be returned to her home in India without  the
    option of relocating elsewhere.

 7. The appellant married her husband in 2007 in India. There is a  son  of
    the marriage who lives with her parents in India.  When  the  appellant
    first married she lived with her in laws. During that time she was  the
    subject of violence at the hands of her husband and mother in law.  She
    went back to her parents' house for a time before coming to the  United
    Kingdom with her husband. The violence  continued  here.  In  September
    2014 he assaulted her resulting in his arrest and prosecution.  He  was
    sentenced to 20 weeks imprisonment. He returned to India on his release
    from prison.

 8. Since her husband's return to India she has been subjected  to  threats
    of violence. Her husband had gone with other men to her parents'  house
    to remove her son. They told her mother that the appellant had  brought
    shame on them by causing her husband  to  be  arrested  and  receive  a
    criminal conviction. Her husband had declared in front of everyone that
    he would personally kill the appellant. On one occasion he  showed  her
    mother a pistol and told her that this was for the appellant  when  she
    returns. Her father and uncles take  her  husband's  side.  Her  father
    believes that the appellant should be beaten for  being  a  mischievous
    wife.

 9. It is clear that if the appellant were to return to India she could not
    live with her parents. Internal relocation is  not  an  issue  for  us.
    Accordingly we have to assume that she will live in the vicinity of her
    home in Punjab. Not unnaturally if she did  return  she  would  seek  a
    reunion with her son and that would make her vulnerable to her  husband
    and her father.

10. Judge Warnock considered the  ability  of  the  state  to  protect  the
    appellant drawing on evidence from a number of  sources  including  the
    Home Office  Guidance  referred  to  above.  In  general  gender  based
    violence at the hands of family or community members is a  serious  and
    widespread problem. While it is true that there has been an improvement
    in  the  legislative  framework  creating  new  criminal  offences  and
    strengthening penalties, the problem as the UN  Special  Rapporteur  on
    violence   against   women   noted   was   ensuring   their   effective
    implementation and securing the allocation of  financial  resources  to
    support their execution  (see  paragraph  1.3.13  of  the  Home  Office
    Guidance). The guidance notes that victims off  gender  based  violence
    may  in  some  circumstances  be  unable  to  obtain  effective   state
    protection.

11. Mr Duffy did not concede the appeal but did concede the weight  of  the
    evidence and the terms of the Home Office Guidance. He said that if  he
    was  to  make  detailed  submissions  it  would  be  to  point  to  the
    availability of refuges for victims of domestic abuse.

12. In re-determination Judge Roberts said that there was  no  evidence  to
    show that the appellant had even actually been  refused  protection  by
    the authorities in India. Sir Kenneth Parker noted in his  reasons  for
    granting permission that there was considerable force in the submission
    that the UT proceeded on the basis that the failure of the appellant to
    approach the authorities in India precluded her in law from  contending
    that she did not have sufficient protection. It was arguable that  such
    a failure might be a proper matter to take into  account  depending  on
    the circumstances but should not be a bar to pursuing the point.

13. It is true that the appellant did not seek the protection of the police
    when she lived in India and before she came to the UK. However  it  has
    to be remembered that the present threats against her, which are of the
    utmost gravity, stem from her decision to seek the  protection  of  the
    state in the UK by reporting her  husband's  violence  and  seeing  him
    convicted and serve a jail sentence. While she was clearly a victim  of
    abuse before this episode it is that  which  has  further  enraged  her
    husband and his family on the one hand and her father and uncles on the
    other. Accordingly the appellant would not  just  be  returning  to  an
    environment in which gender based violence is a serious problem but  to
    one in which specific threats of very serious violence have  been  made
    against her. It is difficult to see how any police force could  provide
    adequate protection against a background where  such  violence  is  not
    simply condoned by her  own  family  but  expected  in  retribution  or
    punishment for her 'failings' as a wife. It is even more difficult in a
    country like India where there are acknowledged gaps in the  protection
    that may be available to victims of domestic violence.

14. The appellant's vulnerability is increased as a result of her son being
    in India with her mother. It is of course true that she  does  not  see
    him at the present time but it would only be natural that if she was to
    return she would  seek  a  reunion  with  him.  If  that  happened  the
    possibility of her father or husband finding out that she was in  India
    and locating her would be increased.

15. For these reasons we are satisfied that Judge Warnock was justified  in
    concluding  that  there  would  be  insufficient  protection  for   the
    appellant on return.  Accordingly  we  shall  remake  the  decision  by
    restoring the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  find  that  the
    appellant is entitled to refugee status.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


The Rt Hon Lord Boyd of Duncansby




