
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07209/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd September 2016                   |On 05th October 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                 Ms H M G A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Lowis, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Ethiopia,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Respondent of 10th April  2015  to
    refuse her application for asylum.  Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Boyes dismissed the Appellant's appeal and the  Appellant  now  appeals
    with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant claims that she  is
    a supporter of the Tigray People's Democratic Movement (the  TPDM)  and
    had supported them since 2005 after the death of her brother in a  riot
    at the hands of the authorities. She married a Dutch national in August
    2009  in  Singapore  and  travelled  abroad  with  her  partner  before
    returning to Ethiopia in 2009 where she stayed until early  2010.   The
    Appellant claims that she was  arbitrarily  arrested  in  January  2010
    after being encountered by the Federal Police distributing leaflets for
    the TPDM.  She says that she was detained, interrogated about the  TPDM
    and beaten.  She says that her aunt paid a bribe to the police and  she
    was released whilst being transferred to another  prison.   She  claims
    that she went into hiding and made arrangements to leave  Ethiopia  for
    Italy where her husband was working and that she left on  22nd  January
    2010.  She went to Italy where she was  issued  with  a  visa  on  10th
    December 2010 to enter the UK as a visitor and she entered  the  UK  in
    December 2010.  She says that after she  left  Ethiopia  her  aunt  was
    arrested, interrogated about her whereabouts  and  in  April  2013  her
    cousin was arrested and the police  sent  a  summons  to  her  aunt  in
    relation to her and her cousin.

 3. In considering the Appellant's  appeal  the  judge  made  a  number  of
    findings which are summarised in paragraphs 63, 64 and 65.   The  judge
    gave some weight to factors in the Appellant's favour and a  number  of
    factors against the Appellant before concluding that the Appellant  had
    not demonstrated to the lower standard that she is  at  risk  from  the
    authorities in Ethiopia because of her political opinion as claimed.

 4. In the Appellant's favour the judge gave some weight to  her  knowledge
    of the TPDM.  The judge also gave weight to a medical report  from  the
    Helen Bamber Foundation.  The judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    been ill-treated or beaten by others at some juncture resulting in  the
    injuries noted in the medical report and that she has resultant  health
    problems.  However the judge said: "It does not necessarily follow that
    her injuries were inflicted by the authorities as  claimed  and/or  for
    the reasons claimed" [63].

 5. The factors the judge weighed against the Appellant included  the  fact
    that  she  had  left  Ethiopia  legally  through  an  airport   on   an
    international flight; the lack of persuasive  evidence  to  demonstrate
    that she was or continues to be a member of the TPDM  as  claimed;  the
    letter the Appellant provided from the TPDM was of limited weight;  the
    fact that the Appellant only made contact with the TPDM in  2014  after
    she claimed asylum; the fact that the Appellant failed to claim  asylum
    in Italy despite living there for eleven  months;  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant made contact with the  Ethiopian  authorities  to  renew  her
    passport; and that she did not claim asylum in the UK until  after  she
    had been here for three  years  despite  several  negative  immigration
    decisions in  connection  with  her  application  and  appeals  against
    negative decisions  in  relation  to  applications  for  EEA  residence
    permits.

 6. In the Grounds of  Appeal  the  Appellant  firstly  contends  that  the
    medical  evidence  should  have  been   taken   as   highly   important
    corroborative evidence of the Appellant's asylum claim and if it was to
    be disregarded it was incumbent on the judge to give good  reasons  for
    so doing.  It  is  contended  that  the  judge  took  into  account  an
    irrelevant consideration in concluding that the medical evidence  could
    not establish who had inflicted the torture or the reasons for doing so
    when no alternative thesis had been put forward by the Respondent or by
    the doctor.

 7. The second ground is that the judge failed to give  sufficient  reasons
    for disbelieving the Appellant's account.  It is pointed out  that  the
    judge made a number of  positive  findings  regarding  the  Appellant's
    credibility  generally  but  also  accepted  that  the  medical  report
    constituted independent evidence of torture consistent with her account
    but despite this the judge rejected her account.  It is contended  that
    the judge gave insufficient reasons for this finding or  for  rejecting
    the Appellant's oral evidence.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that, given the  evidence
    accepted by the judge, it was arguable that the  remaining  credibility
    deficiencies identified by the  judge  do  not  serve  to  undermine  a
    reasonable likelihood of risk.

    Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me Ms Lowis relied on her skeleton argument.  She
    submitted that the judge  failed  to  give  sufficient  weight  to  the
    medical evidence and/or failed to give adequate reasons  for  rejecting
    the medical evidence.  She submitted  that,  taking  into  account  the
    other positive findings, the judge failed to give real reasons  why  he
    found that the other positive factors should be given less weight  than
    the factors found against the Appellant.

10. She submitted that the evidence as to whether the Appellant was subject
    to torture was the central pillar of her asylum claim.   She  submitted
    that the report was compliant with  Istanbul  Protocol  principles  and
    showed that the Appellant's scars were all the same age  and  were  all
    either consistent or highly consistent with the  explanation  given  by
    the Appellant.

11. Ms Lowis submitted that the findings made by the judge in  relation  to
    the medical evidence at paragraphs 50 to 53 are different from those in
    the cases of Y (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362  and  SS  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155 where the judges disagreed  with  the
    medical reports.  In this case the judge accepted the report but failed
    to approach it with the appropriate care and failed to give reasons for
    rejecting it.   She  submitted  that  this  indicates  that  the  judge
    accepted that the report was corroborative but rejected the  report  by
    setting too high a threshold by requiring an explanation or  definitive
    evidence as to who or why the torture was inflicted but  she  submitted
    that this is something that no Appellant could ever evidence.

12. Ms Lowis submitted that at paragraph 53 of the decision the judge  gave
    lip service to attaching weight to the report but there is no  evidence
    that the judge actually attached weight to it. She submitted  that  the
    duty of the judge is set out in paragraph 11  of  the  decision  in  Y.
    This is not a case of contradictions but there is  a  general  duty  to
    give exceptional reasons for rejecting medical evidence.  She  accepted
    as set out at paragraph 21 of SS that it is up to the judge to give due
    weight to medical evidence but they should give  reasons  in  assessing
    the totality of the determination.  Here there was insufficient  weight
    given to the medical evidence and insufficient evidence  for  rejecting
    it.

13. She submitted that in the case of SS the evidence from the  doctor  was
    constricted by the Appellant's behaviour but in  this  case  the  judge
    accepted the  medical  evidence  in  relation  to  nature,  extent  and
    severity of her injuries.  The judge had given insufficient grounds for
    disbelieving the Appellant on the lower standard of proof and  did  not
    apply the correct standard of proof.

14. Ms Lowis accepted that there were findings against  the  Appellant  but
    pointed out that the judge  made  other  findings  in  the  Appellant's
    favour. At paragraphs 31 and 63 the judge  made  positive  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's knowledge and at  paragraph  33  the  judge
    rejected the contention in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  that  the
    Appellant had been inconsistent in relation  to  her  assertion  as  to
    dates in which she had been detained.  Further, at  paragraph  58,  the
    judge  rejected  the  suggestion  that  the  Appellant  had  previously
    deceived the Tribunal.

15. Ms Lowis submitted that, whilst setting out the factors for and against
    the Appellant,  the  judge  did  not  explain  why  those  against  the
    Appellant were given more weight than those for the Appellant and  that
    this suggests that the judge did not properly  apply  the  standard  of
    proof.

16. Mr Norton submitted that the judge did apply the  correct  standard  of
    proof and referred to paragraph 25 where the judge set  this  out.   He
    noted that at paragraphs 26 to 29 the judge set out  the  risk  factors
    that apply and that at paragraph 31 the judge noted  that  some  weight
    should be given to the Appellant's knowledge of the TPDM.

17. He acknowledged that at paragraph 34 the judge noted that the Appellant
    had been consistent  in  relation  to  the  periods  of  detention  but
    submitted that this was simply that the  judge  did  not  attach  great
    weight to this factor against the Appellant.   It  is  significant,  he
    submitted, that at paragraphs 36 and 37 the judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant sought to become a member of the TPDM in 2014  "in  order  to
    obtain evidence to support the asylum claim that she had already  made"
    [36].

18. He submitted that it was open to the judge to conclude that the  letter
    from the TPDM was  of  limited  value  and  limited  weight  [37].   He
    submitted also that it was open to the judge at to conclude that little
    weight should be  attached  to  the  letter  from  the  Federal  Police
    Commission in light of the remarks the judge made about that letter [39-
    40].  He submitted that the judge  recognises  that  weight  should  be
    attached to the medical report but  also  noted  that  it  is  for  the
    Tribunal to assess the credibility of the Appellant's  claim  correctly
    [50-53].

19. Mr Norton also  highlighted  other  factors  considered  by  the  judge
    including that the Appellant had left through the airport [55] and that
    the Appellant had renewed her passport less than two months  after  the
    alleged torture and her alleged departure  [56].   He  noted  that  the
    judge does not hold against  the  Appellant  the  deception  previously
    alleged.  He submitted that the judge  was  entitled  to  consider  the
    Appellant's delay in claiming asylum and her period in Italy.

20. He submitted that the judge had  considered  the  medical  evidence  in
    accordance with the guidance in SS in that she  had  accepted  how  the
    injuries were caused.  He submitted  that  the  judge  had  given  good
    reasons, had given in fact a myriad of reasons why the  claim  was  not
    credible.  He accepted that another judge may have come to a  different
    conclusion in relation to this evidence.  However, there is nothing  to
    show that there is an adequacy of care or a lack of  good  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence.

21. In response Ms Lowis submitted that the judge set too high a  threshold
    in his assessment of the evidence and the issue is  whether  the  judge
    weighed the factors against  each  other  properly  or  gave  a  proper
    explanation as to whether the adverse  factors  were  given  sufficient
    weight.

    Error of Law

22. I have considered all of the submissions made by the parties.   I  note
    that at paragraph 53 the judge concluded that weight should  be  placed
    on the findings in the medical reports and accepted that the  Appellant
    was beaten and ill-treated. However the judge went on to conclude  that
    the medical reports  did  not  provide  persuasive  evidence  that  the
    Appellant  was  detained,  beaten  and  ill-treated  by  the  Ethiopian
    authorities or that it was because of TPDM activities.

23. The judge concluded at paragraph 53:

         "Considering all of the  evidence  before  me  in  the  round,  and
         bearing in mind my findings elsewhere, I am not persuaded that  the
         report provides specific evidence that the Appellant was  detained,
         beaten and ill-treated by the Ethiopian authorities, or even if her
         ill-treatment was at the hands of the authorities, that was because
         of TPDM activities."

24. The judge properly considered the medical evidence and all of the other
    evidence in the round. The judge could not properly have considered the
    medical, or any other, evidence to be determinative of the  Appellant's
    appeal. He properly weighed all  of  the  evidence  before  reaching  a
    conclusion.

25. It is clear that the conclusion is very much in the context of  all  of
    the other findings, in particular  the  findings  at  paragraph  36  in
    relation to the Appellant's claim to have joined the TPDM in 2014 after
    she left Ethiopia.  I note that the judge found  that  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence in relation to when and why she joined  the  TPDM  to  be
    "hesitant, vague and unpersuasive"[36].

26. The judge concluded that the Appellant only sought to become  a  member
    in 2014 to obtain evidence to support the asylum  claim  that  she  had
    already made.  The timing of the Appellant's  claim  the  circumstances
    around her leaving Ethiopia, her failure to claim asylum in Italy,  her
    obtaining a passport, all of these factors were factors which the judge
    legitimately weighed in considering the evidence.

27. I find that the judge has  given  adequate  reasons  for  weighing  the
    identified factors against the Appellant and for concluding that  those
    factors outweighed those in the Appellant's favour. This  is  clear  in
    paragraphs 63-65 where all of the findings are summarised  and  weighed
    against each other. Whilst the judge gave 'some weight' to the  factors
    in the  Appellant's  favour  [63],  he  listed  the  'whole  range'  of
    evidential factors weighing against the Appellant and clearly  attached
    more weight to these factors [37]. I find that it was open to the judge
    to approach the evidence in this way.

28. In all of the circumstances I am satisfied that  the  judge  considered
    all of the evidence and  weighed  all  of  the  evidence  applying  the
    correct standard of proof in considering whether or not  the  Appellant
    had established her claim in relation to past events.  I  am  satisfied
    that it was open to the judge to make the findings he did.

    Notice of Decision

    There is no material error in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.


Signed                              Date: 4 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 4 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
