
[pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal number: AA/07921/2015         |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at:|Field House               | |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On       |4 March 2016              |   On 29 March 2016           |       |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|           |Baldev Ram                                        |Appellant    |
|           |(Anonymity Order not made)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Respondent   |

Representation:

For the appellant:         Mr D Sellwood, of Counsel, instructed by Malik  &
                 Malik Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 18 September 2015,  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 8 May 2015 to refuse his asylum claim.

 2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan. He claimed protection under
    the Geneva Convention and Article 3 of the ECHR on the ground  that  he
    will be at real risk of persecution and treatment in breach of  Article
    3 in Afghanistan on account of his Sikh religion.

 3. At the hearing, Mr Sellwood submitted that the judge had failed to make
    adequate findings of fact. He submitted that this  ground  came  within
    the ambit of the sentence that reads: "Given the  appellant's  evidence
    ......, the A has more than satisfied the burden on him" in para  1  of
    the original grounds.  I do not accept that this  ground  comes  within
    the ambit of the  original  grounds  on  any  reasonable  view  of  the
    sentence  quoted.  Accordingly,  Mr  Sellwood  requires  permission  to
    advance this ground. In order to decide whether  permission  should  be
    granted, I permitted Mr Sellwood to develop his argument.

 4. Mr Sellwood referred me to the appellant's evidence that his sister had
    been killed in a bombing. At his  interview,  the  appellant  had  also
    given the details about the  circumstances  leading  to  his  brother's
    murder by the Taliban. He was abducted. Extremists went to his father's
    house and said that they wanted to convert his  son.  His  brother  was
    found dead with his head shaven. The appellant had given evidence about
    other experiences in Afghanistan, including that he  was  called  names
    and had stones thrown at him. The judge had failed to make any findings
    on these facts. Mr  Sellwood  submitted  that  any  assessment  of  the
    viability of internal relocation could only be  made  against  a  clear
    factual matrix.

 5. Mr Sellwood proceeded to address me on the grounds that were lodged.  I
    heard Mr Staunton in reply. However, it is not  necessary  from  me  to
    deal with these grounds as I have decided to grant  permission  on  the
    ground advanced at the hearing and which I have summarised at 4 above.

 6. The only paragraph in which the judge mentioned the appellant's account
    of his experiences in Afghanistan was at para 15. This is  very  brief.
    For example, it gives no indication that the judge had appreciated  the
    circumstances of the abduction and murder of the  appellant's  brother.
    Importantly, there is no indication whether the judge had  accepted  or
    rejected the evidence of the events that were described by the judge at
    para 15.

 7. At paras 18 and 20, the judge made adverse comments on credibility.  He
    considered that the fact that the appellant had chosen to leave Russia,
    a country where he had the right to  live  and  work  safely,  and  his
    failure to claim  asylum  in  France  undermined  his  credibility.  Mr
    Staunton submitted that paras  18  and  20  show  that  the  judge  had
    rejected the entirety of the appellant's account.

 8. I do not accept Mr Staunton's submission that the  judge  had  rejected
    the entirety of the appellant's account. In the first  place,  para  15
    reads as if he accepted the appellant's account, whereas paras  18  and
    20 clearly indicate that at  least  some  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    accounts were not accepted. Accordingly, para 15 is not consistent with
    paras 18 and 20.

 9. In the second place, it is difficult to see how the  judge  could  have
    properly relied upon the reasons given at paras 18 and 20 as  the  sole
    basis for rejecting the entirety of  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    experiences in Afghanistan.

10. I have read the appellant's interview. His evidence was that his sister
    was hit by shrapnel when a bomb landed on a  vacant  space  during  the
    fighting in 1991/1992. I could see nothing to suggest that the sister's
    death was linked in any way to her religion. Thus, I am  not  persuaded
    that the failure to assess the  credibility  of  the  evidence  of  his
    sister's death and make findings of fact upon it, per se, are material.



11. However, the circumstances in relation to the murder of the brother are
    different. I have briefly described this at para 4 above. In  addition,
    it  is  correct  that  the  appellant  had  given  evidence  of  having
    experienced other problems, including  being  told  by  his  father  to
    remove his hair because he would be in danger otherwise  and  that  the
    women had to wear "burkhas". He also gave evidence of having  lived  in
    Kabul.

12. Having read the interview record, I am satisfied that the judge  simply
    failed to engage with the asserted  facts  of  this  case.  The  single
    paragraph at para 15 is unfortunately woefully inadequate as a summary.
    There are no findings  of  fact  on  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    experiences in Afghanistan, including his account of his experiences in
    Kabul.

13. In these circumstances, I have decided to grant permission to argue the
    ground that Mr Sellwood advanced  at  the  hearing  and  which  I  have
    summarised at para 4.

14. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the  judge  materially
    erred in law, in that:

     (i) He failed to engage with the appellant's case  adequately.  Indeed,
         para 15 is inadequate to the point that I  am  satisfied  that  the
         appellant has simply not had a fair hearing of his case.

     (ii)     He failed to assess the credibility of, and make  findings  of
         fact on, the appellant's account of his experiences in Afghanistan.



15. For all of the above reasons, I set aside the decision of the judge.

16. The effect of my decision is that the appellant's appeal will  need  to
    be determined on the merits on all issues.

17. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

18. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.(b).  In  addition,  given
    that I have decided that the appellant's case will need to  be  decided
    on the merits on all issues and having regard to the Court of  Appeal's
    judgment in JD (Congo) & Others [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of  the  view
    that a remittal to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  the  right  course  of
    action.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set  aside  in  its  entirety.  This
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing on the  merits  on
all issues by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parkes.




Signed                                  Date: 4 March 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
