
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07097/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 11th November 2013                           |On 27th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS



                                   Between

                           hatim Ahmed el fakiali
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Kaedic, Solicitor on behalf of Trott & Gentry
LLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sudan born on  1st  January  1968,  appeals
    with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Beg) who dismissed the appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 12th July 2013 to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom by
    way of directions under paragraph 8-10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration
    Act 1971 and to refuse his claim for asylum.

 2. The history of the appeal is as follows.  The Appellant claims to  have
    travelled to the United Kingdom clandestinely by lorry arriving on 15th
    June 2003.  He claimed asylum on the same day.

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim for asylum was that he was a  member
    of the Tunjur tribe in Sudan and approximately five  years  ago  became
    involved with a Quranic Group which he claimed was forbidden in  Sudan.
    The group are neither Sunni nor Shia Muslims and do not believe in  the
    Hadeeth and practise their religion  with  some  differences  from  the
    mainstream Islamic faith.  In his interview the Appellant  stated  that
    the group were an "awareness group" to show the real value of the Quran
    and to expose the false Islamic government and the Islamic parties.

 4. It is the Appellant's claim that he was arrested on 2nd September  2011
    whilst attending a  Quranic  Group  and  that  for  five  days  of  his
    detention was ill-treated  and  interrogated  about  relationships  the
    group had with political parties and the movement in Darfur.  After ten
    days he was released and signed an  agreement  to  stop  following  his
    ideas and activities.

 5. On 20th April 2013 the Appellant claimed that he was arrested again  by
    the authorities whilst attending a Quranic Group meeting at  his  home.
    The circumstances of this were that his father-in-law came to the house
    unexpectedly and called the police.  The police  raided  his  home  and
    found three forbidden books in the house.  He and other members of  the
    group were detained for four days and accused of apostasy under Article
    126 of the Sudanese Criminal Code.  It is said that his brother paid  a
    guarantee for his release and he was released on bail to  report  daily
    at the police station.  He then stayed with  a  cousin  for  about  one
    month before leaving Sudan with the assistance of an agent.

 6. The basis of his claim was that he feared return to Sudan as  he  would
    be wanted by the authorities having escaped whilst on bail and  because
    the authorities in Sudan including the police and security forces would
    consider him to be an "unbeliever"  and  that  he  would  face  further
    arrest, detention and ill-treatment.

 7. The Appellant left Sudan on a lorry on 24th  May  2013,  travelled  via
    Libya where he stayed for two weeks and arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on 15th June 2013.

 8.  In  a  letter  dated  12th  July  2013  the  Respondent  rejected  the
    Appellant's claims for asylum.  There were a number of reasons given in
    that letter, noting that the Appellant was born in Shandi and had never
    lived in Darfur.  The Respondent considered his claim to be a member of
    the Tunjur tribe but whilst the Appellant had  some  knowledge  of  the
    culture and history of the tribe, his  knowledge  was  insufficient  to
    outweigh positive evidence of knowledge of the Tunjur tribe.  As to the
    Quranic Group, the Respondent stated that no evidence could be found to
    confirm the group existed or that individuals in the group as named  by
    the Appellant or its leaders of the group had any  profile  whatsoever.
    The Respondent also did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  carried  out
    activities to recruit  people  to  the  group  or  that  he  personally
    approached people at his workplace, in the  local  area  and  students.
    The Respondent considered that that was inconsistent with  the  country
    information and that such activities were rarely  practised  in  Sudan.
    There were other inconsistencies noted in respect  of  the  Appellant's
    claim to have been arrested on 20th April 2013 and  detained  for  four
    days.

 9. The Appellant exercised his right to  appeal  that  decision  and  gave
    notice on 29th July 2013.

10. The appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Beg)  on  27th
    August 2013.  The Tribunal heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant  as
    set out in the determination and also from  a  witness,  Mr  Al  Tayaeb
    Hassan Ahmed.  In a determination promulgated on 3rd September 2013 the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds (Articles 2, 3 and 8).
      In  summary  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant   had
    demonstrated to the lower standard of proof that he was from the Tunjur
    tribe but in the alternative even if it was accepted, the Appellant had
    not suffered any discrimination that members of that tribe had suffered
    because they were located in communities within the Darfur Province and
    this Appellant had never lived in Darfur.  As to the basis of his claim
    based on his membership of the Quranic Group, the judge made  a  number
    of adverse findings of credibility relating to the membership  of  that
    group, the activities which he claimed to have been involved in and did
    not find his  account  credible  that  he  had  been  arrested  on  2nd
    September 2011 or 20th April 2013.  The judge  found  at  paragraph  35
    that having considered the evidence in  the  round  and  on  the  lower
    standard of proof she had not found the Appellant a  credible  witness.
    In the alternative, the judge noted that even if she had  found  him  a
    member of the Quranic Group she did not find that he would come to  the
    adverse attention of the Sudanese authorities.  Furthermore even if the
    judge accepted that the Appellant was arrested on 2nd September 2011 he
    was released without charge but she did not accept in  any  event  that
    the Appellant was re-arrested on 20th April 2013  (see  paragraph  35).
    She found that the Appellant had

         "fabricated his claim that he was released  on  bail  and  did  not
         answer to that bail and is therefore wanted by the authorities.   I
         do not find the Appellant has been charged with apostasy under  the
         criminal law.  He is able to practise his faith in his own home".

11. Consequently the judge dismissed the appeal having not found  that  the
    Appellant was a refugee nor that he  would  be  at  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm on return.

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision, the Grounds of
    Appeal having been settled by Mr Bonavero, Counsel who did  not  appear
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Fisher)  on  20th
    September 2013.  The reasons were given as follows:-



         "The grounds seeking permission have been drafted  by  Counsel  who
         did not represent the Appellant at the hearing.  They  assert  that
         the judge erred in her approach to the facts and law.  At paragraph
         2, it is observed  that  the  judge  appears  to  accept  that  the
         Appellant was a member of the Quranic Group but, in  paragraph  36,
         the judge goes on to conclude that he is able to practice his faith
         in his own home.  The grounds assert that this  finding  is  not  a
         complete  answer  to  the  Appellant's   claim   for   humanitarian
         protection, because she was required to consider whether his desire
         to proselytise as part of his religious identity.  Furthermore, the
         grounds  claim  that  the  judge's  findings  on  the   Appellant's
         credibility are flawed to the extent that they  are  unsustainable.
         It is said that she has misunderstood the  Appellant's  explanation
         for downloading articles  from  the  internet.   The  grounds  also
         assert that the judge has engaged  in  speculation,  and  that  she
         appears to have  required  the  Appellant  to  corroborate  certain
         aspects of his claim.

         The  determination  is  detailed.   However,  it  is  difficult  to
         ascertain the judge's factual conclusions with any  precision.   At
         paragraph 35, she states that she did not find the Appellant to  be
         a credible witness.  Despite that, in the next sentence, she states
         that if the Appellant is a member of the Quranic Group, she is  not
         satisfied that he has come to the attention of the authorities.  In
         the following sentence, she states that if she accepts that he  was
         arrested on the first occasion claimed,  he  was  released  without
         charge.  Furthermore, although he has discounted his claim to  have
         spoken  to  educated  and  open-minded  people  in  workplaces  and
         universities about the group's belief,  I  find  that  there  is  a
         certain  tension  between  these  'conclusions',  the  comment   in
         paragraph 36, where she  states  that  the  Appellant  is  able  to
         practise his faith in his own home and the principle  expounded  in
         HJ Iran v SSHD [2010]  UKSC  31,  especially  as  she  goes  on  to
         conclude that he does not have a well-founded fear  of  persecution
         as a consequence.

         Although somewhat finely balanced, I  find  it  arguable  that  the
         judge erred in law on  the  above  basis.   The  remaining  grounds
         appear less meritorious, but I stress  all  grounds  are  arguable.
         Permission to appeal is granted."

14. Ms Kaedic, appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  She relied upon the grounds  as  drafted  by  Counsel.   She
    supplemented those grounds with the following  oral  submissions.   She
    submitted that the judge had made an error of law in her approach as to
    credibility (set out in grounds 9-15).  There was an issue as  to  when
    the Appellant had gathered evidence that  he  had  downloaded  and  the
    judge had mistaken this by finding the  Appellant  had  downloaded  the
    information before the second arrest in order to make an asylum  claim.
    The relevant paragraphs of the determination are 11 and  13  where  she
    summarised the evidence.  At paragraph 13 he gave his  evidence  as  to
    why he had downloaded the article  but  that  was  different  from  the
    judge's conclusion at paragraph 29.  There appears to be a confusion in
    the findings as to why he downloaded the evidence.  The summary of  the
    evidence was that he downloaded the articles for the  group's  purposes
    but later said that he had brought them to show the authorities in  the
    United Kingdom.  Thus the judge and misunderstood  the  evidence  on  a
    core issue in the case.

15. There was further confusion in the findings as a whole which  could  be
    seen at paragraph 35.  The judge  found  that  she  did  not  find  the
    Appellant to be a credible witness.  However the judge did not  make  a
    finding whether he was a member of the Quranic Group and she  does  not
    say why she did not find him to be a member of that group and there  is
    an ambiguity in the findings.  As  to  the  evidence  of  his  wife  at
    paragraph 35, the finding there has no relevance because his  wife  did
    not follow his beliefs and that she was not asked any form of questions
    by the  authorities.   This  demonstrated  a  misunderstanding  in  the
    cultural issues.  The Appellant's wife was not interested in the  group
    nor was she actively following or pursued its activities thus there was
    a misunderstanding in that respect by the judge.  There was  a  further
    misunderstanding about the Appellant's father-in-law reporting what had
    happened at the house.  The evidence was he found the  Appellant  in  a
    meeting  and  reported  it  to  the  police.   The   judge's   findings
    demonstrate that she did not understand the evidence as the Appellant's
    father-in-law was opposed to teaching and followed  mainstream  Islams,
    it was entirely plausible that he would react like that (see paragraphs
    32 and 35 of the determination).

16. As to paragraph 36, the judge said that he could practise his own faith
    in his home.  However that was not the idea behind  his  beliefs  which
    was that he needed to spread those religious ideas  and  challenge  the
    State's view of Islam.  Those were the kind of beliefs that  could  not
    be carried out in the home and he could not proselytise at home.

17. As to paragraph 31, the judge found that it was not plausible  that  he
    would have approached people at his workplace with his ideas.   However
    they are not complete strangers and  he  had  some  knowledge  of  them
    previously.

18. Thus Ms Kaedic submitted that the judge did not understand the evidence
    and did not make findings on all the relevant core issues and in  those
    circumstances the decision was not a safe one and should be  set  aside
    and another hearing held where proper findings should be made.

19. I then heard submissions from Mr Jarvis.  No Rule 24 response had  been
    served, nonetheless he  submitted  that  there  was  no  error  of  law
    disclosed in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Beg).
    He relied upon the case of TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40.   He
    further submitted that the submissions made by Ms  Kaedic  went  beyond
    those originally raised in the grounds by Mr Bonavero, namely  findings
    about the Appellant's  wife,  that  was  not  raised  in  the  grounds,
    findings about approaching people or  strangers  to  comment  upon  the
    beliefs, that was not in the grounds and there had been no  application
    to amend the grounds and therefore permission did not extend to any new
    points.  I indicated to Mr Jarvis that those points that had been  made
    fell under the umbrella  of  the  general  ground  raised  against  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal, namely that  the  credibility
    findings that were made did not take into account the evidence  and  in
    those circumstances they did not appear to me to  be  new  points.   In
    those circumstances Mr Jarvis dealt with them in any event.

20.   Mr Jarvis submitted that whilst the judge appeared to accept he was a
    member of a Quranic Group, that is not the case from the determination.
     The judge said at paragraph 35 that she did not find the  Appellant  a
    credible witness and at several points at paragraph 35 noted the  words
    "even if" thus it was apparent from the judge's determination that  she
    did not accept his claim as she had not  found  him  to  have  given  a
    credible account concerning the events in Sudan.  The use of the  words
    "even if" refer to the judge considering the claim  on  an  alternative
    basis.  This is nothing new; judges make findings  in  the  alternative
    and often make mixed findings and there is nothing remarkable in  Judge
    Beg doing this.  Whilst permission appears to have been granted on  the
    basis that the findings are not clear, the findings made demonstrates a
    mixed approach and there was nothing unlawful or confusing about  that.
    It is clear the judge did not accept the claim of the Appellant at all.



21. He posed the question as to how material  was  the  membership  of  the
    Quranic Group and whether or not it was a political or religious  claim
    made by him or mixed?  Mr Jarvis submitted that  it  was  more  nuanced
    than this and that the Appellant had said he was a Muslim  who  carried
    out certain tenets of the faith but did not accept certain  aspects  of
    it and thus it was a political theological attack  but  the  judge  had
    found the Appellant had provided no other  information  concerning  the
    fate of the 129 people who had  been  arrested.   There  was  no  other
    background material or any other material to demonstrate that those who
    held non-Sunni beliefs are subject to any  form  of  persecution.   The
    Appellant's case was that apostates can be punished under the  law  but
    no further material had been provided.  The Appellant claimed that  his
    belief system would be regarded as a  non-believer  but  there  was  no
    evidence to show that a non-believer would be punished.  The Respondent
    in the refusal letter (referred to at paragraph 5 of the grounds)  only
    relates to general country material of those  carrying  out  activities
    seen by the authorities as against the State.  The Appellant would have
    to establish that his faith and the way that he  practised  it  or  had
    beliefs would bring him to the attention of the authorities.

22.   In this respect there was no evidence  save  for  the  two  newspaper
    articles.  Whilst it was challenged in the grounds  that  there  was  a
    misunderstanding by the judge by comparison of paragraphs  11  and  13,
    and that there was a misrecording, there has been no witness  statement
    from Counsel or indeed any extract of the Record of Proceedings to show
    that there was any such misunderstanding.   The  basis  for  suggesting
    that there was a misunderstanding on the evidence is not  made  out  by
    the Appellant.  In any event at paragraph 28 the judge  concluded  that
    it was not plausible that he would have downloaded the material at  all
    and that was a finding that was not challenged in the grounds  thus  it
    was not a material error even if it were an error.  The judge also  did
    not accept his detention and it is entirely clear that  the  judge  did
    not accept the evidence.  As to his membership of the Tunjur tribe, the
    judge rejected the evidence of the witness Mr Ahmed (see paragraph 25),
    she did not place any weight on the letter (see paragraph 26).

23.   The judge did not accept his second arrest nor did  she  accept  that
    the Appellant was charged and rejected the circumstances of  the  first
    detention  (paragraph  31).   The  judge  found  that  there   was   no
    corroborative medical evidence of torture and whilst  the  grounds  say
    that an asylum seeker is not required to  corroborate  his  claim,  the
    decision of TK (Burundi) does make it clear that if there  is  evidence
    that  should  be  readily  available  the  failure  to   provide   such
    information can be taken into account by a judge.   It  does  not  mean
    that it can always be taken against the Appellant but the judge made  a
    credibility point in this case by noting that no  medical  evidence  of
    torture had been produced, such evidence is commonly produced in asylum
    cases.  The judge also found that he was released without charge.   The
    findings were entirely open to the judge to make  including  those  now
    raised in the grounds for example those regarding the Appellant's  wife
    and the actions  of  the  father-in-law.   The  grounds  are  merely  a
    disagreement with the findings that were made which were  open  to  the
    judge.

24. As to the submission made about the "cultural context" it has not  been
    demonstrated in what way the culture of Sudan would lead to a  specific
    conclusion.  This has just been  a  term  used  to  disagree  with  the
    judge's conclusions.  In respect of the Appellant's wife it was  not  a
    cultural issue  and  there  is  no  perversity  shown  in  the  judge's
    findings.

25. As to the Appellant's ability to practise his faith  there  is  nothing
    unlawful about the findings made there.  The judge did not believe  the
    Appellant in the first place and in any event his view is a theoretical
    one and not a proselytising one.  The judge  rejected  his  involvement
    with the group and that there was a significant absence  of  background
    evidence of the group and consequences of those who had  been  arrested
    and prosecuted.  For those reasons he did not meet the first test in FJ
    (Iran) because he did not show that he  was  a  person  with  religious
    beliefs that would be persecuted.

26. Ms Kaedic by way of reply reiterated that proper findings had not  been
    made by the judge who had misunderstood the evidence.

27. The issue of where the beliefs would  take  him  outside  the  Orthodox
    Islamic beliefs, it was his case that he did not believe in Sunni Islam
    and therefore that took him outside the mainstream Sudanese faith.   He
    believed in  separation  of  politics  and  religion  (see  the  asylum
    interview) and therefore this would run counter to the State and he  is
    outside Orthodox beliefs.  It puts him in the position of an unbeliever
    and outside the faith.  Ms Kaedic further submitted that the father-in-
    law's actions were entirely plausible.  His beliefs seriously challenge
    Sharia law but the judge did not make  any  finding  about  that.   The
    other findings were based on a misunderstanding on the evidence thus it
    was not safe.  She submitted that if an error was found  it  should  be
    remitted for a fresh hearing because a different Tribunal might reach a
    different conclusion.

28. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions:

29. I  remind  myself  that  I  should  only  interfere  with  the  judge's
    determination if an error of law can be found.  I have considered  with
    care the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant as to the asserted
    errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination.  It  is
    submitted that the judge's adverse findings of credibility  are  flawed
    and in the alternative that there has been a  misunderstanding  of  the
    evidence in a number of respects.  The judge misunderstood the evidence
    as to why he had downloaded articles from the internet (by reference to
    paragraphs 11 and 13) and at paragraph 35 it is asserted that the judge
    made a finding based on misunderstanding "cultural  issues"  concerning
    the Appellant's wife and further that there was a  misunderstanding  on
    the evidence by the judge as to why the Appellant's father-in-law would
    have reported to him.  It is said that it was entirely plausible on the
    evidence that he would have done so.  Therefore it  is  submitted  that
    the judge's findings overall are ambiguous, confused and are  therefore
    unsustainable findings which require the determination to be set  aside
    in its entirety.

30. I have considered the submissions but have done so in the light of  the
    determination which must be read as a whole.  Whilst Ms Kaedic (and  to
    some extent the grant of permission) make reference to  the  fact  that
    the judge's findings on factual issues are difficult  to  ascertain  or
    are confused and with particular reference to paragraph 35,  I  do  not
    find this to be the case.  The determination should be read as a  whole
    and in doing so, it is  entirely  plain  from  the  findings  that  are
    clearly made by the judge that the judge did not find this Appellant to
    have given a credible account concerning the core issue of  his  claim,
    that is to have been a member of the Quranic Group, who was arrested by
    the authorities and was detained and ill-treated on two occasions.  The
    judge made a number of adverse credibility findings concerning the core
    account.  Those findings can be  summarised  as  follows.   As  to  his
    general credibility he claimed to be a member of the Tunjur tribe.  The
    judge's  findings  are  set  out  at  paragraphs  24  and  25  of   the
    determination.  She found that whilst the Appellant was able to  answer
    some  of  the  questions   relating   to   the   Tunjur   tribe,   that
    notwithstanding that

         "he has not  been  properly  able  to  explain  or  provide  cogent
         evidence of his membership of the Tunjur tribe, how he was able  to
         get a university education and live an affluent lifestyle in  Sudan
         where he had employment with International House, when most members
         of the tribe suffer discrimination and lack of opportunities." (see
         paragraph 24)

31. The judge also had the opportunity to hear from a witness, Mr Ahmed and
    at paragraph 25 the judge gave sustainable and  evidence-based  reasons
    as to why she attached limited weight to the evidence of Mr Ahmed.  She
    noted that there was no evidence before  the  Tribunal  that  Mr  Ahmed
    himself was a member of the Tunjur tribe and that he had  accepted  the
    Appellant's membership of that tribe because he had been introduced  to
    him by Ahmed who was a friend and someone known in the community.   The
    judge referred  to  an  inconsistency  in  the  evidence;  whereas  the
    Appellant referred to Ahmed as a relative of Al  Tayaeb  Hassan  Ahmed,
    where Mr Ahmed on the other hand said that he was not  a  relative  but
    just a friend and someone known  in  the  community.   Thus  the  judge
    concluded that Mr Ahmed and the Appellant knew very little  about  each
    other; Mr Ahmed did not know whether the Appellant was married  or  had
    children or what the basis of his claim for asylum was.  The  Appellant
    in turn did not know whether Mr Ahmed  was  married  or  had  children.
    They had met by coincidence in Liverpool.  Furthermore  Mr  Ahmed  said
    that he was asked to come to court to give evidence about the donations
    he collected for refugees and did not state that he had been  asked  to
    give evidence about the Appellant's membership  of  the  Tunjur  tribe.
    The judge also outlined a further  discrepancy  in  the  evidence  with
    regard to the collection of donations.  Thus she found the evidence  of
    Mr Ahmed to be inconsistent with that of the Appellant and  vice  versa
    thus attached limited weight to it.

32. At paragraph 26 she considered the letter from the Council of Peace and
    Unite from the Tunjur tribe in the United  Kingdom  dated  22nd  August
    2013.  For the reasons given at paragraph 26 she  found  there  was  no
    explanation from the writer of letter as to how he knew  the  Appellant
    was from the Tunjur tribe.  Having  considered  that  evidence  in  the
    round,  the  judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  account  that  he   had
    demonstrated that he was a member of the Tunjur tribe.  She noted  that
    even if she accepted that he had been a member of the tribe, it had not
    been said that he had suffered any discrimination that  the  background
    material in the  refusal  letter  referred  to  such  people  suffering
    because they were located in communities within  the  Darfur  Province.
    As the judge noted the Appellant had never lived in the Darfur Province
    and had the advantage of a university education and job and thus  there
    was no evidence that he had  been  discriminated  against  or  targeted
    living in Khartoum even if his origins  were  with  the  Tunjur  tribe.
    There have been no challenges to those findings but they  are  relevant
    in this respect because they are general adverse  credibility  findings
    made in relation to the evidence of the Appellant.

33. The judge then went on to deal with the core  issues  relating  to  his
    membership of the Quranic Group.  Despite the grounds stating that  the
    judge appeared to accept that he was a member of  the  group,  that  is
    plainly not the case if one reads paragraph 35  carefully  and  in  the
    light of the earlier  findings  that  are  made  in  the  body  of  the
    determination where the judge gives reasons as to why she  rejects  the
    Appellant's account.  At paragraph 27 the judge set out the Appellant's
    evidence that he gave in the asylum interview concerning the nature  of
    the group and noticed in this context that the Respondent at  paragraph
    18 of the refusal letter noted there was no evidence  to  confirm  that
    such a Quranic Group existed and there was no profile of  the  leaders.
    The judge made reference to the Appellant's evidence claiming  that  he
    had referred to the group's website called ahl-alquran.com and referred
    to Dr Mansour as the author of books found at his home.  The  Appellant
    relied upon two articles which he had downloaded and brought to the  UK
    with him concerning the group and the view the authorities took of  the
    group (they were articles from daily newspapers in Sudan).   The  judge
    made a number of observations about those articles and their relevance.
     The judge noted that the  articles  were  "relatively  old"  and  were
    published on the "13th September 2011" (paragraph  28).   She  observed
    they related to  the  trial  of  129  people  on  charges  of  apostasy
    following a religious sect called the  Quaranist.   However  she  noted
    that the Appellant had failed to  produce  any  further  evidence  with
    regard to what actually happened to the 129 people that  were  charged.
    In this context, the  judge  took  into  account  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence that on the second arrest one of those arrested was  a  person
    whom the Appellant had remained in contact with whilst being in the UK,
    who remained in Sudan.  The judge observed that there was  no  evidence
    that this man had been subjected to prosecution or persecution  by  the
    Sudanese authorities as a result of belonging to the Quranic Group.

34. The judge's findings on the downloading of those articles are  set  out
    at paragraphs 28 and 29.  It is submitted by Ms Kaedic that there is  a
    misunderstanding of the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  which  had  been
    recorded at paragraphs 11 and 13.  It is  right  to  observe  that  the
    misunderstanding of this evidence has not been supported by any  Record
    of Proceedings being submitted from  Counsel's  note  or  that  of  the
    Presenting Officer.  The submission is based on  what  is  recorded  at
    paragraphs 11 and 13 of the determination.  Paragraph 11 stated this

         "The Appellant said that the articles at  pages  1  and  3  of  the
         objective bundle are newspaper articles that he  obtained  on  16th
         April 2012 when he was still in Sudan.  He  said  the  reason  they
         were not submitted to the Home Office before the day of the  appeal
         hearing is because the Home Office requested the  documents  to  be
         translated into English and as they were in Arabic, they had to  be
         translated.  He said he  thought  his  statement  would  have  been
         enough.  He said he printed off the documents about a  year  before
         he left Sudan.  He said the  group  follows  political  issues  and
         collects articles.  He said in Sudan a  person  charged  under  the
         criminal law can either change his  beliefs  or  ideology  or  face
         execution. ..."

    At paragraph 13 it is recorded that

         "He said the articles that he obtained online were obtained in 2012
         as the group was following what was happening.  The Appellant  said
         that he brought the articles with him to the United Kingdom in case
         he needed them if the authorities asked for documents."

35. The findings of the judge are set out at paragraphs 28 and  29.   Those
    findings should be set out in full given  the  assertion  made  in  the
    grounds that there has been a misunderstanding of  the  evidence.   The
    judge said this:-

         "28. The Respondent noted at paragraph 18  of  the  refusal  letter
             that no evidence could be found to confirm  that  the  Quranic
             Group exists and there is  no  profile  of  the  leaders.   At
             question 161 of the asylum interview the Appellant referred to
             the group's website called ahl-alquran.com.  He also  referred
             at question 69 to Dr Mansour the author of one  of  the  books
             found in his home by the authorities.   The  Appellant  relies
             upon  two  online  articles,  the  newspapers  Al  Sahafa  and
             Al Ahrams which are both daily newspapers in Sudan.   I  find
             the articles are relatively old and  were  published  on  13th
             September 2011.  The Appellant gave evidence that he kept  the
             articles and brought them with him to the  United  Kingdom  as
             evidence of his group and of the view the authorities take  of
             the Quranic Group.  I find that the Appellant would  not  have
             taken the risk of downloading and keeping the  articles  which
             refer to the arrest and criminal charges  against  129  people
             whilst he was still living in Sudan and on  his  own  evidence
             actively involved in the Quranic Group.

         29.  I do not find it credible that if the Appellant  was  arrested
             on  2nd  September  2011  and  was  therefore  known  to   the
             authorities as a member of the Quranic Group,  that  he  would
             taken the risk of downloading the articles on 16th April  2012
             and keeping them with him.  I do not find it credible that the
             Appellant would have placed himself at risk while still living
             in Sudan.  He said that he downloaded the articles in case  he
             needed to provide evidence when making a claim for asylum.   I
             find that by 16th  April  2012  the  Appellant  had  not  been
             arrested on his claimed second arrest.  Yet by April  2012  he
             was already making plans to claim asylum abroad and collecting
             evidence.  The Appellant claimed in the asylum  interview  and
             confirmed this in oral evidence that his  second  arrest  took
             place on 20th April 2013 over a year after he  downloaded  the
             articles.  It was his second arrest that made him leave  Sudan
             to  seek  asylum  abroad.   I  find   that   the   Appellant's
             credibility is damaged."

36. I do not  find  that  the  judge  misunderstood  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant at all.  It is plain that she considered the Appellant's  own
    evidence recorded at paragraphs 11 and 13 and made findings  upon  that
    evidence at paragraph 29.  The judge said in respect of the Appellant's
    conduct in downloading the articles "He said he downloaded the articles
    in case he needed to provide evidence when making a claim  for  asylum"
    (see paragraph 29).  He had downloaded them the year before so  as  the
    judge noted that by 16th April 2012 he had not  been  arrested  on  his
    claimed second arrest although he had  already  been  making  plans  to
    claim asylum abroad and collect evidence.  The second arrest took place
    on 20th April 2013 confirmed by the Appellant in his oral evidence  and
    the asylum interview which is a year after he downloaded the  articles.



37. What the  grounds  fail  to  recognise  are  the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 28 which deal with the point raised by Ms Kaedic that it  was
    the Appellant's account not only that he had downloaded them  to  bring
    with him but that he had downloaded them in Sudan because that was what
    the group did.  The judge made a clear finding about  this;  the  judge
    said this at paragraph 28:-

         "The Appellant gave evidence that he kept the articles and  brought
         them with him to the United Kingdom as evidence of his group and of
         the view the authorities take of the Quranic Group.   I  find  that
         the Appellant would not have taken  the  risk  of  downloading  and
         keeping the articles which refer to the arrest and criminal charges
         against 129 people whilst he was still living in Sudan and  on  his
         own evidence actively involved in the Quranic Group."

    The judge went on to also state at paragraph 29:-

         "I do not find it credible that if the Appellant  was  arrested  on
         2nd September 2011 and was therefore known to the authorities as  a
         member of the Quranic Group,  that  he  would  taken  the  risk  of
         downloading the articles on 16th April 2012 and keeping  them  with
         him.  I do not find it  credible  that  the  Appellant  would  have
         placed himself at risk while still living in Sudan."

    Thus parts of  paragraph  28  and  29  relate  to  the  articles  being
    downloaded in Sudan but the judge did not believe his account, based on
    his evidence as a whole, that it was credible that he would  have  done
    so given the level of risk that the Appellant's own evidence  had  made
    reference to.   There  is  no  challenge  to  those  findings  made  at
    paragraphs 28 and 29 and it is plain from the determination that  there
    is no misunderstanding on the judge's part of the Appellant's evidence.
     Thus it is also plain the judge did not  accept  that  he  would  have
    downloaded those documents in Sudan (whenever they were  downloaded  or
    for whatever reason) as due to the nature of the risk to him  and  that
    was  based  on  the  Appellant's  own  evidence.   Thus  there  is   no
    misunderstanding.

38. As to the other findings, as to the arrest on 2nd  September  2011  and
    his claim to have been detained and ill-treated in detention, the judge
    made the point that there was no medical evidence to confirm the  claim
    of  torture  in  detention.   Ms  Kaedic  submits  that  there  is   no
    requirement upon asylum seekers  to  corroborate  their  account.   The
    general rule is of course that  asylum  seekers  are  not  required  to
    provide corroboration for the obvious reasons.  However  as  Mr  Jarvis
    submits, and relies upon the decision of TK (Burundi), whilst it  is  a
    misdirection to imply that corroboration was necessary for  a  positive
    credibility finding, the fact that corroboration is not  required  does
    not mean that a judge is required to leave out of account  the  absence
    of documentary evidence which could reasonably  be  expected.   It  was
    open to the judge to comment that the  Appellant  had  not  provided  a
    medical report.  Medical evidence is often relied  upon  by  Appellants
    seeking asylum as such evidence is capable of supporting their claim to
    have been ill-treated as part of the factual matrix of  their  account.
    The judge recorded in this case that there was no  medical  report  and
    thus was merely drawing a conclusion from the absence of that  evidence
    which could reasonably be expected to be produced.  This was a  finding
    that was open to the judge to make and she was entitled to  do  so,  so
    long as the judge bore in mind the difficulties faced by asylum seekers
    in producing corroborative evidence.  In any event  this  was  not  the
    only finding and not much weight was placed upon that.   There  were  a
    number of other adverse findings made relevant to the arrest.

39.   The  judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  account  that  he   undertook
    activities for the group at paragraph 31.  The Appellant had claimed in
    his oral evidence that his activities for the Quranic  Group  consisted
    of talking  to  educated  and  open-minded  people  in  workplaces  and
    universities about the group's beliefs.  The judge found

         "I do not find it credible that the Appellant would openly talk  to
         strangers in workplaces and universities about the  group's  belief
         if members of the group were targeted in Sudan by  the  authorities
         and considered to be apostates.  Anyone of  the  strangers  who  he
         talked to could have reported him to the authorities."

    During  her  submissions  Ms  Kaedic  submitted   that   that   was   a
    misunderstanding of the evidence and that  it  was  entirely  plausible
    that he would openly talk to people in the workplace because they  were
    strangers he would know them.   I  do  not  find  that  there  was  any
    misunderstanding  by  the  judge  and  that  that  group  is  merely  a
    disagreement with the finding reached by the judge.   At  paragraph  31
    the judge refers to the  Appellant's  own  evidence  about  talking  to
    people in universities  and  workplaces.   Given  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence concerning  the  risk  of  harm  that  was  attached  to  such
    discussions, it was open to the judge to reach the conclusion  that  it
    was not credible that he would take such a risk by talking openly about
    such matters to those who were  strangers  to  him  in  workplaces  and
    universities.  That was a finding that was entirely open to  the  judge
    to make, it was based on the Appellant's own  evidence  (see  paragraph
    33) and therefore is simply a disagreement with the judge's finding.

40. The second arrest was also rejected.  At paragraph 33 the  judge  found
    that there was no evidence that the twelve people  who  were  allegedly
    arrested with the Appellant were  subsequently  charged  with  criminal
    offences and convicted.  The judge also found that if the Appellant had
    been genuinely charged under Article 126A of the Sudanese Criminal Code
    he would not have been released on bail when the authorities could have
    detained him further under the law.  That was a finding  entirely  open
    to the judge and was based on the country  materials  set  out  in  the
    refusal letter at paragraphs 19(d) and (e).   The  background  material
    related to the treatment of criminal suspects in Sudan indicating  that
    warrants were not required for arrest, criminal procedure  nor  permits
    authorities to detain individuals for three days without  charge  which
    may be extended up to a further 45 days and that individuals accused of
    violating  national  security  are  frequently  detained   indefinitely
    without charge.  Given that background information, it  is  noted  that
    the authorities "could have detained you pending your trial.  You claim
    the charges you  face  were  extremely  serious  and  carry  the  death
    penalty".  The Appellant had given evidence in his interview  that  the
    authorities considered him to be the leader of the group  and  that  it
    offered protection from prosecuting two members of the group in  return
    for their testimony against him and that he had  previously  failed  to
    comply with the conditions of a previous release.  On the basis of  the
    Appellant's own evidence, the judge reached the conclusion that if  the
    authorities had a  particular  and  serious  adverse  interest  in  the
    Appellant, and that there was a risk  he  would  not  comply  with  the
    conditions of  his  release  (as  he  had  not  in  the  first  alleged
    detention), that was found to be inconsistent with his  claim  that  he
    was released.  Those are findings that were based on the  evidence  and
    were open to the judge to make.

41.   At paragraph 34 the judge considered the Appellant's evidence that he
    was released from detention after a financial guarantee paid  from  his
    brother in Saudi Arabia.  This is a second point upon which  the  judge
    noted that there was no corroborative  evidence  that  the  Appellant's
    brother from Saudi Arabia  was  visiting  Sudan.   Again  there  is  no
    requirement for corroboration but where such evidence would  reasonably
    be likely to be available,  that  was  a  matter  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into account.  The judge further makes the point  that
    the Appellant's evidence was that authorities "did not know that he was
    living abroad" (in relation to the Appellant's brother).   However  the
    judge found that if  the  Appellant  was  charged  with  offences  that
    carried the death penalty (this was the claim  of  the  Appellant)  the
    authorities would have made some investigations about  the  person  who
    stood guarantee for him for his release from  detention.   That  was  a
    point entirely open to the judge to make based on the factual matrix of
    the Appellant's account.

42. As  to  the  finding  about  the  Appellant's  wife  and  the  lack  of
    questioning, this was submitted  to  show  a  misunderstanding  of  the
    "cultural context" of Sudanese society.  That has not been supported by
    any form of country material nor do I find that it is supported by  the
    judge's findings.  The judge was  simply  making  the  point  that  the
    Appellant's account was that the Appellant's wife had told him  on  the
    telephone that the authorities had come looking for him  and  that  she
    told them she did not know anything.   That  was  contrasted  with  the
    evidence where the judge found that despite that, there was no evidence
    that  the  Appellant's  wife  or  siblings  were  questioned   by   the
    authorities to find out whether they also held the same beliefs as  the
    Appellant.  The judge considered it in the  light  of  the  Appellant's
    claim that he was someone actively propagating his views and  in  those
    circumstances it was reasonable that the authorities would question  or
    interrogate others who were close to the Appellant, bearing in mind not
    only that it was the father-in-law who had  reported  him  but  in  any
    event as noted by the  judge,  the  authorities  had  attended  at  the
    Appellant's home.  There is no misunderstanding about the  evidence  in
    that respect and that was a finding that was entirely open to the judge
    to make.

43. Drawing all those matters  together,  it  is  plain  when  reading  the
    determination as a whole and in particular paragraph 35 in the  context
    of that, that the judge  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    credible witness and  said  so.   The  judge  did  not  find  that  the
    Appellant had demonstrated that his account of circumstances in  Sudan,
    including his membership of the Quranic Group had been demonstrated  to
    the lower standard.  Contrary to the assertion made in the grounds that
    the judge appeared to accept that he was a member of the Quranic Group,
    that is not the finding of the judge at all as is plain from  paragraph
    35 when read in conjunction with the earlier findings.  The  judge  did
    not accept he was a member nor that he had carried out  the  activities
    nor did he find the Appellant had given  credible  evidence  concerning
    the two arrests noting the lack of evidence in support  and  the  other
    findings set out.  Paragraph 35  clearly  refers  to  findings  in  the
    alternative.  That is demonstrated by the use of the  words  "even  if"
    the Appellant his a member of the Quranic Group.  That  clearly  points
    to the judge's findings made earlier in the determination that she  did
    not accept that he was such a member nor that he had given  a  credible
    account about experiences in  Sudan.  Therefore  the  primary  findings
    remain as set out in  the  earlier  paragraphs  and  it  has  not  been
    demonstrated to this Tribunal that those primary adverse findings  have
    been made on any misunderstanding of the evidence nor has it been shown
    that there was any perversity on the part of the judge in reaching such
    findings on the evidence that was placed before her.  I  conclude  that
    those findings were ones that were entirely open to the judge to  make,
    having considered the oral and written evidence of the Appellant and in
    the  light  of  the  country  materials.   The  judge  disbelieved  the
    Appellant's account in  its  totality.   In  those  circumstances,  any
    alternative findings are irrelevant.  At paragraph 36 the judge said

         "The Appellant has fabricated his claim that  he  was  released  on
         bail and did not answer to that bail and is therefore wanted by the
         authorities.  I do not find the Appellant  has  been  charged  with
         apostasy under the criminal law"

    thus finding that there was no risk on return to this  Appellant  based
    on the primary findings of  fact as made by the judge.

44. As for the second ground,  it  is  asserted  that  there  is  a  flawed
    approach by the judge concerning the issue of religious persecution.  I
    do not find that this is made out on the findings of fact made  by  the
    judge.  Contrary to the assertion at paragraph 2 of  the  grounds,  the
    judge did not accept that the Appellant was a  member  of  the  Quranic
    Group for the reasons I have stated earlier, nor that  he  had  carried
    out the activities that he had claimed or that he  was  wanted  by  the
    authorities having been arrested, detained, bailed and  then  left  the
    country.  In those circumstances the judge found that he had not  given
    a credible account of having such a faith.  In those circumstances  the
    judge's comment that he was "able to practise  his  faith  in  his  own
    home" need to be seen in the light of any alternative findings which in
    this case were not strictly necessary to be made.  The judge's  primary
    findings was that she did not accept that the Appellant had engaged  in
    the religious practise in the way that he claimed for the  reasons  the
    judge gave.  This approach  was  not  simplistic  as  asserted  in  the
    grounds; the judge did not believe  that  the  Appellant  had  given  a
    credible account when the determination is read as a whole.

45. Consequently for those  reasons,  I  do  not  find  that  it  has  been
    demonstrated that the judge made an error of law in  the  determination
    and it shall stand.

Decision

46. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.






Signed                              Date 14/11/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

