
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/07351/2013
                                                               AA/07352/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 26th February 2015               |On 28th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     PH
                                     PR
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Broudie, Jackson and
Canter
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellants are both nationals of the Islamic Republic of  Iran.
         They have permission[1] to appeal against the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal (Judge  Foudy)[2]  to  dismiss  their  linked  asylum
         appeals[3].

         Background and Matters in Issue

      2. The Appellants are mother and son. The basis of  their  claims  for
         international protection is a fear of persecution  for  reasons  of
         their imputed political opinion. The Appellants asserted,  and  the
         Tribunal accepted, that the First Appellant's husband H  (also  the
         Second Appellant's father) had been the mayor of a  town  in  Iran.
         All three had claimed asylum in May 2013 on the basis  that  H  had
         being coerced by the Iranian  regime  into  taking  that  job,  and
         presumably into implementing policies that he was opposed to.   The
         family now feared persecution because he had abandoned his post  at
         a point described by the Tribunal as the "critical time in the lead
         up to the Presidential elections in summer  2013".   In  June  2013
         they learned that the eldest son of the family, who had remained in
         Iran, had been  arrested  and  was  being  held  until  his  father
         returned.  H therefore withdrew his own asylum claim  and  returned
         to Iran to secure the release of his son.  He has not been heard of
         since he returned to Iran, but the family believe that he must  now
         be in custody, since his eldest son has now been released.

      3. The Tribunal proceeded on the basis  that  the  facts  underpinning
         these appeals were all accepted.   The  appeals  were  nevertheless
         dismissed on the basis that there was no  current  risk  to  either
         Appellant.  The  release  of  the  eldest  son  showed   that   the
         authorities in Iran had no on-going interest in any of  H's  family
         members. The son had been used as a bargaining chip to  ensure  H's
         return but there was no indication that a similar tactic  would  be
         used against these Appellants.  The Tribunal found it  "incredible"
         that the Iranian authorities would do any more  than  question  the
         Appellants about why they had been out of Iran since February 2013:
         "that in itself does not amount to persecution or  Article  3  ill-
         treatment".

      4. The grounds of appeal  are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  risk
         assessment was flawed for a failure to take relevant evidence  into
         account. In particular no regard was given to the following:

          i) Although it was believed that the elder son had been  released
             the evidence was that his whereabouts and fate were unknown;

         ii) The Appellant's had relied on  a  report  by  Iranian  country
             expert Dr Kakhki who believed that the whole family  could  be
             at  risk  for  suspected   reformist   sympathies   in   these
             circumstances;

        iii) The Operational Guidance Note  (OGN)  and  Country  of  Origin
             Information Report (COIR) before the Tribunal  indicated  that
             prison conditions in Iran breached Article 3 -  no  assessment
             was made as to the likelihood of detention during or following
             the questioning that would occur on arrival;

         iv) The Appellants' had professed their own dislike of the Iranian
             regime. No consideration was given to  that  evidence  in  the
             context of the questioning that they would be subject  to:  RT
             (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38.

      5. The Respondent opposed the appeal on all grounds. The evidence  was
         that the Appellants had been unable to make contact with the eldest
         son. Asking the Tribunal to infer from this that he was somehow  at
         risk was speculation.    As  for  the  evidence  of  Dr  Kakhki  he
         appeared to have overlooked the fact that the  Iranian  authorities
         had got what they wanted out of the detention of H's eldest  son  -
         in those circumstances there was no reason to detain  or  otherwise
         persecute any  members  of  his  family.   No  issue  arose  as  to
         questioning on return since the Appellants had both  left  Iran  on
         valid passports endorsed with  UK  visit  visas  and  Iranian  exit
         permits. The Home Office had those passports  and  would  be  using
         them  to  return  the  Appellants:  the   OGN   only   applies   to
         "undocumented"  failed  asylum  seekers.   Ms   Johnstone   further
         submitted that no 'HJ/RT' point arises  since  the  Appellants  can
         tell the truth: the Iranians know that H tried to flee to  Britain,
         since they managed to lure him back and now have him in custody.

         Error of Law

      6. On the face of it,  the  logic  in  this  determination  cannot  be
         faulted. On the Appellants' own evidence  the  Iranian  authorities
         were not interested in them, only H, and since he has now  returned
         in order to secure the release of his son, there is no  reason  why
         the authorities would have any on-going interest in this family.

      7. This analysis, attractive as it  is,  does  however  fail  to  take
         relevant evidence into account.  It was already accepted  that  the
         regime had used another family  member  in  order  to  get  to  the
         principle target: as the determination notes at paragraph 21, there
         is good country evidence that this is a method  regularly  employed
         by the Iranian regime.   Where the fate of that family  member  was
         unknown it was arguable that he remained at "real  risk",  such  an
         assessment being made in the context of a repressive, brutal and at
         times irrational regime.  This was  the  point  being  made  by  Dr
         Kakhki.

      8. I am further satisfied that there was  an  inadequate  analysis  of
         what might happen to these  Appellants  on  return  to  Tehran.  No
         consideration was given to the evidence  in  the  OGN/  COIR.  This
         states that checks are conducted not only  into  illegal  departure
         (which Ms Johnstone correctly observes would  not  apply  to  these
         returnees) but where the person has "outstanding  issues  with  the
         authorities" [32.11 COIR].    Nor was there any consideration given
         to the political views expressed by  these  Appellants.   The  fact
         that they had been out of the country for a period longer than that
         permitted by their UK visas would indicate that this had not simply
         been a holiday. The  most  basic  checks  would  have  alerted  the
         authorities to their relationship with H.  In  those  circumstances
         some assessment should have been made of  the  'HJ/RK'  point  that
         was, it would appear, argued before the First-tier  Tribunal.   For
         those reasons I set this decision aside, following a hearing on the
         30th October 2014.

         The Re-Made Decision

      9. I re-make my decision with reference to the factual matrix found by
         the First-tier Tribunal but I must also have regard to  the  up  to
         date material before me: by the time the  appeal  was  re-heard  in
         February 2015 there had been some development in the evidence as it
         had stood before Judge Foudy.  I therefore begin by making findings
         of fact on the new material. I will  then  make  an  assessment  of
         current risk.

         Current Circumstances of Appellants: Additional Evidence

     10. PH adopted her witness statement dated 22nd October  2014.  Therein
         she gives evidence, supported by documentary evidence and her  live
         testimony, that she had converted to Christianity. She states  that
         whilst she was still in Iran she had dreamt  about  being  held  in
         Jesus' hand; she had felt him to be beautiful and  pure.   She  was
         baptised at the Well Community Church in Rochdale  in  April  2014.
         The file contained evidence from Dr  Iain  Wight,  Leader  of  that
         church, that she and her son had  been  regularly  attending  there
         since March 2014.   Ms Johnstone put it to PH that this  conversion
         appeared to coincide with her having lost her  asylum  appeal.  The
         determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  promulgated   in
         December 2013 and the Appellants started attending church a  matter
         of weeks  later.    PH  agreed  that  she  had  been  under  stress
         following  the  dismissal  of  the  appeal.  She  had  been  taking
         medication and was in need of support. Two Iranian friends  in  the
         UK introduced her to the church.  She was helped there. In response
         to Mr Brown's questions she confirmed that she had been  told  that
         she had permission to challenge  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal in January and that she had started to  attend  church  in
         March.

     11. PH consistently stated that the whereabouts of her son and  husband
         remained unknown. She had not been able to make enquiries about  it
         with her family in Iran. She said that she was reluctant to use the
         telephone or  email  to  Iran  because  she  believed  them  to  be
         monitored by the authorities. A  relative  of  hers  who  lives  in
         Germany had visited Iran and had told her  that  the  whole  family
         there are "under extreme pressure". She had advised  the  Appellant
         that it would not at present be safe to return.  This relative  had
         spoken with the Appellant's sister who is a lawyer and "knows  more
         than the average person". Her sister had told  this  relative  that
         the Appellant should be  careful  about  the  telephone  etc  being
         monitored.  The Appellant said that she already been aware of  this
         issue, because her husband had  always  warned  her  about  it.  Ms
         Johnstone put it to the Appellant that she could have instructed  a
         lawyer, for instance  her  sister,  to  make  enquiries  about  her
         husband. The Appellant said that there was no point because Etelaat
         don't give out that kind of information about political prisoners.

     12. Ms Johnstone asked PH about her son in Iran. She was asked how  she
         came to know that he had been released. She clarified that she  did
         not know he had been released, this was simply what her brother-in-
         law had been told when he  had  made  enquiries  with  a  'contact'
         within Etelaat.    She maintained that her son in the UK  has  made
         no attempt to find his brother or father through social media.  She
         has told him not to.

     13. PH expressed her own opinions  as  being  opposed  to  the  Iranian
         regime. She said that whilst she was still in Iran she had stood by
         her husband's side as they campaigned on human rights  issues.  For
         instance she spoke out at work about women's rights.  She  believes
         that the regime does not respect human rights.  She  has  converted
         to Christianity. These are her beliefs but she could not  admit  to
         any of this on arrival since  they  would  "straight  away  arrange
         execution".

     14. PH accepted that when she left Iran her passport had been  endorsed
         with an exit stamp but was unable to say with  any  certainty  what
         kind or colour it had been.  She  said  that  she  had  left  as  a
         tourist and now anticipated being questioned on  arrival  since  it
         was evident that she had not  simply  been  on  holiday.  That  was
         obvious from the length of time but also because she had failed  to
         return to her job in a government department.  Ms Johnstone put  it
         to her that on her visa application form she had described  herself
         as a librarian. PH agreed that this was the case - she was. She was
         employed by the government. She explained that  if  you  wanted  to
         leave Iran you had to fill  in  forms  for  the  security  services
         explaining where you are going and how long you will be  away  for.
         She had not wanted to do all of this so she had just taken 2  weeks
         leave. They had not known she was leaving the country.

     15. I then heard evidence from PR.  He adopted his  witness  statement.
         He too has converted to Christianity  and  has  been  baptised.  He
         found the people in the church to be genuine and that  they  helped
         him from the bottom of their hearts with  all  the  stress  he  was
         experiencing.  In his statement he said that he had  been  prompted
         to go to church after meeting a woman named Mina  who  was  in  the
         hostel where he was staying with his mum.  Mina  had  come  in  and
         prayed with them and he had  felt  relaxed  and  calm  and  "a  new
         feeling" in his body. In his oral evidence he  explained  that  his
         involvement in Christianity "goes back to a dream" he had.  He  was
         going up a mountain and in the distance he saw a man with a  bright
         face, full of light, trying to take his hand and pull  him  up  the
         mountain.  It makes him feel good - calm. Ms  Johnstone  asked  why
         this dream had not featured in his statement. He said that  he  had
         not recalled it - it was only a month or two ago.   He  offered  no
         comment on her observation that his mother  had  also  mentioned  a
         dream.

     16. PR states that he was seventeen when he arrived in the UK.  One  of
         the things he is worried about is that he  will  be  questioned  on
         arrival about why he has not completed his military service. He was
         due for call up when he turned 18. He does not know  what  he  will
         say if asked why he has not done it.

     17. He confirmed that he has had no contact with either his brother  or
         his father since he arrived.  He has not tried to look on  Facebook
         or anywhere else for his brother - he is frightened of finding  out
         bad news.

     18. I then heard oral evidence from a Mr Roy Teague. He is an elder  of
         the Well Community Church and I was informed by way of letter dated
         18th February 2015 that he was being sent in  lieu  of  the  church
         leader,  Mr  Wight.    He  confirmed  that  to  his  knowledge  the
         Appellants had both been attending the  church  since  March  2014.
         Neither he nor any other church leader can speak Farsi so they rely
         on other Iranians who come to  translate  the  services.    He  was
         asked about the very  short  time  that  the  Appellants  had  been
         attending the church before they were baptised. He agreed  that  it
         had been quick - only a matter of weeks. He said  that  the  church
         does not have its own baptistery - it has to 'book  a  slot'  at  a
         church in Heywood which has one suitable. The slot had already been
         booked for a number of other people  and  so  the  Appellants  were
         'moved up' and were done on the same day. He denied that the church
         would agree to baptise people it was not sure about. He  said  that
         the Appellants were only baptised because Mr Wight and others  were
         convinced that the Appellants had accepted the Lord Jesus Christ as
         their saviour. It was not particularly important that they had  any
         great depth of knowledge  about  Christianity  -  that  would  come
         later, and in the case of these Appellants it had, as they  pursued
         their learning as full members of the congregation.  The church was
         alive to the possibility that they were being 'used'. In this  case
         that was categorically not their view.   It  is  his  understanding
         that the Well Community Church has baptised a total of 17  Iranians
         but he was unable to give a timeframe.

         Current Circumstances of Appellants: My Findings

     19. The Appellants must show it to be  "reasonably  likely"  that  they
         have converted to Christianity. I remind myself that this is a  low
         standard of proof and that their evidence until this point has been
         accepted as true. I have considered all  of  the  evidence  in  the
         round but find that the Appellant's have not discharged the  burden
         of proof and shown to that lower standard that they  have  in  fact
         left Islam for Christianity.

     20. The  objective  evidence  of  their  conversion  consisted  of  the
         evidence of Mr Teague that they had been attending his church for a
         matter of weeks before they were  baptised.   I  accept  that  they
         attended those services between March and April 2014 and that  they
         continue to do so. I heard evidence that their  baptisms  in  April
         2014 were brought forward for purely practical reasons - the church
         had already booked the use of  the  baptistery  in  the  church  in
         Heywood and so the Appellants were added to that group.  I  do  not
         doubt that Mr Teague was telling the truth, or that he believes the
         Appellants to be true converts. His faith in them is however driven
         by the fact that he is a fervent Christian,  who  would  very  much
         like them to be fervent Christians.  I have attached some weight to
         this subjective opinion, but having considered his evidence in  the
         round with that of the Appellants, cannot at present  be  satisfied
         that this is a true conversion.

     21. These Appellants have not  been  tested  on  their  "knowledge"  or
         understanding of the  Christian  faith  but  it  is  overwhelmingly
         likely that on the date that they were baptised it was  minimal.  I
         make this finding because there  is  no  evidence  that  they  were
         investigating Christianity prior to their meeting with Mina in  the
         hostel, and can only have gleaned the most basic information in the
         month that they were  attending  services  at  the  Well  Community
         Church. The Appellants were  both  raised  as  Muslims,  and  Islam
         specifically forbids departure from the faith in  trenchant  terms.
         In those circumstances any faith journey away from it is likely  to
         be a difficult process that any individual would struggle with.  It
         is only rarely that it could be accomplished in a matter of  weeks.
         The evidence of the Appellants suggests that they were both  driven
         to this Damascene moment by having "feelings" and  "dreams".  I  do
         not doubt that both of these psychological phenomena  are  relevant
         to an individual's spirituality, but the evidence on these  matters
         was markedly inconsistent.  PH wrote in her statement that she  had
         become interested in Christianity after having a dream in  Iran  in
         which she was held by Jesus who told her that if she had any wishes
         she should let him know. One might think that such a dream would be
         regarded with great significance but there is no evidence that  she
         took any steps to investigate Christianity after this.  Even  after
         her arrival in the UK in February 2013 it took her over a  year  to
         attend a church.  PR expressly states in his  written  evidence  of
         October 2014 that he decided to find out about  Christianity  after
         experiencing a "new kind of feeling" in his  body  when  he  prayed
         with Mina in the hostel in the UK.  This is what led him to want to
         attend church. In his oral evidence he said that he had decided  to
         attend church after having a dream about Jesus. When it was put  to
         him that he had never mentioned this dream before he said  that  it
         was because he had only had it a few weeks ago: a reason for why it
         did not appear in his statement but hardly a  possible  explanation
         for why he decided to attend church in March 2014.

     22. Overall there is insufficient evidence  before  me  to  demonstrate
         that either of these Appellants has made a genuine conversion  from
         Islam to Christianity. I do however  accept  that  they  have  been
         attending the Well Community Church for just over a year  and  that
         they have undergone a baptism.

         Risk Assessment

     23. Both Appellants  came  to  the  UK  with  valid  Iranian  passports
         containing exit permits. I find that they left Iran lawfully.

     24. If returned to Iran today they would have been out of  the  country
         for well over two years.  Their UK visit visas expired on the  20th
         June 2013 and there would be no endorsement on their  passports  to
         show that there had been any  extension  of  leave.  Any  competent
         officer would in those circumstances make some  enquiry  into  what
         the pair had been doing in the UK: it is accepted country  guidance
         that all returnees are screened[4]. In  the  context  of  Iran  the
         officer's starting point, for a woman travelling with her  son  but
         without a husband, might be to enquire who her husband is and where
         he is: the COIR cites evidence that women need  the  permission  of
         their husband to be able to travel, particularly with  children[5].
          In his report dated  17th  September  2013  Dr  Kakhki  wrote  the
         following:

             "I have conducted extensive  research  using  a  Farsi  Search
             engine and found a considerable amount of information relating
             to [SR]'s work as the Mayor of [X], his relationship with  the
             members of  the  city  council,  his  progressive  and  modern
             approach to developing the city in the interests of the  local
             populace. He is generally well regarded as  a  well  respected
             professional manager held in regard by voters, despite  having
             conflict with hardline elements of the government.

             There were numerous objections when [SR] was removed from  his
             position as the Bushehr Mayor, and  plentiful  calls  for  his
             reinstatement can  be  found  within  various  news  websites/
             internet articles. Consequently I have no doubt that [SR]  was
             indeed the Mayor of [X] and was reappointed  to  his  post  in
             2013, despite controversy between hardliners  and  progressive
             reformists regarding his reappointment".

         This was the background to Judge Foudy's  acceptance  that  SR  had
         been compelled to return to Iran by political opponents and that he
         had been imprisoned on his arrival.   I find it  to  be  reasonably
         likely that this information would  be  readily  available  to  the
         receiving immigration officer on arrival in Tehran. That is because
         the passport details, exit permits and any other identity documents
         held by the Appellants will be linked in central records to that of
         SR, and because neither Appellant can  reasonably  be  expected  to
         withhold the fact of their relationship with him. If they  were  to
         do so that would be a very risky strategy, since it would depend on
         the officer accepting at face value the information  they  provided
         and not conducting a check of his own.

     25. I see no reason to doubt the evidence that  the  family  left  Iran
         having told the authorities that they would be returning  within  a
         matter of weeks, SR having been given a leave  of  absence  on  the
         basis that he needed medical treatment in the  UK.    PH  explained
         that she had not even bothered to tell her employer  that  she  was
         leaving the country, since to do so would involve filling in  forms
         for the security services to check and authorise "ex-Iran leave". I
         accept her evidence that she  told  her  boss  that  she  would  be
         returning after two weeks.   I accept that having established their
         Appellants' relationships to SR the officer at the immigration desk
         would quickly establish all of this too.

     26. The question at the heart of this appeal is what would happen next.
         It  is  the  Respondent's  case  that  nothing  would  happen.  The
         Appellants would be granted entry and be allowed  to  go  on  their
         way.   If  the  information  provided  to  PH's  brother-in-law  is
         correct, her eldest son was released  from  custody  and  there  is
         therefore no reason to suspect  that  either  of  these  Appellants
         would  be  subject  to  any  further  investigation.  There  is   a
         possibility that this is indeed  what  would  happen,  but  in  the
         context of Iran I find there to be a real risk that the  Appellants
         would be subject to far greater scrutiny than that.

     27. They are the immediate relatives of a man who has made  enemies  in
         the "hardliners" in the Iranian government to the  extent  that  he
         has been removed from his  public  office  and  imprisoned.  It  is
         reasonable to infer from the circumstances that SR would have  been
         questioned about  his  time  in  the  UK.  The  country  background
         material indicates that there is a real risk that SR has been  ill-
         treated during his detention. I find it  to  be  reasonably  likely
         that he will have told the Iranian  authorities  that  he  and  his
         family had claimed asylum in the UK. Even if he did not this  would
         be a reasonable inference for any  investigating  officer  to  draw
         given that the Appellants have been away from  Iran  for  over  two
         years when they were supposed to return after two  weeks.    As  Dr
         Kakhki explains, this lengthy, unauthorised absence  from  Iran  is
         likely in itself to raise questions:

             "... spending a considerable amount of time abroad may  create
             an additional risk factor for [PH]  and  her  son  upon  their
             return  as  the  authorities  may  investigate  any  potential
             connections and information  they  may  have  acquired  during
             their  stay  abroad,  as  well  as  possible   divulgence   of
             confidential information to unauthorised  persons  during  the
             asylum application process in the UK"

     28. It is at this point that  the  authorities  of  HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
         (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31 and RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC  38  become
         relevant.  If I  accept  that  the  Appellants  are  likely  to  be
         questioned about their relationship to RS and their time in the UK,
         logic would suggest that this is reasonably likely to involve  some
         questions about their own  political  views,  particularly  if  the
         investigation is concerned with the details of their asylum  claim.
         Mr Brown correctly points out that neither Appellant can reasonably
         be expected to conceal  their  allegiance  to  SR,  nor  their  own
         antipathy towards the hardline elements of the Iranian regime. Nor,
         applying RT, can they  be  expected  to  lie  if  asked  about  any
         connection to Christianity in the  UK.   An  investigating  officer
         would not be interested in "peering into  their  souls":  the  fact
         that they  have  been  attending  church  and  have  been  formally
         baptised would be the focus of the enquiry.  I find that  in  these
         circumstances  there  is  a  real  risk  the  Appellants  would  be
         transferred from the airport into detention under  the  control  of
         the security services and that this would likely involve direct ill-
         treatment or being held in conditions which themselves amounted  to
         a violation of Article  3  ECHR.   Section  3.17.3-3.17.11  of  the
         Respondent's Operational Guidance Note (v8.0 October 2012) sets out
         the detailed evidence that leads to the conclusion at  3.17.3:  "as
         conditions in prisons and detention facilities are potentially life
         threatening in Iran,  they  are  likely  to  reach  the  Article  3
         threshold".  The same guidance goes on to state [at  3.17.14]:  "It
         is clear that political opponents of the regime  will  suffer  ill-
         treatment amounting to persecution. As imprisonment is  related  to
         one of the five Refugee grounds - political or perceived  political
         opinion, a grant of asylum will  be  appropriate".   Applying  that
         guidance, these appeals must be allowed.

         Decisions

     29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of  law
         and it is set aside to the extent identified above.

     30. The decisions in both appeals are:

         "The appeals are allowed on asylum grounds.

         The Appellants are not entitled to humanitarian protection  because
         they are refugees.

         The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds."

     31. I make a direction for anonymity in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the Appellants and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              3rd April 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 14th January 2014 by Designated First-tier
Tribunal Judge Murray
[2] Determination dated 9th December 2013
[3] Decisions appealed were decisions to remove from the UK pursuant to s10
of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 dated 23rd July 2013
[4] BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36
(IAC)
[5] See Country of Origin Information Report September 2013 sections 31.03-
31.05

