
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07864/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2015                |On 8th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     PP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, Counsel instructed on behalf of
Sriharans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal had made an  anonymity  direction  and  neither
    party sought for this to be discharged therefore I make  the  anonymity
    direction as above.

 3. The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Aujla) who, in a  determination  promulgated
    on 2nd June 2015 dismissed his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent made  on  24th  September  2014  to  refuse  his  claim  for
    asylum/humanitarian protection or on human rights grounds and to  issue
    a decision to remove.

 4. The immigration history of the Appellant can  be  shortly  stated.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 5th September 2012 on his passport and in
    possession of a visit visa issued in Oman  valid  from  7th  July  2012
    until 7th January 2013.  The Appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka.   He
    had claimed asylum by attending at the Home Office  on  25th  September
    2012.

 5. The Secretary of State refused his claim for asylum for the reasons set
    out in the refusal letter dated 18th September 2014.  As a result,  the
    Appellant sought to appeal that decision and the matter came before the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Aujla) on 19th May 2015.   It  is  right  to
    observe that prior to the hearing there  had  been  a  further  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal which had been adjourned for the reasons
    set out at paragraphs [11]-[16] of the determination; a matter  I  will
    return to in due course.

 6. The basis of the  Appellant's  claim  was  set  out  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraphs [22]-[24] and related to events that had occurred previously
    in Sri Lanka relating to his family members including his  brother  and
    his father both of whom  were  refugees  having  been  granted  refugee
    status in the United Kingdom respectively in 2009.  The  Appellant  had
    lived in Oman but after returning to  Sri  Lanka  in  August  2012  was
    arrested by the Sri Lankan  authorities  on  2nd  September  2012,  was
    detained, ill-treated but was able to escape  from  custody  it  having
    been arranged by his father-in-law who had paid for his release by  way
    of a bribe.  He left Sri Lankan on 5th September 2012  and  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on the same day.  The Appellant  made  reference  to
    further interest being shown in him at the family home and as a  result
    of his connections to his family members.  A further issue  that  arose
    after the Secretary of State refused his asylum  claim  related  to  an
    interview that had taken place with officials from the Sri Lankan  High
    Commission to  obtain  an  emergency  travel  document  (ETD)  for  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant gave evidence as to what had happened at that
    interview  and  that  the  questions  asked  and  the  conduct  of  the
    authorities following this interview also demonstrated a risk on return
    to Sri Lanka.

 7. The  judge  dismissed  his  appeal  having  set  out  his  findings  of
    credibility and fact from paragraph [37]-[53] of the determination.  He
    set out the main issues to be decided at [40] and having considered the
    Appellant's account he reached the conclusion that  the  Appellant  had
    not given a credible account as to why the authorities would  have  any
    continuing interest in him arising out of his brother's past history or
    otherwise.  In respect of the interview held on 11th November  2014  at
    [52], whilst he did not  have  any  independent  evidence  as  to  what
    questions had been  asked  of  the  Appellant  at  that  interview  the
    Respondent having not produced the interview notes and the judge having
    refused an adjournment for that  purpose,  considered  the  Appellant's
    account of what had transpired but reached the conclusion that whatever
    questions he had been asked, the answers would not have  generated  any
    adverse interest in the Appellant as they had no interest in him on any
    account.  The judge reached the conclusion that whilst the  authorities
    were aware of his relationship to his brother that that had not  caused
    them any concern in the past and there would  be  no  reason  why  that
    would happen on return to Sri Lanka.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Shimmin)  on  25th  June
    2015.  A Rule 24 response was filed thereafter on 9th July 2015.

 9. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Ms Jones, who did  not
    appear for the Appellant in the court below  relied  upon  the  grounds
    that were before the Tribunal which asserted that the judge  had  erred
    in law by not assessing the intervention of the Sri Lankan  authorities
    separately and also that the judge  had  failed  to  make  findings  in
    respect of the Appellant's evidence as to what had happened as a result
    of the questions that had been asked in that interview which the  judge
    had set out at [33] but had not reached findings of  fact  on  at  [52]
    when he considered the issue.  Ms Jones submitted that  the  judge  had
    made findings unsustainable on the evidence at  [45]  relating  to  the
    family history and the judge's consideration that there had been no new
    activities that would trigger interest in the  Appellant  three  and  a
    half years later which was inconsistent with the evidence but also with
    the judge's own finding that the authorities would have been aware that
    the Appellant had a UK visa when they inspected  his  passport  at  the
    airport and the Appellant's brother's activities in the UK.

10. She also relied upon the ground in which  it  was  submitted  that  the
    judge  wrongly  found  the  Appellant's  case  to  be  implausible   at
    paragraphs [45] and [46]. She submitted that  he  made  those  findings
    based on his own views and background and that the judge failed to take
    into account the cultural context in which findings  should  have  been
    considered and in particular why the Appellant did not make enquiry  of
    his father-in-law as to how he had arranged his escape.  Ms Jones  also
    relied upon the ground in which it was said that the  finding  at  [49]
    that his failure to return to Oman when he could have sought protection
    rather than come to the UK had not been brought to the Appellant in the
    hearing and that that was procedural irregularity and that  furthermore
    the findings that were made were not in  accordance  with  the  country
    guidance decision of JG and  Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.

11. In addition she sought to amend  the  grounds  at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing to include a ground that the judge had not made any findings of
    fact upon the evidence of the Appellant's brother and  father  both  of
    whom had refugee status and that both had provided  witness  statements
    and the Appellant's brother was at court to give  evidence.   She  also
    sought to introduce  a  copy  of  the  determination  relating  to  the
    Appellant's father in  which  the  oral  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    brother was recorded and findings of fact made by that Judge which  she
    said was relevant to the issue of risk and the  findings  as  a  whole.
    Thus she submitted that there were errors  of  law  which  demonstrated
    that the decision should be set aside.

12. Mr Whitwell on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon the Rule 24
    response in which the Respondent opposed the appeal on the  basis  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself appropriately  and  made
    findings which were open to him on the evidence.  In respect of the ETD
    interview, Mr Whitwell submitted that at [52] the judge had  considered
    the argument that had been put forward on behalf of the  Appellant  but
    was entitled to reject any risk of harm to him having  found  that  the
    Appellant was not a credible  witness  and  that  irrespective  of  the
    brother's circumstances the authorities had not shown any  interest  in
    the Appellant prior to 2012 and that there was  no  reason  to  believe
    that he would be of interest solely on account of  the  interview  that
    had taken place.  As to the amended ground, he submitted the production
    of the determination of the Appellant's father had not been couched  in
    terms of the decision of Ladd v Marshall.  He had looked  at  the  file
    note made by the previous Presenting Officer and whilst there had  been
    a reference made to the Presenting Officer seeking  an  adjournment  to
    request the brother's file, that in itself did not lend support to  the
    instructions given to Ms Jones that the Appellant's brother's  evidence
    was not necessary and in any event the judge  was  aware  of  both  the
    Appellant's brother and his father's refugee status at [22].   Thus  it
    was submitted there were findings that were open to the judge  to  make
    on questions of credibility and the judge had given reasons as  to  why
    he had not found  the  Appellant  to  have  given  a  credible  account
    relating to both his immigration history and the  issue  of  delay  and
    those facts were not really challenged.  As to the  arrest  warrant  at
    [50], the judge recorded that he had no original document.

13. At the conclusion of the submissions I informed the parties that I  had
    reached the conclusion overall that the grounds were made out and  that
    the decision should be set aside.  I therefore give my reasons.

14. It is common ground that the Appellant was subject to an  interview  on
    11th November 2014 undertaken by the Sri Lankan High  Commission.   The
    interview was with a  view  to  obtain  an  emergency  travel  document
    ("ETD") for the Appellant as he had claimed he had lost  his  passport.
    The determination sets out this background  at  [12]  noting  that  the
    Appellant had attended a hearing on 15th December where  the  Appellant
    had produced a witness statement dated 11th November 2014  setting  out
    that when he had gone to report at Eaton House he was interviewed by an
    Immigration Officer who was accompanied by two officials from  the  Sri
    Lankan High Commission.  He did not know  that  they  were  from  there
    until after  the  interview  and  he  was  asked  questions  about  his
    employment, the police area that he had lived in, whether  his  brother
    was a journalist who was living in the United Kingdom, the  address  of
    his brother, how he lost his passport, his  immigration  history.   The
    hearing was adjourned as it was indicated  by  the  Presenting  Officer
    that the new evidence needed investigation and it was accepted that the
    Appellant had been interviewed as claimed.  At the hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal there was no  further  progress  in  obtaining  the
    Record of Interview or further information thus an application was made
    by the Presenting Officer for two reasons;  the  Respondent  needed  to
    investigate the matter and "to  reconsider  the  Appellant's  case"  at
    [14].  There was a note on the file which records that  the  submission
    made before the previous Immigration Judge appeared to be on the  basis
    that in view of the  interview  having  taken  place  that  there  were
    grounds for revising the decision.   However  at  [15]  the  First-tier
    Tribunal records that the Appellant's Counsel  objected  to  a  further
    adjournment and therefore at [16] the judge refused the adjournment  on
    the basis that the Respondent had had ample  time  to  investigate  the
    matter and reconsider the Appellant's case thus he proceeded  with  the
    hearing.  The judge therefore had  no  interview  notes  and  the  only
    evidence to what questions he had been asked or in what manner was that
    of the Appellant.

15. The judge set out the issues at [40] including  whether  the  interview
    with the officials of the Sri Lankan High Commission would  expose  the
    Appellant to risk of harm on return.  His findings in this respect  are
    set out at [52].  Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge did consider the
    issue of risk and having found the Appellant not to be credible earlier
    in the determination he was entitled to consider his  account  of  what
    had transpired at the interview against  that  backdrop.   As  set  out
    earlier the judge had no interview notes having refused the  Presenting
    Officer's application for adjournment.  He accepted that the  Appellant
    had been asked questions concerning his personal family details and how
    he lost his passport and whilst he accepted that he may have been asked
    questions about his father and brother, he did not  set  out  what  the
    nature of those questions were and  whether  he  accepted  the  account
    given by the Appellant in  his  statement.  However  whilst  the  judge
    reached the conclusion that whatever had happened during the  interview
    would not generate an adverse interest in him, even if he was right  to
    conclude that he had not been of interest to  the  authorities  in  the
    past, he had failed to take into account the facts that the authorities
    had learnt during the interview which would give rise to a risk and  in
    particular that both his brother and father were refugees in the UK  as
    a result of interest shown in them by the authorities, that his father-
    in-law had assisted him to escape and that he had spent time in the  UK
    with his brother who had provided a witness statement at  [48]-[50]  in
    which he had set out the basis of his claim and that he was  associated
    with the British  Tamil  Forum  [6].   The  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    brother's claim for refugee status which was accepted by the  Secretary
    of State was that he had undertaken work as a journalist where  he  had
    investigated news footage dealing with human rights abuses of  the  Sri
    Lankan Government (see witness statement paragraphs 4-6 at page 49) and
    that  his  father  had  also  been  the  subject  of  interest  of  the
    authorities following him having left Sri Lanka and that his father had
    also been granted refugee status on that basis (see  page  46  father's
    statement).

16.  Furthermore  the  judge  did  not  deal  with  the  relevant  evidence
    concerning the events that were said to have  occurred  after  the  EDT
    interview which was relevant to the assessment of risk.  The judge  set
    out at [33] the Appellant's oral evidence which deals with  the  events
    following the ETD interview and postdates his written witness statement
    of November 2014.  His evidence was  that  since  signing  the  witness
    statement, the authorities in Sri  Lanka  had  contacted  his  wife  in
    January 2015, she  had  been  interrogated  and  they  had  taken  down
    details.  He also made reference to his wife being shown a passport and
    being asked to confirm that the person shown on the  passport  was  her
    husband.  The Appellant also gave evidence of further harassment by the
    authorities to other family members including his  father-in-law  whose
    employment had been terminated.  The judge made  no  findings  on  this
    evidence which occurred post the ETD interview and therefore is  absent
    from his analysis of risk at [52].  Whilst the submission  made  by  Mr
    Whitwell that he had made general credibility findings, the analysis of
    risk arising from the ETD interview  was  incomplete  for  the  reasons
    given therefore I find that that ground is made out.

17. I am also satisfied that at [45] the judge made a core finding of  fact
    which was based on an erroneous factual basis.   The  judge  considered
    the Appellant's  account  of  being  of  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities, and made a finding that after the Appellant's brother  had
    escaped custody in 2009 that there was no interest in the Appellant  or
    any member of his family until September 2012.  The judge  stated  that
    "however the authorities gave no  problems  to  the  Appellant  or  any
    member of the family.  The Appellant would  have  me  believe  that  in
    September 2012, over three and a  half  years  after  his  brother  had
    escaped custody, the  authorities  arrested  and  detained  him."   The
    finding was based on an erroneous factual basis.  The chronology of the
    Appellant's claim was set out earlier  in  the  determination  at  [22]
    referring to the Appellant's brother having been arrested in 2008,  and
    subsequently escaping from custody in 2009 and being  recognised  as  a
    refugee.  The Appellant's father  consequently  had  problems  in  2009
    arising from his son's activities in Sri Lanka and was  granted  asylum
    in the UK [paragraph 51].  The Appellant was not in Sri Lanka  but  was
    in Oman and had returned  thereafter  in  August  2012  although  there
    appear to have been some visits within that time.  The finding made  at
    [45] that the authorities had no problem with the Appellant or  members
    of his family after his brother left was  not  factually  correct;  the
    Appellant's father was also the subject of adverse interest by the  Sri
    Lankan authorities which led to him being granted  refugee  status  and
    also ignores the period in which the Appellant was outside of Sri Lanka
    in Oman.  Consequently  the  finding  based  on  the  belief  that  the
    authorities waited three and a half years before showing  any  interest
    was factually  incorrect.   Consequently  I  am  satisfied  that  those
    grounds I have  referred  to  and  are  pleaded,  demonstrate  that  in
    reaching the overall credibility finding and the assessment of risk was
    flawed  for  the  reasons  I  have  given.   Whilst  there  were  other
    credibility findings that were  made  by  the  judge,  which  were  not
    challenged, including the delay in claiming  asylum,  for  the  reasons
    given the overall findings were unsafe.

18. At the outset of  the  case  Ms  Jones  sought  to  amend  the  grounds
    challenged.  No notice was given of this in writing or otherwise  prior
    to the hearing.  She submitted that there were no findings of fact made
    by the judge concerning the  Appellant's  brother's  evidence  and  his
    account which would lend weight and corroboration  to  the  Appellant's
    account of risk on return.  She submitted that the Appellant's  brother
    and father were both granted refugee status; the Appellant's  brother's
    account was based on his activities  as  a  journalist  exposing  human
    rights abuses and that his father was persecuted after he had left  the
    UK for the  reasons  set  out  in  the  witness  statement.   She  made
    reference to the witness statement from the  Appellant's  father  (page
    45) and the  Appellant's  brother  who  had  also  provided  a  witness
    statement setting out his experience (page 46).  The basis of the claim
    was  that  the  interest  of  the  authorities  had  shifted  from  the
    Appellant's brother to the Appellant's father [paragraph 9] and this in
    turn supported the risk to the Appellant.  The Appellant's brother also
    set out in his witness statement evidence at  paragraph  10  concerning
    the issue of  the  arrest  warrant  relevant  to  the  Appellant.   She
    submitted that whilst the Appellant's brother  was  at  court  and  had
    provided a witness statement he was not called to give evidence as  her
    instructions were to the effect that it was not felt to be necessary by
    the  judge.   Furthermore  she  provided  a  copy   of   the   father's
    determination which had not been provided before which set out the oral
    evidence of the Appellant's brother and  set  out  the  nature  of  the
    threats to the family and interest in the family by the authorities.

19. I could find no reference to this matter in the determination and asked
    Mr Whitwell for any observations that he could provide from  his  file.
    He stated that there had been a  request  for  an  adjournment  by  the
    Presenting Officer to consider the ETD documents which was set  out  in
    the determination but also the Presenting  Officer  had  asked  for  an
    adjournment to request the Appellant's brother's file.   There  was  no
    reference of this in the determination.

20. On the evidence before me I am not able to determine what  occurred  at
    the hearing relating to the evidence of the Appellant's brother.  As Mr
    Whitwell submitted, the fact that the Presenting Officer was requesting
    the brother's file did not necessarily provide support either  way.   I
    agree.  However, what is plain is  that  the  Appellant's  brother  had
    provided a witness statement setting out a background of  the  evidence
    and evidence concerning the arrest warrant which the judge rejected  at
    [50]   having   already   found   the   Appellant's   credibility   was
    "fundamentally flawed" but without considering the  arrest  warrant  in
    the context of the evidence given by the Appellant's brother  and  also
    as to how the arrest warrant had come into existence  and  no  findings
    are made in this respect or on the written evidence of the  Appellant's
    brother.  It is right however to observe that  the  judge  was  clearly
    aware of the Appellant's  relatives,  both  brother  and  father  being
    granted refugee status  as  there  is  reference  to  that  within  the
    determination.

21. As set out above, whilst Ms Jones sought amendment at a very late stage
    in the ordinary course of events I would not necessarily  have  granted
    permission to enlarge the grounds at such a  late  stage.   However  in
    view of my conclusions as to the grounds which  were  pleaded  which  I
    find were sufficient in my judgment to demonstrate an error of  law  in
    the overall credibility findings  and  analysis  of  risk,  it  is  not
    necessary to make any further consideration of that issue.

22. I have therefore reached the overall decision  that  the  determination
    should be set aside.  Both advocates agreed before the Tribunal that in
    view of the nature of the error  pleaded  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing and to  make  fresh
    findings of fact upon the evidence as a whole including the evidence of
    the Appellant's brother and  father.   Mr  Whitwell  was  not  able  to
    provide  any  further  detail  concerning  the  information  that   was
    previously sought therefore it may be necessary for the  matter  to  be
    set down for a Case Management Review  hearing  before  listing  for  a
    final hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

23. As both advocates agreed that this appeal and the basis upon  which  it
    was  set  aside  falls  within  the  Practice  Statement  (as  amended)
    paragraph 7.2 in the light of the factual nature of the evidence to  be
    given that the appropriate course is for the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal to be set aside and for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for there to be an assessment of all the evidence.

24. Whilst it is not the ordinary practise of the Tribunal to  remit  cases
    to the First-tier Tribunal, there are reasons why in this case  such  a
    course should  be  adopted,  having  given  particular  regard  to  the
    overriding objective and that there are issues of fact and  credibility
    settled to the  appeal  which  require  determination.   Therefore  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the case is to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal Judge at  Taylor  House  or  Hatton
    Cross for  a  hearing  in  accordance  with  Section  12(2)(b)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).  None of the findings  of
    fact shall remain.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the Immigration Judge to be set aside and  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for hearing, but not before Judge Aujla,  in  accordance
with Section 12(2)(b) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  and
Practice Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

An anonymity  direction  is  made  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269 as amended).


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

