
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07092/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     s S
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  L
    Farmer which was promulgated on 24 April 2015. The  appeal  is  brought
    pursuant to permission granted on 23 July 2015 by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan.  The appellant is a citizen of the  Republic  of  Congo  whose
    appeal was refused on asylum grounds and in relation to Article  8  and
    the interference with private and family life.

2.   The decision of the judge is lengthy and detailed but the first  ground
    of appeal which was the primary basis upon which permission was granted
    relates to a specific question  of  medical  evidence  and  the  mental
    health condition of the appellant at the time of  the  hearing.   There
    was evidence in documentary form from Dr Alzbeta Karlikova in a  letter
    dated 6 January 2015.  That letter gave a diagnosis of  dementia,  code
    reference ICD10 F03.  Dr  Alzbeta  referred  to  the  appellant  having
    difficulties comprehending tasks  and  some  of  the  questions  asked.
    Comment is also made that the appellant was  disoriented  in  time  and
    place.

3.   The decision makes reference to that letter and it was clearly  in  the
    Judge's mind at  the  time.   In  paragraph  23,  the  judge  said  the
    following:

         "The appellant's witness statement running to 9 pages is signed  as
         true on 31 March 2013.  I was told that this was the result of  two
         lengthy and detailed meetings and in a less  pressured  environment
         than a courtroom. However, given that she was able  to  give  those
         detailed instructions and sign the statement as correct  less  than
         three weeks I assume prior to the hearing I am not  persuaded  that
         any dementia she may be suffering from  would  have  precluded  her
         from giving evidence."

4.   This finding is one  which  present  a  reviewing  Tribunal  with  some
    difficulties.  First, it is not clear what weight, if  any,  the  Judge
    intended to  give  to  the  written  evidence  of  the  appellant  and,
    secondly, it is not clear the basis upon which the  Judge  appeared  to
    reject, or at least question, the specific diagnosis of dementia  given
    in the opening part of the letter.

5.   Regard should be given to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of
    2010: Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive  Appellant  Guidance  which
    should  be  followed  when  considering  the  evidence  of   vulnerable
    witnesses.  There is no reference to it at  all  in  the  decision.  It
    seems therefore that no consideration was given to the fact  that  this
    appellant may have been, and in all probability, was vulnerable  within
    the meaning of that Guidance Note.  In the particular circumstances  of
    this case the failure to address that matter is significant because  it
    has an effect on all that follows.  In my judgment the manner in  which
    the Judge dealt with the  medical  evidence  and  the  written  witness
    statement of the appellant amounts to an error of  law.   Further,  the
    decision itself is unclear as  to  what  specific  findings  the  Judge
    actually made in relation to those issues of dementia upon which weight
    was placed.

6.   In particular I have regard to  paragraph  48  of  the  decision  which
    reads as follows:

         "The appellant relies on her age and dementia when arguing that her
         case is exceptional.  I accept that the appellant is elderly but  I
         do not accept that she can rely on a clear  diagnosis  of  dementia
         nor that the extent of any dementia that she  has  makes  her  case
         exceptional."

7.   The difficult balancing exercise which requires proportionality and  an
    assessment  of  whether  a  refusal  would  have  unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences for an individual is a complex exercise which needs to  be
    undertaken after clear findings of  fact  have  been  made.   In  these
    circumstances, the Article 8 assessment was in my view flawed  and  the
    first ground of appeal relating to the assessment of  medical  evidence
    is properly made out.

8.   It is argued by Mr Symes and  conceded  by  Miss  Savage  on  the  Home
    Secretary's behalf that if I am with the appellant on the first  ground
    then the second ground becomes redundant and the appropriate course  is
    to remit this matter to a First-tier Tribunal to look at afresh and for
    a proper consideration to be given to the medical evidence and to  what
    conclusions  can  properly  if,  as  is  possible,  the  appellant   is
    vulnerable witness who may not be in a position to give oral testimony.



9.   That exercise was not undertaken by the Judge and in the  circumstances
    I agree with both representatives that the  appropriate  course  is  to
    remit this matter to a First-tier Tribunal.   In  the  circumstances  I
    should refrain from expressing any view on the  Article  8  assessment.
    That will be carried out de novo by another First-tier Tribunal  Judge.
    However, I record for the sake of transparency that it may very well be
    that a First-tier Tribunal Judge, properly directing  him  or  herself,
    may very well come to precisely the same conclusion as the Judge did in
    this instance.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed. Matter remitted to First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 11 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 11 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
