

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: AA071102015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 25th May 2016                        |On: 16th June 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     GHS
                          (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham, Counsel instructed by Wilson
                       Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1990. He  appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Malik)  to
    dismiss his appeal against  a  decision  to  refuse  him  international
    protection.




 2. It is  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Pakistan for reasons of his imputed  political  opinion.
    He is from Karachi. He states that since approximately 2011 he has been
    involved in charity work in Pakistan, first in distributing educational
    materials in villages in Sindh, and latterly in Afghan refugee camps on
    the outskirts of the city. The Appellant claims that in  June  2014  he
    received threats from the Pakistani Taliban who  were  opposed  to  his
    efforts to spread education, and specifically to  his  distribution  of
    educational materials that were perceived as  "western".    The  threat
    was at first made by  telephone;  he  subsequently  received  a  'night
    letter'.  The Appellant claims that on the  28th  August  2014  he  was
    travelling in a car with a friend when they were  fired  on  by  masked
    men. The Appellant was 100% sure  that  the  attackers  were  from  the
    Taliban. The Appellant moved to another city, Lardkana.   The Appellant
    claims that on the 6th March 2015 four armed men came to where  he  was
    staying and asked for him. The Appellant managed to escape.   He  tried
    to obtain police protection on a number of occasions but each time they
    wanted him to pay: he was  not  working  and  could  not  do  so.   The
    Appellant notes that three days prior to the incident in March  2015  a
    police officer had come to his house and asked  to  borrow  money.  The
    Appellant had refused and the officer said that he would not be able to
    protect him.  After that incident the Appellant left Pakistan, came  to
    the UK and claimed asylum.  He produced various documents in support of
    his claim including a  'First  Information  Report'  (FIR)  purportedly
    issued by the police in Pakistan.


 3. In a letter dated 17th April 2015 the Respondent  rejected  the  claim.
    She did not accept that any of the  account  was  true.    It  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant was at risk from the  Taliban.  If  he  was
    being threatened, the Pakistani state could provide  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and/or it was open to the Appellant to live  somewhere  else
    in Pakistan.

 4. By the time that the matter came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    evidence had developed. The  Respondent  relied  upon  three  'Document
    Verification Reports' (DVRs) which alleged that  documents  adduced  by
    the Appellant were not genuine.  In  each  case  an  officer  from  the
    British Embassy in Abu Dhabi had made checks including  contacting  the
    purported author of the document,  and  in  each  case  they  had  been
    informed that the document did not emanate  from  the  claimed  source.
    This was a matter that plainly weighed against the Appellant: paragraph
    9 (i-ii).  The Tribunal took account of the Appellant's  oral  evidence
    and the remaining documents. His claims to have worked in  the  charity
    sector and to have been targeted  as  a  result  are  rejected  as  not
    credible. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

    The Grounds of Appeal

 5. The Appellant now has permission to appeal on the following grounds:

              i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard  to  material
                 evidence

                 The Appellant had relied on witness  statements  from  five
                 individuals who were still in  Pakistan.  These  statements
                 had been prepared over the  telephone  by  the  Appellant's
                 solicitor with the assistance of  an  interpreter  both  of
                 whom had sworn and signed the documents. At paragraph 3 the
                 determination records the existence of these statements and
                 the Tribunal records "I attached little weight to  them  as
                 they were unsigned and the witnesses  did  not  attend  the
                 hearing". The Appellant submits that in fact  the  Tribunal
                 appears to have attached no weight at all to this evidence,
                 since it does  not  feature  in  the  reasoning.   This  is
                 submitted to be an error  of  law.  The  evidence  of  five
                 witnesses cannot be dismissed in its entirety without  good
                 reason.

             ii) There was an unfairness/procedural irregularity in  matters
                 being taken against the Appellant which had not been put to
                 him

                 The Appellant had relied on a receipt purportedly issued by
                 a donor as evidence of his charitable activities. This  had
                 been rejected by the Tribunal on the grounds that there was
                 no explanation given as to why the receipt had been issued.
                 The Appellant submits that this is unfair: had  the  matter
                 been put to him he could have explained that such  receipts
                 are issued for tax purposes

            iii) Failure to give reasons/ making assumptions unsupported  by
                 evidence

                 The Tribunal had found  it  to  be  "incredible"  that  the
                 Taliban would threaten the Appellant instead of killing him
                 or attempting to do so. It  is  submitted  that  describing
                 something as "incredible" is a finding, not  a  reason.  In
                 this case  there  was  country  background  material  which
                 showed that the Taliban frequently threaten  people;  since
                 that  was  their   modus   operandi   there   was   nothing
                 "incredible" or "inherently unlikely" in them  having  done
                 so in this case

             iv) Flawed assessment on risk infecting whole determination

                 The Appellant acknowledges that the appeal was dismissed on
                 internal flight  grounds  but  points  out  that  this  was
                 predicated on the flawed  risk  assessment.  There  was  no
                 assessment of the individual facts as they  relate  to  the
                 Appellant.


    The Response


 6. For the Respondent Mr Harrison accepted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not appear to have read or considered the witness  statements  from
    the five witnesses in Pakistan. Although these documents  are  recorded
    as forming part of the Appellant's case,   and that there was no  doubt
    a limit that could be attached to such untested evidence,  Mr  Harrison
    conceded that it must be a material error for the determination to have
    omitted to consider these documents altogether. That  was  particularly
    so where the Tribunal appears to have drawn adverse inference from  the
    lack of supporting evidence from individuals in Pakistan.


 7. Mr Harrison was further  prepared  to  acknowledge  that  a  number  of
    aspects  of  the  evidence  had  been  described  as  "incredible"   or
    "implausible"  without  those  findings  being   adequately   reasoned.
    Although Mr Harrison submitted that this was an appeal that the  First-
    tier Tribunal was entitled to dismiss, given the evidence and  the  use
    of false documentation, he accepted that this was not an  inevitability
    and that grounds (i) and (iii) had been made out.

 8. Given the concession of the Respondent I do not think it  necessary  to
    address grounds (ii) or (iv). That is because the errors identified, in
    particular the failure to analyse or consider the  witness  statements,
    was material in the context of an asylum claim where  those  statements
    spoke directly to the matters in issue. For that reason I am  satisfied
    that the determination must be set aside.

      Decisions

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.

10. The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

11. Having regard to the nature  of  the  evidence  I  make  the  following
    direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               10th June 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 15th September 2015 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Cruthers


