
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/07774/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |          Decision and Reasons       |
|                                   |Promulgated                          |
|On 10 February 2016                |          On 22 February 2016        |
|                                           |                             |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     T S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:   Ms O Taiwo, UK Law, solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, to preserve the anonymity order deemed necessary  by
the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain, promulgated  on  15  December
2015, which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1988 and is a national of Eritrea.

4. On  24  April  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hussain ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 6  January  2016  Judge  Astle  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "The Respondent accepted the Appellant's Eritrean nationality and  her
      illegal exit from the country but sought to depart from  the  guidance
      in MO (Illegal exit - risk on  return)  Eritrea  CG[2011]  UKUT  00190
      (IAC) on the basis of what she  considered  to  be  new  evidence.  At
      paragraph 41 the Judge said in effect that he  was  bound  by  country
      guidance until it was overturned. In so doing it is arguable  that  he
      failed to have  regard  to  Practice  Direction  12.2.  Permission  is
      therefore granted."

The hearing

7. Ms Everett, for the respondent  adopted  the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. She told me that the focus in this case is on [41] of the  decision.
There, she told me, the Judge summarily dismissed the  background  materials
relied on by the appellant and did  not  carry  out  any  analysis  of  that
evidence. She told me that the Judge had approached the evidence  as  if  he
was fettered by country guidance cases, and  did  not  make  either  inquiry
into, nor analysis of, the evidence. In short, there has been a flaw in  the
Judge's fact finding exercise because he has  not  analysed  the  background
materials. Ms Everett reminded me that the President of the Upper Tier  will
hear a case which may form new country guidance for Eritrea  in  March  this
year.

8. For the appellant, Ms Taiwo told me that the decision  does  not  contain
an  error  of  law,  material  or  otherwise.  She  reminded  me  that   the
appellant's  bundle  contained  background  materials  from  a   number   of
different sources, and argued that  the  Judge  had  taken  account  of  the
background materials as well as country guidance case-law. She told me  that
the decision is a careful, balanced decision in which  the  Judge  has  made
findings in fact before considering risk on return to Eritrea. She  told  me
that the Judge correctly considered the background materials and  the  case-
law to evaluate risk on return, and that  his  decision  to  follow  country
guidance is not an error of law.

Analysis

9. At [39] the Judge correctly identifies that  the  cases  of  MO  (Illegal
exit - risk on return)  Eritrea  CG  [2011]UKUT  00190  IAC  and  MA  (draft
evaders ; illegal  departures;  risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00059  as
country guidance cases which have relevance to this case. At [40] the  Judge
sets out the respondent's argument that the country  guidance  cases  should
not be followed in this case and at [41] the Judge sets out his reasons  for
finding that the country guidance cases apply to this case.

10. The Judge's reasoning is  not  flawless,  but  it  does  not  contain  a
material error of law. In  AF  (2004)UKIAT  00284  the  Tribunal  said  that
failure by Adjudicators to follow country guidance cases  was  an  error  of
law.  That was also the view of the Tribunal in MY(Eritrea) 2005 UKAIT 158.

11. In OM(AA Wrong in Law) Zimbabwe CG 2006 UKAIT 00077  the  Tribunal  said
that a Country Guidance case stands until it is  replaced  or  found  to  be
wrong in law. It will not be appropriate to  grant  an  adjournment  on  the
grounds that a party is seeking to challenge  a  relevant  Country  Guidance
case in the higher courts.   Where  a  Country  Guidance  case  is  replaced
because of a change of country conditions or because  further  evidence  has
emerged, that will not mean that it was  an  error  of  law  to  follow  it.
However, where a Country Guidance case is found to be  legally  flawed,  the
reasons for  so  finding  will  have  existed  both  before  and  after  its
notification.  The error is effectively replicated  in  the  decision  which
followed it and so there would be an error of law in that decision too.

12. It is argued that the Judge failed to analyse the  background  materials
relied on by the respondent. It is not surprising that  the  Judge  did  not
carry out a detailed  analysis  of  the  Danish  immigration  service  fact-
finding mission report, because the respondent did not produce  it.  I  have
the respondent's PF1 bundle together with the appellant's bundle.  The  case
file indicates that those were the documents produced to the first-tier.

13. At [47] and [48] of  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the  respondent
relies on her own country of information guidance  dated  March  2015.  That
guidance draws heavily  on  the  Danish  immigration  services  fact-finding
mission report. The Judge cannot be faulted  for  a  failure  to  analyse  a
report which is only summarised in the respondent's COI  report.  The  Judge
cannot be criticised for failing to analyse a report which  was  not  placed
before him.

14. At [41] the Judge declares that he is not  prepared  to  find  that  the
extant country guidance is redundant and, in the  second  sentence  of  that
paragraph, makes it clear that  he  prefers  the  country  guidance  to  the
background materials relied on by the respondent. That is a finding of  fact
which demonstrates that the Judge has taken account of all of  the  evidence
in this case and reached the conclusion that there is insufficient  reliable
evidence to merit departure from country guidance.

15. At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, it was said that  "Where
a tribunal has referred to considering all the evidence,  a  reviewing  body
should be very slow to conclude that that tribunal overlooked  some  factor,
simply  because  the  factor  is  not  explicitly   referred   to   in   the
determination concerned". McCombe LJ  in  VW(Sri  Lanka)  C5/2012/3037  said
"Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,  when  a
First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  given  a  judgment  explaining  why  he  has
reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow out industriously  areas
of evidence that have been less fully dealt with than  others  and  then  to
use this as a basis for  saying  the  judge's  decision  is  legally  flawed
because it did not  deal  with  a  particular  matter  more  fully.   In  my
judgment, with respect, that is no  basis  on  which  to  sustain  a  proper
challenge to a judge's finding of fact"

16.    In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

17.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

CONCLUSION

18. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

19. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 15
February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




