
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07461/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th April 2016                        |On 28th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              Mr Husnain Saeed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Richards (LR)
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bannerman, promulgated on 12th August 2015, following  a  hearing
    at Manchester on 31st July  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who  was  born  on  6th
    March  1994.   He  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 15th April 2015, refusing his claim to  asylum
    and to humanitarian protection, on the basis, as the Appellant alleges,
    that he is a gay man, who would suffer persecution and ill-treatment if
    he had to return to Pakistan.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge allowed the appeal on the basis that "The  Appellant's  claim
    for sexuality is honest and must be taken into account in deciding upon
    the Appellant's asylum claim to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    refugee" (see paragraph 18).  The judge took into account the following
    factors.  First, that, although the Appellant's alleged sexual partner,
    Mr Muhammad Usama Abide, had not attended court to give evidence on the
    Appellant's behalf, this was because the Appellant and Mr Abide had the
    previous night had a row, whereupon,  despite  Mr  Abide  knowing  that
    there was a Tribunal hearing the next day, Mr Abide had walked  out  of
    the house and then not attended court,  but  the  judge  was  satisfied
    about the explanation in this regard given  by  the  Appellant  at  the
    hearing.

 4. Second, that although there was a previous promulgated decision in  the
    case of Mr Muhammad Usama Abide (although in that case the reference to
    his surname is Abid), whereupon Judge Ransley had  on  18th  June  2015
    (AA/04794/2015) dismissed the appeal of Mr Abide on the basis that  the
    entire claim was fabricated of his relationship with the Appellant, the
    "Appellant's witnesses' accounts had a clearing of truth about them and
    the Appellant's presentation and evidence  was  convincing  as  to  his
    homosexuality" (paragraph 17).  The judge observed that,

         "Clearly he was not present at the hearing,  though  I  note  there
         were a number of other areas of concern regarding Mr  Abide's  case
         which cast doubt upon his credibility" when the claim of  Mr  Abide
         was rejected by Judge Ransley (see paragraph 17).

 5. Third, the judge heard evidence of two witnesses,  Mohammad  Attif  Bin
    Taj and Imran Ahmed Chaudri, both of whom were drag queens, and one was
    from London and  the  other  was  from  Birmingham  (though  none  from
    Manchester where the Appellant actually  lived  with  his  alleged  gay
    partner Mr Abide).  The judge found their evidence to be persuasive.

 6. Fourth, that although the Appellant had actually then returned back  to
    Pakistan during 2011 and 2014, after describing his homosexuality, "His
    family had not found out about that until after he  had  returned  from
    Pakistan", whereupon, "It was only when they contacted him,  after  his
    return, to make clear the dislike of his sexuality and to make  threats
    towards him, that he had claimed asylum"  (paragraph  17).   The  judge
    stated that, "I had regard to the stage at which the Appellant made his
    asylum claim, having been in the UK for a number of years, but accepted
    his explanation regarding the same as being  credible  ..."  (paragraph
    17).

 7. For all these reasons, the appeal was allowed.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the Appellant's partner was found
    to have fabricated his relationship with  the  Appellant  and  it  must
    follow that the Appellant was not in a genuine relationship  with  that
    partner either now.  The judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for
    finding that the decision in the partner's appeal had no effect on  the
    outcome of the present appeal.

 9. On 20th October 2015, the Upper Tribunal granted permission  to  appeal
    on the basis that given the adverse credibility findings in relation to
    the Appellant's partner, the judge had failed to give adequate reasons.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before  me  on  4th  April  2016,  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe,
    appearing on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State submitted that
    the fundamental problem with the determination of Judge  Bannerman  was
    that it does not deal with the fact that the  Appellant's  relationship
    with his partner was found in the appeal decision in the  determination
    of Judge Ransley to have been fabricated  (see  paragraphs  51  -  53).
    Yet, what was being relied upon in  the  determination  made  by  Judge
    Bannerman now was exactly the same evidence that was being relied  upon
    in the determination of Judge Ransley on 18th June 2015.

11. Whilst it was accepted that res judicata does not apply in  immigration
    appeals, the Tribunal had made it clear in Mubu [2012] UKUT 00398, that
    the guidelines set out in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 are  always  to
    be applied to the determination of the factual issue, the dispute as to
    which has already been the subject  of  judicial  determination  in  an
    appeal  against  an  early  immigration  decision  involving  the  same
    parties.  The judge in this case does not even refer  to  the  case  of
    Devaseelan and had obviously not given adequate heed to it.

12. My attention was also drawn to the case of TK  (Georgia)  [2014]  UKIAT
    00149 where it was held that those matters must be taken  into  account
    (see paragraphs 5, 17, 20 and 22).  The binding  effect  of  unappealed
    decisions has also been made clear  in  the  recent  case  of  Chomanga
    (Zimbabwe) [2011] UKUT 00312, which confirms that the parties are bound
    "by unappealed findings of fact in an Immigration Judge's decision".

13. Finally, since the Appellant does not in the instant appeal take  issue
    with the way in which the judge has recorded the evidence, and there is
    no cross-appeal from the Appellant in relation to  the  evidence,  this
    Tribunal should make a finding of  an  error  of  law  and  remake  the
    decision.

14. For his part, Mr Richards submitted that the case of Devaseelan  stands
    for the proposition (see paragraph 39) that the earlier decision  of  a
    judge should be a starting point.  However, this only meant that it was
    a starting point.  It was open  to  another  judge,  having  heard  the
    evidence from two witnesses as in this case, who were not available  to
    give evidence in the earlier case, to form a different view.

15. Second, before  Judge  Ransley  on  18th  June  2015,  the  Appellant's
    partner, Mr Abide, was unrepresented, and not being a  lawyer,  he  did
    not see it  fit  to  call  the  Appellant  to  confirm  the  homosexual
    relationship that was the basis of  the  appeal,  even  though  he  was
    sitting in the back of the courtroom.

16. Third, it is incorrect to say that the  judge  did  not  give  adequate
    attention to a previous decision.  He in terms refers to  the  decision
    by Judge Ransley at paragraph 17 and states that, "I do, however,  take
    account of ... albeit ...".  What weight the judge was going to give to
    the previous decision was entirely a matter for him.  It  may  be  that
    the judge only dealt with this in a single paragraph, but if one  looks
    at the size of this paragraph, it is a weighty and lengthy paragraph.

17. Therefore, so long as the judge had addressed the point of the previous
    determination, and taken it on board, it was open to him, having  heard
    the evidence from two witnesses who were not earlier present, to take a
    contrary view  in  his  own  findings  of  fact  in  relation  to  this
    particular Appellant.  This he did do.  There was no error of law.

18. In reply,  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  Judge  Bannerman  was
    required to take everything into account, but  Devaseelan  makes  clear
    that where in a case such as the present, the two witnesses could  have
    been called earlier, but were not, that is a relevant  matter,  because
    the facts are not materially different from the first determination  of
    Judge Ransley.

19. Second, it was not enough for Judge Bannerman to simply  refer  to  the
    earlier determination of Judge Ransley and  say,  "Clearly  I  was  not
    present at the hearing, though I note there  were  a  number  of  other
    areas of concern regarding the subject's case which  casts  doubt  upon
    his credibility" (paragraph 17), without actually  engaging  with  that
    earlier determination.  There was no evidence here that Judge Bannerman
    had engaged with the determination of Judge Ransley.

20. It is for this reason that no adequate reasons are given.  For example,
    at paragraph 11 of Judge  Bannerman's  determination,  of  the  day  in
    question, the Presenting Officer had raised serious concerns about  the
    claim being put forward by this  Appellant,  and  the  judge  does  not
    adequately deal with each and every aspect of this.





Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as  follows.   First,
    this is a case where the judge has not engaged  with  the  findings  of
    Judge   Ransley's   earlier   determination   of   18th    June    2015
    (AA/04794/2015).  This is contrary to the  rule  in  Devaseelan  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702.  Judge Bannerman does not refer to this case.  However, it
    is evident from this case that the principle is  established  that,  if
    before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on  facts  that  are
    not materially different from those put to the first  Adjudicator,  and
    proposes to support the claim by what is in essence the  same  evidence
    as that available to the Appellant at that time, the second Adjudicator
    should  regard  the  issues  as  settled  by  the  first  Adjudicator's
    determination and make his findings in  line  with  that  determination
    rather than allowing the  matter  to  be  re-litigated  (see  paragraph
    41(6)).  In this case, a lot  has  persuaded  the  judge,  if  not  the
    evidence of the Appellant's partner, who did not attend at the hearing,
    but the evidence of two witnesses, one of whom was from London, and the
    other from Birmingham, but neither from Manchester, to give evidence on
    the Appellant's behalf, but on facts which are  essentially  the  same.
    The fact that the judge does not have  regard  to  Devaseelan  and  the
    strictures therein is an error of law.

22. Second, this is a case where it could be said  that,  "In  the  present
    case, no such compelling new evidence is alleged to have been available
    ..." see TK (Georgia) [2004] UKIAT 00149 (at paragraph 20) as  to  have
    materially changed the analysis of the facts by  Judge  Ransley  on  an
    earlier occasion, given that there are very serious concerns raised  at
    paragraph 11 of Judge Bannerman's determination from  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, in respect of this claim.

Remaking the Decision

23. I have remade the decision on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  Judge
    Bannerman and Judge Ransley and  the  submissions  that  I  have  heard
    before me today.  I am dismissing this appeal bearing in mind  Practice
    Statement 7.2 makes it clear that, "The Upper  Tribunal  is  likely  on
    each occasion to proceed to remake the decision, instead  of  remitting
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal ...", bearing in mind that the  two
    determinations of Judge  Ransley  in  the  first  instance,  and  Judge
    Bannerman in the second instance, comprise  all  the  essential  facts,
    based  on  the  evidence  submitted  on  each  occasion  which  is  not
    dissimilar with respect to one from  the  other.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

24. First, there is the rule in the determination  of  Devaseelan  that  if
    before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on  facts  that  are
    not materially different from those put to the first Adjudicator,  then
    the second Adjudicator should regard the issues as settled by the first
    Adjudicator's determination and make his findings  in  line  with  that
    determination.  The issues in this case were the same both before Judge
    Ransley and before Judge Bannerman.

25. Second, whereas Devaseelan is best known for the proposition  that  the
    earlier decision is the starting point,  it  does  leave  scope  for  a
    subsequent judge to  depart  from  that  decision  if  the  facts  have
    materially changed.  In this case the facts have not  changed.   Before
    Judge Ransley the Appellant himself did not give evidence on behalf  of
    Mr Abide, even when he was expressly invited to do so by the judge (see
    paragraph 53).  Judge Ransley held that,

         "I do not believe the Appellant is  a  gay  man,  or  that  he  has
         received death threats from his family and there was  an  extremist
         in Pakistan who threatened to kill him if he returned  to  Pakistan
         due to his sexuality.  The Appellant has fabricated an asylum claim
         after abandoning his studies" (see paragraph 52).

    This was in relation to the Appellant's partner, Mr Abide.  The  judge,
    indeed, gave  reasons  for  why  the  Appellant's  partner  lacked  all
    credibility (see paragraphs 46 to 50).

26. Third, the Appellant's partner himself has not given evidence  on  this
    occasion and the explanation that he had a quarrel with  the  Appellant
    the night before because he thought he may have  had  sexual  relations
    with somebody else, who had turned up to give evidence on his behalf at
    this  hearing,  is  simply  implausible.   As  paragraph  11   of   the
    determination  makes  clear  the  Appellant's  partner  knew  that  the
    Appellant had a court hearing the next day, and he knew that in his own
    determination by Judge Ransley, the fact that his partner had not given
    evidence, had been fatal to his claim, and yet he had chosen, with  all
    that was at stake, not to attend to give evidence, simply because of  a
    quarrel.

27. Fourth, the evidence of the two witnesses who attended to give evidence
    on the Appellant's behalf, cannot in the event amount to dispensing all
    the other doubts that had arisen in this claim.   This  is  so  for  at
    least two reasons.  First, both claim to be drag queens.   However,  as
    the Presenting Officer made clear  (see  paragraph  11)  not  all  drag
    queens are also gay.  Second, it is not clear why, if the Appellant  is
    living in Manchester, evidence has had to be called  from  one  witness
    from London and the other from Birmingham, for this can hardly be  more
    compelling than evidence from someone who actually lives in  Manchester
    with the Appellant and knows him intimately.   No  other  person  could
    have been well positioned to do that than the Appellant's own  partner.
    He chose not to attend.

28. Finally, there are serious question marks about the Appellant's  entire
    claim, and the manner in which it has been raised  for  asylum  status,
    with his studies having been  abandoned.   The  Appellant's  claim  was
    that, "In Pakistan the extremists know who he is  and  if  he  went  to
    Pakistan bad things would happen to him" (see paragraph 5).   There  is
    simply no basis for this contention.  It is simply thrown in.   It  was
    simply thrown in also in the claim in the  determination  before  Judge
    Ransley made by the Appellant's partner.  In the same way,  this  is  a
    case where the Appellant actually when returned to Pakistan in 2011 and
    2014, whilst knowing that he was gay, and  doing  so  in  circumstances
    where the principal source of threat  he  claims  comes  from  his  own
    family, whom he was visiting.  Nothing happened  to  him  in  Pakistan.
    The Appellant conveniently puts forward the theory that, "It  was  only
    when they contacted him, after his return, to make clear the dislike of
    his sexuality and to make threats towards  him,  that  he  had  claimed
    asylum" (see paragraph 17 of the  determination).   It  is  simply  not
    plausible that the Appellant would go to Pakistan to visit his  family,
    and not face any threats from them or ill-treatment,  but  only  do  so
    after he had arrived back in the UK away from their eyesight, allegedly
    because it was now that they had found out that he was  gay,  with  his
    father even threatening to  stone  him  to  death.   None  of  this  is
    remotely plausible.  Accordingly, for all the reasons that I have given
    above,  this  claim  is  a  fabrication  and  cannot  succeed.   It  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    dismissed

30. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 27th April 2016


