
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA075272015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th May 2016                          |On 25th May 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                                     n t
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant has the benefit of  an  anonymity  order.   This  is  his
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the permission of a Judge of
    the Upper Tribunal, against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Hillis hereinafter "the judge") promulgated on 31st  July  2015,
    dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision  of  9th  April
    2015 refusing to grant him asylum or any other  form  of  international
    protection.

 2. After a hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) I set  aside  the
    decision of the judge on the basis that he  had  erred  in  failing  to
    consider whether, if the Appellant were returned to his  home  country,
    he would be politically active there such as to place himself  at  risk
    of persecution or serious harm or would  refrain  from  such  political
    activity solely for  the  reason  of  avoiding  persecution.   In  this
    determination I shall explain, below, how I have re-made the decision.

 3. By way of background, the Appellant, who was born on [  ]  1970,  is  a
    male national of the Gambia.  He came to the UK on 23rd  December  1999
    having obtained leave to enter as a student.  He  made  his  claim  for
    asylum on 6th November 2014.  The basis for his claim was that  he  had
    had some previous  oppositionist  political  activity  in  the  Gambia,
    though he did not claim to be at risk as a result of that, but that  he
    had also been active in the UK, albeit relatively recently,  and  those
    UK based activities would place him at risk upon return.  As  to  those
    activities he said that he had attended some  political  demonstrations
    in London, had been critical of the President of  the  Gambia  and  the
    ruling regime on Twitter and  had  written  three  published  articles,
    available on the internet,  which  also  contained  criticisms  of  the
    President. He suggested the articles would have been read by  those  in
    authority in the Gambia such that he would  be  immediately  persecuted
    upon his return.  There was, in fact, no dispute about the fact that he
    had written the three articles, that he had put his name to them,  that
    they had been published by an organisation called Kairo News  and  that
    they were available to be read via the internet.

 4. The judge hearing his appeal identified,  as  the  central  issue,  the
    question of whether he had come to the adverse attention of the Gambian
    authorities as a result of his UK based activity and whether there  was
    a real possibility he would be identified as a returning  dissident  on
    arrival in the Gambia.  He said that the background material before him
    suggested that the human rights  situation  for  identified  dissidents
    either inside the Gambia or abroad "is one which breaches the terms  of
    Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention and the Refugee Convention  on
    the basis of either actual or imputed political opinion".

 5. The judge, in considering what the Appellant had had to  say  regarding
    the demonstrations and some photographs taken of him  on  them  and  in
    considering the three articles and the consequent risk upon  return  to
    the Gambia said this;

         "Has the Appellant been identified as a Political Dissident?

         The Photographs

         24.  It is accepted  by  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  has
             written three articles which have been published on the  World
             Wide Web  criticising  the  Gambian  regime  and  calling  for
             President Jammeh to stand down.  It is also accepted  he  has
             posted comments on Twitter to other users of that site and has
             attended a demonstration in London against the Gambian regime.
              Mr. Archibald, very properly, concentrated hi questions  and
             submissions on the issue of whether or not the  Appellant  has
             been or will be on return identified as a dissident.

         25.  The Appellant relies on a number of photographs in respect  of
             his attendance at the demonstration in London  in  support  of
             his claim that he will have been  identified  by  the  Gambian
             authorities as a participant.

         26.  During oral testimony he was unable  to  identify  himself  on
             photograph 4 but was able to identify himself in photographs 1
             and 2 as holding a poster stating of  President Jammeh  'This
             man in white is the Gambian Terrorist' below a  photograph  of
             the President. He also identified himself as standing  in  the
             background behind others who were holding a banner criticising
             President Jammeh and his regime. The photographs were taken by
             friends but also one was taken by a person he did not know who
             he gave his name to and it was sent to him later.

         27.  He stated that he was not  aware  of  those  photographs  ever
             being published anywhere at all but  claimed  that  there  are
             Gambian spies in the UK. He stated  that  he  has  never  been
             contacted by  the  Gambian  authorities  about  his  articles,
             comments on Twitter or the photographs.

         28.  I do not find the Appellant credible  in  his  claim  that  an
             unknown person who  took  at  least  one  of  the  photographs
             introduced himself to the  Appellant  and  he  then  gave  the
             person his address to send  the  photograph  to,  particularly
             without even getting this person's  name  if  he  was  of  the
             genuine belief that Gambian spies  would  be  present  at  the
             demonstration.

         29.  I have taken into account that the Appellant's  attendance  at
             the demonstration is after he had been arrested in the UK as a
             suspect in a criminal  offence  of  soliciting  and  had  been
             served with a Notice of Liability of Removal as an  overstayer
             and all his previous appeals were now exhausted.

         30.  I conclude that the Appellant has failed to show, to  the  low
             standard  required,  he  may  have  been  identified  at   the
             demonstration as claimed.

         The Articles on the Internet

         31.  The Appellant readily conceded in his oral testimony that  the
             only people who have contacted him about  these  articles  are
             members of the Gambian public and not anyone in a position  of
             power or authority.  Additionally, he did  not  claim  in  his
             oral testimony that the people who contacted him had told  him
             that the authorities were aware of the articles  and  that  he
             had been identified  as  a  dissident  abroad.   There  is  no
             evidence before me to show, to the low standard required, that
             the  Appellant's  articles  have  been  seen  by  the  Gambian
             authorities or security forces and that he has come  to  their
             adverse attention.  There is no reply to these articles posted
             by the Gambian authorities on the evidence before me.  I  note
             here that the article at page 19 in the  Appellant's  bundle,
             for example, states 'You can  follow  any  responses  to  this
             entry through the RSS2.0 feed.'

         32.  I have taken into account that the Appellant has not only  put
             his  name  to  these  articles  but  also  published  his  own
             photograph as part of them at a time when he had already  been
             arrested in the UK and was on notice of  the  UK Government's
             intention  to remove him.  The fact that he readily identified
             himself on the Article does not, on the  evidence  before  me,
             seem  to  have  led  to  his  identification  by  the  Gambian
             authorities or drawn any response from them whatsoever.

         33.  There is no reliable evidence before me to show  that  any  of
             the Appellant's Twitter posts have brought him to the  adverse
             attention of the Gambian authorities.

         Risk on arrival in Gambia

         34.  The Appellant has not based his  claim  for  asylum  on  being
             homosexual and I, therefore, conclude he will not be  at  risk
             of  death  on  return  pursuant  to  the  President's   avowed
             intention to kill those returning failed  asylum  seekers  who
             made such a claim (AB48).

         35.  I have taken into account in my assessment of the evidence the
             contents of the  article  entitled  'Gambian  Justice  Monitor
             Warns Gambians abroad of Backlash  for  Denigration.'   In  my
             judgment, it clearly shows that the Justice  Minister,  Edward
             Gomez, is more concerned with 'defending the integrity' of the
             Gambian Government and  its  President  than  the  rights  and
             freedom of speech of the Gambian citizens at home or abroad. I
             have  paid  particular  attention  to  his  pronouncement   on
             dissidents abroad that 'We will wait here for  them  to  come'
             and that they will be prosecuted any time  they  come  to  The
             Gambia and his statement that 'These  are  unfortunately  evil
             members of the Gambian society who took refuge abroad  putting
             every nonsensical story on papers and on radios to tarnish the
             good image of the Gambian Government.'

         36.  I note here that Mr. Nicholson has not  submitted  before  me
             that there is any record of names  held  at  the  airports  or
             other  ports  in  Gambia  of  dissidents   abroad   that   the
             authorities have identified as of adverse  interest  to  them,
             nor  has  he  submitted  that  returning  asylum  seekers  are
             routinely detained  and  questioned  on  arrival  about  their
             political views and activities abroad.

         37.  The  Appellant,  in  my  judgment,  will  not  be  an  obvious
             candidate  for  questioning  on  return  as  someone  not  yet
             identified as a political dissident and there is  no  evidence
             he will be seen as anything more than someone who came to  the
             UK as a student and is returning to Gambia at the end  of  his
             studies and the breakdown of his relationship with his wife.

         38.  The Repost of the Special Rapporteur dated  16th March, 2015
             deals with the many abuses in the Gambian security  and  legal
             institutions but provides no evidence  of  what  Gambians  who
             return from abroad face at the point of entry or once they are
             in their home area.

         39.  It is accepted by Mr. Nicholson that any  political  activity
             the Appellant was involved in prior to leaving The  Gambia  in
             1999 cannot engage the Refugee Convention or the ECHR  as  the
             Appellant has  not  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
             authorities  due  to  that  activity  and  has   returned   to
             The Gambia on two  occasions  without  any  difficulty  since
             coming to the UK."

 6. For the purposes of my remaking of  the  decision  those  findings  are
    preserved.  I note here that they  do  not  represent  a  comprehensive
    adverse finding regarding his credibility at all but  that  a  discrete
    aspect of what he had to say regarding one of the photographs taken  of
    him  at  a  demonstration  was  found  not  to  amount  to  a  credible
    contention.

 7. At the hearing concerned with remaking I  had  before  me  the  various
    documents which had been before the judge. I  was  also  provided  with
    some additional  documentation  in  the  form  of  an  updated  witness
    statement of the Appellant of 21st April 2016, some  evidence  relating
    to  his  Twitter  activities  and  some  further  background   material
    regarding  the  attitude  of  the  Gambian  authorities  to   political
    oppositionists.

 8. The Appellant gave oral evidence before me.  He gave  his  evidence  in
    English.  In  his  evidence-in-chief  he  simply  adopted  his  witness
    statement of 21st  April  2016.   I  shall,  therefore,  summarise  the
    content of that statement at this stage in my determination.

 9. The Appellant said, in his statement, that if he  is  returned  to  the
    Gambia he would continue to pursue oppositionist activity.   He  wishes
    to free the Gambia from what he describes as a dictatorship.   He  said
    that on 20th February 2016 he had attended a demonstration against  the
    Gambian authorities and had, pursuant to that, spent time  outside  the
    Houses of Parliament and  then  outside  10  Downing  Street.   He  has
    continued to "tweet" about political issues in the Gambia.  He recently
    discovered that one of his Twitter followers is a Mr Njie  who  is  the
    newly appointed chairman of the electoral commission in the Gambia.  He
    thought that the fact he was being followed by  that  person  suggested
    the authorities are aware of his UK based activities.

10. In cross-examination the Appellant explained a number of aspects of how
    Twitter works.  He thought Mr Njie remained sympathetic to  the  regime
    in the Gambia because he had been so sympathetic in the past.   He  was
    not certain, however, because he "does not know the man".   If  he  was
    returned to the Gambia and was able to "get  through  the  airport"  he
    would take part in political and campaigning activities.  He  feels  he
    has a responsibility to let people know what the current  President  of
    the Gambia is like.  He had attended the demonstration of 28th February
    2016 because it is necessary to create awareness of  the  human  rights
    abuses which are occurring in the Gambia.  A UK based organisation  had
    urged people to attend that demonstration.  The demonstrators  had  not
    gone anywhere near the Gambian High Commission on that occasion.

11. In response to some questions put by me the Appellant said that he  had
    attended the demonstration because of his concerns about  human  rights
    abuses and that, since there had been some recent abuses of  that  sort
    carried out in the Gambia, he  thought  it  was  necessary.   He  feels
    people from the Gambia have a duty to fight for their country.  He  had
    started his UK  based  political  activities  in  2014  when  a  former
    neighbour of his in the Gambia had had to flee the country  and  go  to
    Senegal in order to save his life.  That person had been close  to  him
    and he had decided that then was "the right time to get involved".

12. There was no re-examination.

13. Having  heard  the  oral  evidence  I  received  submissions  from  the
    representatives.  Mr Diwnycz said  that  he  did  not  doubt  that  the
    Appellant's political convictions are genuinely  held.   He  also  said
    that he accepted he had a subjective fear  of  return.   He  would  not
    contend that he was making things up or embellishing matters.  However,
    there was no evidence to suggest he had already come to  the  attention
    of the authorities in the Gambia and the  mere  fact  that  he  was  or
    appeared to be being followed by Mr Njie on Twitter did not demonstrate
    he would be at risk.  There would be no risk stemming from  the  recent
    demonstration he had attended because the demonstrators  had  not  gone
    anywhere near the Gambian High Commission.  Whilst his political  views
    are genuinely held, submitted Mr Diwnycz, they are "not as deep  as  it
    may seem".  His activities would not "raise  the  conscientiousness  of
    the Gambian State".

14. Mr Hussain, for the Appellant, submitted  that  he  was  likely  to  be
    politically active on return and those activities would  be  likely  to
    place him  at  risk.   The  background  country  material  showed  that
    oppositionists were at risk.  He drew my attention, in particular, to a
    Human Rights Watch article of 17th September 2015.

15. It is in light of all of the above that I must now go on to remake  the
    decision.  In so doing I have reminded myself that the burden of  proof
    rests upon the Appellant and the standard of proof  is  what  is  often
    described as the "real risk" test.  I have, in fact, concluded, for the
    reasons I set out below, that the Appellant has demonstrated,  to  that
    standard, that if he is returned to his home country of the  Gambia  he
    will face a real risk of  persecution  in  consequence  of  his  actual
    political opinion.

16. As indicated, a number of findings of the judge  have  been  preserved.
    In consequence, I must conclude that the Appellant was not, at the time
    of the hearing before Judge Hillis (20th July 2015)  at  real  risk  of
    persecution upon return on the basis that his UK based  activities  had
    come to the attention of the authorities in the  Gambia.   Despite  the
    subsequent filing of evidence concerning a follower he has acquired  on
    Twitter I made it clear when setting  the  decision  aside  and  giving
    directions for its remaking,  that  the  issue  to  be  considered  was
    whether the Appellant, on the assumption that he would not be picked up
    by the authorities at the airport and had not  already  come  to  their
    attention, would indulge in oppositionist activities in the Gambia such
    as to bring him to the adverse attention of the  authorities  or  would
    not do so simply as a means of avoiding persecution.   That,  then,  is
    what I have focused upon.

17. It will be  noted  that  the  judge  did  have  a  credibility  concern
    regarding the Appellant's contention that he had given his address,  at
    a previous  demonstration,  to  an  unknown  person  who  had  taken  a
    photograph of him.  There are no  other  adverse  credibility  findings
    and, therefore, no other preserved adverse  credibility  findings.   Mr
    Diwnycz,  before  me,  in  effect,  accepted  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant with respect to the genuineness of his political convictions.
     That is a concession of some significance.   Further,  as  Mr  Diwnycz
    again very properly acknowledged, the Appellant did not appear to  seek
    to embellish when giving his evidence before me.  For example,  he  did
    not seek to contend that Mr Njie was definitely still  associated  with
    the authorities in the Gambia, although he thought he  might  well  be,
    nor did he seek to suggest that a demonstration he had attended, whilst
    including a march from the Houses of Parliament to 10  Downing  Street,
    had passed anywhere near the Gambian High Commission.  Further, he  was
    able to offer an explanation as to what  had  triggered  his  UK  based
    political activity in 2014 and what he had said to me  about  that  was
    consistent with his earlier accounts.  Bearing in mind all of that  and
    Mr Diwnycz's acceptance that he has genuinely held  political  views  I
    have found, to the lower standard,  that  he  is  a  genuine  political
    activist and that his articles concerning the regime in the Gambia, his
    tweets concerning the regime and his attendance at  demonstrations  are
    all genuine  expressions  of  his  political  views  rather  than,  for
    example, any attempt to artificially create an asylum claim.

18. The above does not mean, of itself, that I should  uncritically  accept
    his assertion  that  he  will  continue  to  indulge  in  oppositionist
    activity if he  is  returned  to  the  Gambia.   There  is  always  the
    possibility that a person will indulge in such activities when  outside
    of a country but will not be prepared to do so  when  inside  the  home
    country.  However, given that I accept he does hold oppositionist views
    and given his willingness to put his name  to  three  articles  sharply
    critical of the regime and which he would have been aware might  become
    available on the internet for all to see such that he  is  prepared  to
    accept some degree of  risk,  and  given  the  absence  of  any  direct
    credibility challenge before me, I do accept, to  the  lower  standard,
    the Appellant's assertions that he will pursue oppositionist activities
    upon return.  I accept, to the lower standard, what he has said in  the
    witness statement of 21st  April  2016  that  he  will  seek  to  raise
    people's awareness about the activities of the regime and that he would
    join although opposition groups with similar objectives to  him  "until
    such time that this government is brought down".

19. The only remaining question, then, is whether or not there  is  a  real
    risk that such activities would place him at  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm.  In that context I note  that  there  was  no  contention
    before the judge, on behalf of  the  Respondent,  to  the  effect  that
    oppositionists would not be at risk in the  Gambia.   However,  I  have
    sought to reach my own view about that.  Mr Diwnycz  submits  that  the
    type of activity the Appellant says he would indulge in  would  not  be
    such as to attract the wrath of the authorities.

20. When granting permission to appeal  I  note  that  the  granting  judge
    observed that  "the  human  rights  record  of  Gambia  is  not  beyond
    criticism".  That is clearly artistic understatement.  I have looked at
    the background material which has been placed before me.  There  are  a
    number of reports and news items in the most  recent  bundle  filed  on
    behalf of the Appellant which suggest that the authorities do,  indeed,
    take a hard line against oppositionists.  There is a Human Rights Watch
    Report of 16th September 2015 which claims that the  current  President
    of the Gambia, President Jammeh

         "has ruled Gambia with often  ruthless  repression  of  dissent,  a
         tight clamp on virtually all independent  media,  and  the  use  of
         State  security  forces  and  shadow  in  paramilitary  groups   to
         intimidate and silence all deemed critics of the government".

    It is suggested that the population "lives in a climate of fear"  as  a
    result of that.  The report talks of the arbitrary arrest and detention
    "of countless people" for political reasons.  It is indicated that some
    persons have been arrested because they have criticised  the  President
    or highlighted the current administration's policy failures.   That  is
    the sort of thing which the Appellant has  done  in  his  articles  and
    which I have accepted, to the lower standard, he will  continue  to  do
    upon return.  The report goes on to indicate that  oppositionists  have
    been tortured in various ways when detained.  There is,  before  me,  a
    Home Office Operational Guidance Note relating to the Gambia which  was
    issued in June of 2013.  It refers to credible reports dating from 2012
    that the government held  civilians  in  captivity  "based  upon  their
    political views or associations".  Of  course,  that  document  is  now
    somewhat dated but there is nothing before me to suggest that there has
    been any material change in the Gambia since it was issued.  There is a
    BBC News article, which Mr Hussain also drew to my attention, and which
    is dated 16th April 2016 and which reports that an opposition  activist
    in  the  Gambia  has,  according  to  Amnesty  International,  died  in
    detention.  It is said that he was one of a number of persons  who  had
    been detained after taking part in what  is  described  as  a  peaceful
    protest.  The article also indicates that he was detained shortly after
    the commencement of a protest march which had been swiftly  dealt  with
    by the authorities.

21. The above material does certainly appear to suggest that oppositionists
    are at risk of persecution or serious harm simply on the basis of their
    voicing disapproval or criticism of the regime.  Mr  Diwnycz  suggested
    that the Appellant's activities would  not  be  sufficient  to  trigger
    interest in him by the authorities but the material referred  to  above
    seems to suggest otherwise and Mr Diwnycz has not drawn my attention to
    any background country material suggesting that oppositionist  activity
    has to reach a particular  threshold  before  an  adverse  interest  is
    taken.

22. In light of the above, therefore, I do conclude that the  activities  I
    have found the Appellant will carry out in the Gambia will be  such  as
    to create a real risk of his coming to the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities and, subsequently, being treated in a way which will amount
    to persecution or serious harm.  In light of all  of  that  I  conclude
    that he has demonstrated that he is a refugee.  I also conclude, on the
    basis of  the  same  reasoning  and  the  same  findings  that  he  has
    demonstrated  he  will  face  a  real  risk  of  treatment  which  will
    contravene Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).



23. In remaking the decision, therefore, I allow the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been  set  aside.   In  remaking
the decision I allow the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and  on  human
rights grounds with reference to Article 3 of the ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Dated 23 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable so there can be no fee award.


Signed                                    Dated 23 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
