
IAC-AH-CO-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07026/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 February and 26 June 2015           |On 6 July 2015                      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                BB (Algeria)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr N Bramble (02.02.15) and Ms A Everett
                           (26.06.15), Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Ms A Broom, Solicitor, Duncan Lewis
                           Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  a
    decision by the Secretary of State to refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a
    refugee,  as  otherwise  requiring  international   or   human   rights
    protection.  The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction, and I
    consider that it is appropriate that the claimant is accorded anonymity
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Algeria, whose date of birth is 10  April
    1995.  On 3 July 2012 he applied for a visit visa as  an  unaccompanied
    child.  He proposed to visit his uncle and aunt in London for a  period
    of 21 days.  The Entry Clearance Officer granted him entry clearance as
    he was satisfied that he was a student, and authorisation to travel had
    been given by his father.

 3. The claimant is recorded as having claimed asylum on 5  February  2013.
    He was given a screening interview on 14 February 2013, and he  made  a
    witness statement in support of his asylum claim on 21  February  2013.
    He was subsequently interviewed about his asylum claim  on  8  November
    2013.

 4. In his witness statement, he said that he had been born and brought  up
    in Algiers.  Neither of his parents worked, and they were supported  by
    two paternal uncles.  They all lived in one household  with  these  two
    uncles.  His mother was a practising Christian.  He was not sure of his
    father's  religion.   He  was  an  alcoholic,  and  he  never  saw  him
    practising any religion.  The claimant was brought up as  a  Christian,
    as was his older brother (who no longer lived at home).   His  mother's
    religion caused problems for them.  They were bullied,  threatened  and
    verbally abused.  His paternal uncles used to attack his  mother.   The
    claimant was not allowed to eat from a plate, and nor were  his  mother
    and brothers.  His uncles made them eat out of bowls like  dogs  rather
    than like human beings.  He was a particular target.  His uncles  would
    beat him on a daily basis.  Their neighbours  would  target  him  also.
    People would spit on them as they passed by and say  if  they  did  not
    become Muslim, they would be killed.   They  would  call  him  a  dirty
    Christian, and say he did not deserve be alive.

 5. From the age of 7, one of the two uncles began raping him.  He would do
    so whenever there was no one else around.  When he  was  about  13,  he
    threatened him with a gun and said if he told the police or if anything
    happened to him, his friends would get him instead.  When he was  about
    13, things got worse.  He started trying to stand  up  for  his  mother
    when his uncles abused her.  He also began trying to refuse  his  uncle
    who was sexually abusing him.  As punishment, his uncles would put  him
    in the basement where he would be tied hand and foot  and  left  there.
    He told his uncle that he was gay.  He hoped this would repel him,  and
    cause him to stop trying to abuse him.  His uncle did not try to  touch
    him as often, but it did not stop altogether.  His older  brother  left
    home when the appellant was 14.  His uncle told other  people  that  he
    was gay, and spread it all around the neighbourhood.  It made people in
    the neighbourhood become even more abusive towards him.  He was  always
    under pressure because of  his  sexuality  and  as  he  got  older  the
    pressure to change his religion increased.  He was set on by groups  of
    youths when he came back from school.  He would be beaten with  sticks.
    From the time that he was 13 until he was 16, he went  to  school  very
    irregularly.  Once he even reported what was going on to the police but
    they just laughed at him and sent him away.  He told them he was  being
    abused because of his religion and  his  sexuality,  and  one  of  them
    stroked his face and called him a pretty boy and told him to run  along
    home.  They did not care.  This was when he was aged 14.

 6. The whole family moved to Oran when he just turned 16.  The  uncle  who
    used to rape him took him and his parents and younger  brothers  there.
    They were there for four months, and then they moved back  to  Algiers.
    At this point, his father took him to get a passport.  It was a  secret
    between himself, his mother and father.  Not even his younger  brothers
    knew.

 7. He and his brothers had been going to school in Oran, and it  was  much
    better for him there because no one knew  anything  about  him  or  his
    circumstances.   The  day  after  they  returned  to  Algiers,  he  was
    kidnapped by a group of Salafists.  He was on the street at  the  time,
    and three of them came from behind and grabbed him.  They took  him  to
    the forest and held him for about seven days.  They would beat him  and
    preach to him and try to convert him.  They told  him  what  the  Quran
    said about homosexuality and about Christianity.  They would tie him up
    and would hit him and kick him.  He was gagged, and sometimes he nearly
    suffocated.

 8. After about a week there was a big sound of alarms  like  maybe  police
    sirens, and they ran away leaving him alone.  He was not  tied  up,  as
    they only tied him up when they were beating him.  He was able  to  run
    away himself.  He walked for about an hour and a half and  came  to  an
    area where there were some lorries parked.  He just  got  into  one  at
    random, and hid in the back amongst sheep.  The lorry drove for five or
    six hours and stopped in Oran.  He did not  want  to  go  back  to  his
    family, and he did not feel safe in Algiers.  So he thought he might as
    well stay where he was.  He spent about eight months in Oran.  For  the
    first few weeks he slept rough and begged on the streets to  get  food.
    After a bit, he realised he could earn money helping the fishermen.  He
    did not tell them about his sexuality.

 9. He had never had a consensual homosexual relationship, but he knew that
    he was not physically attracted to women and that he was  attracted  to
    men.

10. After about month the claimant contacted his  mother  in  Algiers,  and
    told her where he was and what  had  happened.   She  agreed  that  the
    safest thing was for him to stay where he was.  He would speak  to  her
    every couple of weeks or once a month.  After a few months, his  mother
    told him she was planning for him to come to the UK to  stay  with  his
    maternal uncle.  She said she had asked them if  he  could  come  on  a
    holiday, and they had been happy to agree.  He returned to Algiers  for
    one day in order to do the biometrics for the visit  visa  application.
    He travelled to Algiers by coach for this appointment, and he  met  his
    father who took him for the biometrics.  This was in  June  2012.   The
    father collected the visa, and he eventually left Algeria on  7  August
    2012.  He did not know why there was a delay, as his mother was dealing
    with the arrangements.

11. The claimant was  seen  by  Dr  Satinder  Sahota,  consultant  forensic
    psychiatrist, on 24 September 2013.  Dr Sahota prepared  a  psychiatric
    report on 30 September 2013.  The claimant presented with a history  of
    mental health  problems  with  onset  in  Algeria,  and  a  history  of
    treatment of his mental health in the UK.  He  reported  a  history  of
    physical abuse from the age of 7 years.  He left school at the  age  of
    16 years, and reported that he was kidnapped the same year  because  of
    his homosexuality and Christian religion.  He told Dr  Sahota  that  he
    could not return home when he was released as he  feared  he  would  be
    killed by his uncle.  He had been living with  his  maternal  uncle  in
    Brixton since 7 August 2012, and he attended an ESOL  English  language
    course at a college in Vauxhall.  He reported a long history of assault
    and self-harm.  He also  reported  a  history  of  depressed  mood  and
    anxiety.  He said he had stayed  indoors  since  he  came  to  the  UK,
    preferring not to talk to anyone.  He was under  the  care  of  Lambeth
    Adolescent Mental Health Services where  he  received  a  diagnosis  of
    PTSD.  He had now been discharged from the service, and  was  receiving
    fluoxetine antidepressant medication 20mg per day from his GP.  He  was
    also receiving promethazine which was an antipsychotic  drug,  commonly
    prescribed for its hypnotic properties.

12. The claimant told Dr Sahota that he suspected his uncle was behind  the
    kidnapping  incident  in  Algeria.   In  his  opinion,  the  claimant's
    symptoms  were  characteristic  of  PTSD,  which  was  the  appropriate
    diagnosis.  His response to treatment for his PTSD was dependent on (in
    addition to psychiatric and  psychological  interventions)  whether  he
    could pursue his educational and occupational  interests  and  overcome
    his immigration problems.  He  could  start  to  respond  to  treatment
    within three to six months if those factors improved.

13. On 2 September 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing  to  recognise  the  claimant  as  a   refugee.    Given   the
    inconsistencies and notable lack of  detail  provided  in  response  to
    questions relating to his sexuality, it was not accepted  that  he  was
    gay.  His claim to be a  Christian  was  also  rejected.   It  was  not
    accepted he had suffered mistreatment  at  the  hands  of  his  uncles,
    neighbours and teachers because of his religion.   His  claim  to  have
    been kidnapped by Salafists was also rejected.  He stated that  he  had
    moved to Oran with his family and that while living there  he  did  not
    encounter any problems.  It was considered he could return  to  Algiers
    or Oran.  He suffered from PTSD, but the evidence did not indicate that
    his depression was at such a critical stage it  would  be  inhumane  to
    remove him.  Suitable medical treatment was available in Algeria  which
    he could access in the future.  He had not provided any  evidence  that
    he would be denied medical treatment or  that  he  would  not  able  to
    travel to obtain such  treatment.   So  his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would not amount to a breach of Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

14. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Harris sitting  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross on 6 November 2014.  Ms Broom appeared on
    behalf of the claimant, and the Secretary of State was represented by a
    Home Office Presenting Officer.

15. In his subsequent decision, the judge found that  his  account  of  his
    experiences in Algeria was credible.  Although the Secretary  of  State
    correctly identified the lack of knowledge of Christianity displayed by
    the claimant, he considered that a significant aspect of the claim  was
    not so much any religious activity on his part but that  he  identified
    himself as not being a Muslim; "and how some Muslims take  this  as  an
    affront to their religion"  (paragraph  41).   The  judge  reached  the
    following conclusion at paragraph [48]:

         "The [claimant] sometimes  told  his  account  in  a  muddled  way.
         Nevertheless, weighing up the evidence before me, I consider  there
         has been sufficient plausibility and consistency in the core  parts
         of the claimant's claim for me to find him to be credible."

16. On the issue of risk on return, the judge  went  on  to  cite  guidance
    given by the Upper Tribunal in OO (gay men:  risk)  Algeria  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 63 (IAC) paragraph 85.  The guidance included the following:

         "(c) The evidence does not  suggest  that,  as  a  general  matter,
             societal and familial disapproval  of  male  gay  identity  in
             Algeria  reaches  levels  that  are  persecutory,  within  the
             meaning of  Article  9  of  the  Qualification  Directive,  or
             otherwise reach the threshold required  for  protection  under
             Article 15B of that directive or Article 3 of the ECHR.

         (d)  That  conclusion  is  reinforced  by  the  evidence  that  the
             admittedly small number of gay men who live openly as such  in
             Algeria do not in general suffer  serious  harm  amounting  to
             persecution.

         (e)  If somebody is able to  establish  that  their  behaviour  was
             shaped by more than disapproval  amounting  to  serious  harm,
             they may be able to establish a  need  for  protection.   Each
             case should be determined on the  evidence  specific  to  that
             particular case."

17. Applying this guidance, the judge  held  at  paragraph  [51]  that  the
    claimant was not at a real risk of persecution on return to Algeria  by
    the Algerian authorities either as a gay man or as a Christian.

18. But, applying paragraph 399K of the Rules, he found that  the  claimant
    was at risk of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  from  non-state
    actors in his home area.

19. At paragraphs  [55]  onwards,  the  judge  addressed  the  question  of
    internal relocation.  From the claimant's  account,  the  claimant  was
    able to stay in Oran for "a number of weeks" without a problem.  But he
    did not live openly as a gay man or as a person identifying himself  as
    Christian.  He was satisfied that, as at the date of the hearing, there
    was a real likelihood that the claimant would wish to live openly.  The
    background evidence indicated there was widespread  social  disapproval
    and discrimination against gay men in Algeria, albeit not generally  of
    a  severity  to  amount  to  persecution.   Similarly,  the  background
    evidence  also  indicated  there   to   be   social   disapproval   and
    discrimination against  those  identified  as  Christians,  albeit  not
    generally amounting to persecution.  The judge continued:

         "58. However, I consider that  on  the  particular  facts  of  this
             claimant's case there is a distinct combination  of  being  not
             only openly a gay man but also someone who identifies expressly
             as a Christian.  This would, to  adopt  the  language  used  at
             paragraph 77 of OO Algeria, be considered by many  in  Algerian
             society as an affront to that  society's  moral  and  religious
             code because of a refusal to conform  to  proscribed  norms  of
             behaviour.

         59.  On the evidence before me, I find that internal relocation  is
             not reasonably available to the claimant because of  the  level
             of discrimination and animosity he would face in his particular
             circumstances."

20. For that reason, the  judge  found  that  the  claimant  qualified  for
    protection as a refugee, and that there were  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that the claimant  faced  a  real  risk  on  return  of  ill-
    treatment in breach of Article 3 ECHR.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

21. A member of the Specialist  Appeals  Team  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal on behalf of the Secretary of State.  The judge  had  mistakenly
    taken discrimination, social disapproval and animosity as reaching  the
    threshold for persecution when at paragraph [57] of the decision he had
    found that the  objective  evidence  did  not  demonstrate  persecutory
    behaviour for either Christianity or homosexuality.  The judge had made
    a material misdirection of law in relation to the threshold required to
    establish refugee status (i.e. a risk of persecution,  not  a  risk  of
    discrimination).

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

22. On 19 December 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons.  It was arguable that  in  failing
    firstly to consider whether there was a part of the country  of  origin
    where the  claimant  would  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
    persecuted the Tribunal failed properly  to  apply  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 399O of the Immigration Rules.   As  the  background  country
    information  (cited  by   the   Tribunal)   suggested   that   societal
    discrimination in Algeria against gays and  Christians  generally  fell
    short of persecution, the arguable  error  of  law  identified  in  the
    application might also be material to the outcome of the appeal.

The Error of Law Hearing

23. After hearing from Mr Bramble and Ms Broom,  and  having  reviewed  the
    country guidance case of OO Algeria and paragraph 399O of the Rules,  I
    was persuaded that a material error of law was made out, such that  the
    decision should be set aside and remade.  My  reasons  for  finding  an
    error of law are set out below.

24. After further discussion, it was agreed by the  parties  that  I  could
    remake a decision on the reasonableness  of  internal  relocation  (and
    hence remake the decision on the  claimant's  international  protection
    claim) without hearing any further evidence.  However, I noted from  Ms
    Broom's skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal that  she  had
    also advanced an Article 8 claim, which had not been addressed by Judge
    Harris.

25. While the claimant did not  cross-appeal  on  this  issue,  Mr  Bramble
    conceded that Article 8 was an issue which I would have to address if I
    remade the decision on the claimant's international protection claim in
    favour of the Secretary of State.  The solution which he proposed,  and
    with which Ms Broom concurred, was that I should make directions for  a
    resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal on the Article 8 claim if such an
    eventuality  arose  (namely  the  remaking  of  the  decision  of   the
    international protection claim in the Secretary of State's favour)  but
    not if I remade this decision in the claimant's favour.



Reasons of Finding an Error of Law

26. Paragraph 399O states:

         '(i) The Secretary of State will not make:

               a) a grant of asylum if in part of the country  of  origin  a
                  person  would  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
                  persecuted, and the person can reasonably be  expected  to
                  stay in that part of the country...

          i) in examining whether a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
             country of return meets the requirements

             (i)  the Secretary of  State,  when  making  his  decision  on
                  whether to grant asylum or humanitarian  protection,  will
                  have regard to the  general  circumstances  prevailing  in
                  that part of the country and to the personal circumstances
                  of the person.'

27. In Januzi & Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2006]
    UKHL 5 each of the appellants  before  the  House  of  Lords  had  been
    refused recognition as a refugee on the basis that  there  was  another
    place within the country of his nationality, where  he  would  have  no
    well-founded fear of persecution, where the protection of  the  country
    would be available to him and where in all the circumstances  he  could
    reasonably and without undue harshness be expected to live.  The common
    issue in the appeals was whether, in judging reasonableness  and  undue
    harshness in this context, account should be  taken  of  any  disparity
    between the civil, political and socio-economic human rights which  the
    appellant would enjoy under  the  leading  international  Human  Rights
    Conventions and covenants and those which he would enjoy at  the  place
    of relocation.

28. The House of Lords essentially answered this question in the  negative.
    Giving the leading speech, Lord Bingham  at  paragraph  13  cited  with
    approval the following dicta from EA & Other v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2003] EWCA 1032 at paragraph 67:

         "... we  consider  that  consideration  of  the  reasonableness  of
         internal relocation should focus on the consequences to the  asylum
         seeker of settling in  the  place  of  relocation  instead  of  his
         previous  home.   The  comparison  between  the   asylum   seeker's
         situation in this country and what it would be in the place of  the
         relocation is not relevant for this purpose, though it may be  very
         relevant when considering the impact of the Human Rights Convention
         on the requirements of humanity."

29. At paragraph 20, Lord Bingham said that valuable  guidance  was  to  be
    found in the UNHCR guidelines on international protection dated 23 July
    2003.  Paragraph 7H(a) of the reasonableness analysis was approached by
    asking "can the claimant, in the context of the country concerned, lead
    a relatively normal  life  without  facing  undue  hardship?"  and  the
    comment is made: "if not, it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    person to move there".  In development of this analysis the  guidelines
    addressed respect for human rights in paragraph 28:

         'Respect for human rights.  Where respect for  basic  human  rights
         standards, including in particular non-derogable rights, is clearly
         problematic, the proposed area cannot be  considered  a  reasonable
         alternative.  This does not mean that  deprivation  of  any  civil,
         political or socio-economic human right in the proposed  area  will
         disqualify  it  from  being  an  internal  flight   or   relocation
         alternative.  Rather, it requires, from a practical prospective, an
         assessment of whether the rights that  will  not  be  respected  or
         protected  are  fundamental  to  the  individual,  such  that   the
         deprivation of those rights would be sufficiently harmful to render
         the area an unreasonable alternative.'

30. At paragraph 21 Lord Bingham said:

         "The more closely the persecution in  question  is  linked  to  the
         state, and the greater the control of the state over  those  acting
         or purporting to act on its behalf, the more likely  (other  things
         being equal) that a victim of persecution  in  one  place  will  be
         similarly vulnerable  in  another  place  within  the  state.   The
         converse may also be true.  All must depend on a fair assessment of
         the relevant facts."

31. Ms Broom's submission below was that internal relocation was absolutely
    not a viable option for the claimant as he  would  be  unable  to  live
    openly as a homosexual in  Algeria.   Due  to  the  criminalisation  of
    homosexual relationships and the widespread societal discrimination, he
    would be at risk of persecution from state and  non-state  actors.   He
    would also be unable to return to Algeria as  a  Christian,  a  country
    where Christians were maltreated, arrested and churches were closed.

32. As the same findings of fact by the judge  on  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation were also deployed to justify  a  finding  under  Article  3
    ECHR, the judge appears to have accepted Ms Broom's submission  and  to
    have found that the appellant had a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    throughout Algeria.  This was not a finding that was open to the judge,
    having regard to OO Algeria and the background evidence before  him  as
    the experience of Christians in Algeria.  As the judge acknowledged  in
    paragraph [57] of his decision, the background evidence indicated  that
    treatment of gay men in Algeria and those identified as Christians  did
    not generally amount to  persecution.   So  if  neither  characteristic
    (being openly gay or being openly Christian) engendered a real risk  of
    persecution outside the claimant's former home area in  Algeria,  there
    was no logical basis for inferring that  the  combination  of  the  two
    characteristics  would  carry  the  claimant   over   the   persecutory
    threshold.   In  order  to  find  that  the  combination  of  the   two
    characteristics  engendered  a   well-founded   fear   of   persecution
    throughout Algeria the judge would have needed to  identify  background
    evidence which supported such a proposition, and he failed to do so.

33. Instead, the judge supported his finding by a passage from  OO  Algeria
    which does  not  form  part  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  guidance.   At
    paragraph 77, the Tribunal said  that  they  had  borne  in  mind  "the
    expressed view" that anyone believed to be gay would be  considered  to
    represent an affront to society's moral code because of  a  refusal  to
    conform to prescribed norms of behaviour.

34. But notwithstanding this expressed view, the Tribunal went on to  reach
    the conclusion that nonetheless being openly gay  did  not  engender  a
    real risk of persecutory ill-treatment.  This was because there was  no
    evidence indicating homophobic attacks or serious harm meted out to  an
    individual who was or was suspected  of  being  gay.   There  was  also
    evidence to suggest that some gay men in Algeria found it  possible  to
    live openly: "if living openly does not attract serious harm, which  on
    the evidence before us it does not, people  feeling  compelled  to  act
    discreetly does not mean that the threshold of Article  9  is  reached;
    the fact that a person does not live openly cannot put that person in a
    better position than a person who does live openly."

35. Ms Broom sought to salvage the judge's decision on internal  relocation
    on the ground that his finding at paragraph [59] is not to  be  treated
    as a finding that the claimant has a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    throughout Algeria, but as a finding which is paragraph 399O compliant:
    that is to say, a finding that there is no part of  Algeria  where  the
    claimant can reasonably be expected to stay.

36. But if the claimant  is  safe  from  persecution  in  another  part  of
    Algeria, even if he chooses to live openly as a Christian and gay  man,
    prima facie it is reasonable for the claimant to  relocate  internally.
    In short, the judge has not given adequate  reasons  for  finding  that
    internal relocation is not a viable option for the claimant.

The Remaking of the Decision on the International Protection Claim

37. In remaking the decision, my starting point is that the findings of the
    First-tier Tribunal with regard to past persecution remain undisturbed.
     Paragraph 399K provides that the fact that a person has  already  been
    subject to persecution or serious harm will be regarded  as  a  serious
    indication of the person's well-founded fear  of  persecution  or  real
    risk of suffering  serious  harm  unless  there  are  good  reasons  to
    consider that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

38. There are good reasons to consider that the claimant  will  not  suffer
    persecution or serious harm outside his former home  area  in  Algiers.
    The claimant was peculiarly vulnerable because he  was  a  minor  in  a
    household presided over by an abusive uncle.  No only did this  abusive
    uncle stir up animosity towards the claimant in  the  neighbourhood  on
    account of his  espousal  of  the  Christian  faith  and  his  declared
    homosexuality, but he also probably lay behind the claimant's abduction
    and detention by Muslim extremists who sought to forcibly  convert  the
    claimant to Islam. The claimant's age and  membership  of  his  uncle's
    household is also likely to have been a  factor  in  his  inability  to
    access police protection when he complained about his ill-treatment  at
    the age of fourteen.

39. The claimant would not be returning to live in  his  uncle's  household
    while still a minor, but  would  be  returning  as  an  adult  to  live
    somewhere else outside his uncle's sphere  of  influence  and  control.
    The claimant was able to live for eight  months  in  Oran  as  a  minor
    without any interference from his uncle and  without  any  problems  on
    account of his sexual orientation (albeit undeclared) or on account  of
    the fact that he was a non-Muslim.

40. Although the quality of life for gay men and Christians in  Algeria  is
    significantly worse than it is in a European country such as the United
    Kingdom, it is not the comparison between the claimant's life here in a
    tolerant society and what his life would be in a  place  such  as  Oran
    which is material.  Even if he chose to live openly as a  gay  man  and
    Christian in a place such as Oran, there is not the real  risk  of  the
    claimant suffering persecution in consequence, and he would be able  to
    lead an adequate private life. I am reinforced in this finding  by  the
    background evidence discussed below.

41. The background evidence relating to the  experience  of  Christians  in
    Algeria is mixed.  While on the one hand they face discrimination,  the
    number of adherents to  the  Christian  faith  in  Algeria  is  growing
    (claimant's bundle  page  82).   In  the  report  downloaded  from  the
    internet on 3 November 2014 (claimant's bundle page 80)  the  following
    is stated:

         'Protestant church planters  have  been  active  in  recent  years,
         claiming to launch dozens of  churches  as  they  travel  and  find
         converts already present in many towns thanks  to  Christian  radio
         and satellite TV.  Conservative estimates put  Algerian  Christians
         at 10,000 strong, largely concentrated in Kabylle  where  the  non-
         Arab populace has proven more receptive to Christianity.

         Protestants first established a foothold in Kabylle  in  the  1980s
         and grew in number through  the  1990s  while  the  government  was
         occupied with domestic terrorism.  While terrorist attacks continue
         in Algeria, relative to the 90s concerns have begun to subside just
         as evangelism efforts have doubled the Protestant presence in  Arab
         areas outside of Kabylle.'

42. In conclusion, for the reasons I have given  above,  I  find  that  the
    claimant can reasonably be expected to stay in a place such as Oran  or
    Kabylle, and that the claimant thus does not qualify for recognition as
    a refugee.  By the same token, there are not  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that on return to Algeria the claimant would face a real risk
    of harm of such severity as to cross the threshold of Article 3 ECHR.

The Resumed Hearing to remake the Decision under Article 8 ECHR

43. The claimant spoke  through  an  Arabic  interpreter  whom  he  clearly
    understood.  He adopted as his evidence-in-chief his witness  statement
    dated 13 April 2015.  Since being in the UK, he had been able  to  live
    openly as a gay man.  He met his first partner at  Lambeth  College  in
    2013.  His name was Cedric and  he  was  French.   He  had  been  in  a
    relationship with Cedric for two  months,  but  it  was  not  a  sexual
    relationship.

44. He met his second partner in February 2014 at a pub  in  Clapham.   His
    name was Zeki, and he was Colombian.  They had a relationship for  five
    months.  He met his third partner in August 2014.  His  name  was  Tio,
    and he was French.  He had met him in a pub in Soho.  They had now been
    in a relationship together for nearly eight months.   They  met  around
    three to four times a week.  Sometimes they studied together, sometimes
    they went to the cinema, pub or visited mutual friends.  They liked  to
    go skateboarding in various places in London, and they  sometimes  went
    to gay clubs together.  Their favourite club was the  Duck  Village  in
    Vauxhall.

45. He had asked Tio to come and see his solicitors to  provide  a  witness
    statement in support of his appeal.  Tio said he would not be  able  to
    do this, as he was working.  Tio did not  know  about  his  immigration
    status, and he did not want to involve Tio in his problems.

46. He was living with his family and his uncle did not know  that  he  was
    gay, so he could not go out as much as he would like to.  Also, he  was
    studying.  He had never joined any gay websites to meet people.  As  he
    lived with his family, he did not want his uncle to  see  this  on  his
    computer. He did not want to disrespect him.  Also,  as  he  was  in  a
    relationship, he did not need to be signing up  to  any  gay  websites.
    His family in the UK consisted of his aunt M, and  his  uncle  G.   His
    uncle G was his mother's brother.  His aunt was a British citizen,  and
    his uncle G had been granted ILR.  He told his aunt M that he  was  gay
    about one and a half years ago.  She was fine about this, and  did  not
    react negatively.  He had not told his uncle that he was gay.   He  had
    asked his aunt to promise not to tell his uncle that he  was  gay.   If
    his uncle found out that he was gay then he would kill him and  he  did
    not know whether he would still be able to  reside  with  him  and  his
    aunt, and what would happen to him.  His uncle  had  a  mentality  like
    people in Algeria.   His  uncle  also  did  not  know  that  he  was  a
    Christian. He had been mainly attending St Matthew's Church and  Christ
    Church in Brixton.

47. He had been receiving medication for depression and sleep  deprivation.
    Since being in the UK, he had tried to commit suicide on more than  one
    occasion.  On one occasion his uncle had seen him,  and  taken  him  to
    King's College Hospital in London.  He could not remember how  long  he
    was at the hospital.  He was prescribed new medication, and  they  told
    him to go to a psychiatrist.  He was diagnosed with PTSD in  May  2013.
    He then saw a psychiatrist on a  monthly  basis  at  South  London  and
    Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust.

48. He had been attending Vauxhall Lambeth College  since  September  2013.
    He had completed courses in maths and English ESOL E2 in June 2014.  He
    was now studying English level 1, maths E3 and  carpentry  and  joinery
    level 1, and he would complete these courses in June 2015.  If  he  was
    granted status, he would like to go on to study science at  university.
    He would also like to work in the field of  carpentry,  as  he  enjoyed
    this very much.  He could not imagine going  back  to  Algeria,  as  he
    feared he would be killed as a gay man and as a  Christian.   He  could
    not live openly or comfortably in Algeria.

49. The claimant was asked some questions by Miss  Broom,  and  was  cross-
    examined by Miss Everett.  He was asked why  there  was  no  letter  of
    support from Tio.  He said it was a private issue.  He did not want  to
    involve him in his immigration situation. He was asked about the family
    that he had in Algeria.  He said that he had his mum, sister and  three
    of his siblings living in Algeria.  He had last spoken  to  them  three
    years ago.  He said that his uncle here (his mother's brother) was  not
    in contact with his mother. He was asked why. He said his uncle did not
    want to have contact with her since he had heard about his problems  in
    Algeria.

50. In cross-examination, he said he had told his aunt he  was  gay  as  he
    trusted her.  He did not know if she had told his uncle.  Maybe she had
    told him.  He had told his boyfriend that he was French.   This  was  a
    plausible explanation,  as  he  (the  claimant)  spoke  fluent  French.
    French was the second language of Algeria.  He told  his  boyfriend  he
    had been born in Algeria, and that he had grown up in France where  his
    mother and father continued to reside.

51. In her letter of support dated 14 April 2015,  the  claimant's  aunt  M
    said that the claimant had come to visit  them  in  August  2012  on  a
    holiday visa, and over the years had become an  accepted  part  of  the
    family.  He missed surfing, but had become adept at skateboarding,  and
    regularly used the skate park in Brixton.  He  appeared  to  have  made
    friends and settled into life here.   They  talked  regularly,  and  he
    confided in her about some of his relationships, and  he  had  accepted
    her advice on safe sex.  Even her husband had  now  accepted  that  the
    claimant might be homosexual, something he would not have been able  to
    be so open about in Algeria.  Having been to Algeria many  times  since
    2008, she had not seen any openly gay men, and it  was  something  that
    the claimant's Muslim family would not accept.

52. The claimant continued  to  receive  medical  assistance  to  help  him
    recover from the post-traumatic stress  which  he  had  suffered  as  a
    result of being abused by male relatives  on  his  father's  side.   In
    recent times he had appeared more  content  and  happy.   She  and  her
    husband were  willing  to  continue  to  support  him  financially  and
    emotionally.

53. In an undated letter, another aunt of the appellant in the UK, aunt  F,
    who is the sister of aunt M, said that M had told them all  before  the
    appellant arrived here, that she was desperate to have him to  come  to
    stay with her as  she  was  very  concerned  about  the  abuse  he  was
    suffering in Algeria, and she was certain that the abuse would continue
    if he went back to Algeria.  Although the  claimant  was  a  few  years
    older now, aunt M said he would not be able to support himself and live
    a normal life over there.  He had arrived in the UK as a very  shy  and
    introverted young boy who could not understand more than a few words in
    English.  But each time she had met him, his efforts to  learn  English
    were fantastic, and he had very quickly become fluent in  English,  and
    he had also grown in confidence.  They all thought  he  would  only  go
    backwards if he was to return to Algeria.

54. In her closings submissions on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Miss
    Everett submitted  that  the  claimant's  Article  8  rights  were  not
    engaged.  In reply, Miss Broom referred me to  her  extensive  skeleton
    argument in the supplementary bundle.  There would be very  significant
    obstacles to the claimant's integration into the country to  which  she
    would have to go if required  to  leave  the  UK.   He  had  so  little
    connection with Algeria  as  to  mean  that  the  consequences  of  him
    establishing  a  private  life  there  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh,
    following Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 0060 (IAC).  She referred to  HJ  (Iran)
    and HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31, and submitted that  gay  people  were
    unable to live openly in Algeria, and so the claimant would be at  real
    risk of persecution by living openly in Algeria.  The precariousness of
    the claimant's immigration status should be given little weight  as  he
    was a minor when he entered the UK, and he had remained in the  UK  for
    reasons beyond his control.

Discussion and Findings on the Article 8 claim

55. The necessary starting point in assessing the  claim  under  Article  8
    ECHR is my earlier finding on the claim for  international  protection,
    in particular my finding that there are  areas  in  Algeria  where  the
    claimant can choose to live openly as a gay man and  Christian  without
    there being a real risk of him suffering  persecution  in  consequence,
    and that he would be able to lead an  adequate  private  life  in  such
    places.  Accordingly, the second requirement identified in HJ (Iran) is
    not satisfied, namely that gay people who live openly will be liable to
    persecution in the country of origin.

56. As submitted by Miss Everett, there is also reason to question  whether
    the claimant meets the fourth requirement in HJ  (Iran),  which  is  as
    follows:

         "If  the  applicant  would  live  discreetly,  why  would  he  live
         discreetly?  If the applicant  would  live  discreetly  because  he
         wanted to do so, or because of social pressures (e.g.  not  wanting
         to distress his parents or embarrass his friends) then he is not  a
         refugee.  But if a material reason for living discreetly  would  be
         the fear of persecution that would follow if he lived openly,  then
         he is a refugee."

57. Despite not having a fear of persecution in the UK, the claimant  lives
    discreetly  as  a  homosexual  here  in  that  he  has   confided   his
    homosexuality to his aunt and not announced it  to  his  uncle.  Absent
    taking his aunt into his confidence, it would not  be  obvious  to  his
    aunt that he was active as a homosexual. So if the claimant is discreet
    about his homosexuality in the UK because of social pressures (e.g. not
    wanting to embarrass family members here) there is no reason to suppose
    that he would live any less discreetly in Algeria,  or  that  he  would
    want to be more open about his homosexuality  in  Algeria  than  he  is
    about his homosexuality in the UK.

58. But even if the fourth requirement is met, the  second  requirement  is
    not, and I am not persuaded there are very significant obstacles to the
    claimant's reintegration into life and society in Algeria.  Clearly  it
    would not be reasonable to expect him to return to  live  in  the  same
    household as his abusive uncle, or  in  the  same  neighbourhood.   The
    significance of the evidence given by aunt M is that she returns  on  a
    frequent basis to Algeria, and so she must have relatives  in  Algeria.
    These relatives, at aunt M's instigation, ought to be able  to  provide
    the claimant with some support.  But even if the claimant cannot access
    practical and emotional support from relatives of aunt M or aunt  F  in
    Algeria, he is now sufficiently mature and  advanced  in  his  recovery
    from the symptoms of PTSD to be able to lead  an  independent  life  in
    Algeria.  It is clear from the aunt's evidence that she and her husband
    will provide the claimant  with  the  necessary  financial  support  to
    maintain and accommodate himself in Algeria, and will provide him  with
    the necessary funding for his further and higher education in Algeria.

59. Given the claimant's history, and his length of residence in the United
    Kingdom, I accept that questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test  should  be
    answered in his favour.  Questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test should be
    answered in favour of the  Secretary  of  State,  and  so  the  crucial
    question is whether the interference  consequential  upon  the  refusal
    decision is a proportionate one.  In assessing proportionality, I  take
    into account the public interest considerations set out in Section 117D
    of the 2002 Act.

60. Although the claimant was a minor when he arrived in the United Kingdom
    on a visit visa, most of his residence here  has  been  accrued  as  an
    adult.  Moreover, the principle that little weight should  be  attached
    to private life which is built up while a person's status is precarious
    applies to children no less than it applies to  adults.   Only  when  a
    person has accrued seven years' residence in the United  Kingdom  as  a
    child are the scales significantly  tipped  in  that  person's  favour.
    When the claimant reached his age of maturity in the UK, he had been in
    the United Kingdom for less than one year.

61. The claimant is now over the age of 20, and as  he  progresses  further
    into adulthood, the proposition that he enjoys  family  life  with  his
    uncle and aunt for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR becomes  increasingly
    tendentious.  But even if this is assumed in the claimant's favour, and
    even taking into account the excellent progress the claimant  has  made
    in integrating into UK society, I find that the public interest in  the
    maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls should  prevail.
    Although he has not been successful in his asylum claim, by pursuing it
    the claimant has been able to remain in the UK for some three years  so
    as to access medical treatment and familial support in recovering  from
    the domestic abuse to which he was subjected as a minor in Algeria.  So
    neither the claimant, nor  any  of  his  family  members  here,  has  a
    legitimate expectation that the claimant can extend his  stay  here  on
    human rights  grounds  rather  than  having  to  satisfy  the  "normal"
    requirements for limited leave to enter or remain under the Rules, such
    as meeting the points-based system requirements for entry clearance  or
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

Conclusion

62. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: the claimant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds raised.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the SSHD.  Failure to comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

