
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07711/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 29 May 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     AZ
                           (anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant who is a national of Iran appeals the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Brenells  who  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds against  the  decision
    to refuse to vary his leave to remain and a further decision to  remove
    him for reasons given in a determination dated 12 March 2014.

 2. This is the second occasion the appellant has  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In a determination following a hearing on 26  November  2013
    Upper Tribunal Judge Conway set aside a decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Andonian who had dismissed the appeal against the  2013  decision
    on credibility grounds with the direction  that  no  findings  were  to
    stand.  Judge Brenells also disbelieved the appellant.   Permission  to
    appeal this decision was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne
    based on the grounds before him which he considered to be  arguable  to
    which he added his own views at [3] of his decision on the approach  he
    considered the judge should have taken.

 3. The appellant's age is in dispute.  It is the respondent's case that he
    was born in March 1992 and the appellant's case that  he  was  born  in
    July 1993.  On either basis he is now indisputably an adult and was  so
    at the time his appeal was heard before Judge Brenells.

 4. The appellant's claim can be stated as follows.  He lived in Iran  with
    four sisters and parents.  His problems began in October 2008 when  his
    parents were arrested and detained by the authorities.  His mother  was
    released within three days but his father held in  detention  for  nine
    weeks.  Consolation by a friend on the release of his  mother  resulted
    in the appellant joining a group at  the  school  that  prepared  anti-
    government leaflets.  The appellant  and  four  school  mates  prepared
    leaflets critical of the regime  which  they  placed  in  the  library.
    Whilst doing so he was caught by the chief  librarian  who  called  his
    brother, a policeman, named Hassan who took the appellant to his  house
    later that day after indicating if he co-operated, everything would  be
    sorted out.  After making advances to the appellant and threatening  to
    report the incident at the library to the police, Hassan then raped the
    appellant after he had resisted.

 5. The following day Hassan explained he was prepared to help  secure  his
    father's release if he agreed to have sex with him.  The appellant  had
    no option but  to  agree.   In  December  2008  Hassan  approached  the
    appellant at school and informed him that his father had been  released
    and they went together to the appellant's  house  to  see  his  father.
    Thereafter Hassan took the appellant to his own house where  there  was
    further sexual activity.  Encouraged by the  librarian,  the  appellant
    had a further  encounter  with  Hassan  outside  the  school.  On  this
    occasion the appellant explained that he could not force  him  to  have
    sex anymore.  Hassan became angry and told the appellant if he did  not
    want to be with him he should offer one of his sisters.  The  appellant
    said he would speak to his sister but never did.

 6. In mid January 2009 the appellant threw a coca-cola can with petrol  at
    a police car which caused an explosion.  He  had  been  assisted  by  a
    friend in obtaining the materials for this.  The appellant ran away but
    a few people on the street had seen him do so.  He did not return  that
    evening but went to stay with a friend.  An uncle then arranged for the
    appellant to leave the country.  The appellant  fears  return  to  Iran
    having left there illegally  and  also  because  of  a  fear  of  being
    identified as a  wanted  person.   The  appellant  relies  on  evidence
    including a summons issued against him in 2009  for  disturbing  public
    order and more recent evidence comprising an email from his sister  and
    a letter from his father also sent by email in 2013.  A letter from the
    appellant's  GP  dated  22  August  2013  confirms  his  treatment  for
    depression with medication between 2009 and 2011.

 7. The credibility of the appellant was challenged for detailed reasons in
    two letters from the Secretary of State. The first dated 7 August  2009
    when he was granted limited leave to remain for some 30 days.  The more
    recent letter dated 31 July 2013 in  response  to  an  application  for
    further leave to remain during the  currency  of  that  limited  period
    before expiry of his leave on 10 September 2009.

 8. Judge Brenells set out his reasons why he did not believe the appellant
    over some fourteen paragraphs in his determination.  He considered  the
    appellant's credibility damaged in the following respects:

      i) The evidence was contradictory regarding the appellant's claim  not
         to have more detail about his father's anti-regime activities;

     ii) Had it been true that his mother had been told by  the  authorities
         that his  father  was  spying  for  the  Israelis,  the  background
         evidence indicated he would have been detained for a very long time
         or been summarily executed;

    iii) Since there was no evidence that  his  father  was  released  as  a
         result of efforts by the policeman Hassan it was not accepted  that
         the policeman had been instrumental in  obtaining  his  release  if
         indeed his father had been imprisoned;

     iv) It was not credible that even an immature 15 year old would  be  so
         foolish as to write anti-Iranian government slogans whilst  on  the
         school premises.  The claim  had  been  that  this  had  been  done
         clandestinely in the  school  library,  in  a  toilet  and  in  the
         classrooms during break time.  Had he been  doing  so  and  placing
         them in the books it was inevitable that he would be caught at some
         time;

      v) The appellant's claim is that he was traumatised by the actions  of
         Hassan and received treatment for depression.   The  only  evidence
         was the letter from the GP (referred to above).  The appellant  had
         been looked after by Surrey County Council Social Services and  had
         been  professionally  represented.   He  had  not   concealed   his
         allegation of homosexual rape but there  was  no  evidence  he  had
         suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder or that he needed  any
         counselling or therapy;

     vi) It was not credible that in Iran which is  the  death  penalty  for
         homosexual activity of any kind a  bisexual  policeman  would  have
         risked his life by disclosing  his  sexuality  so  immediately  and
         openly to a school child and that he would further risk exposure by
         asking for the appellant's sister in substitution;

    vii) In the light of the appellant's  conduct  at  the  hearing  it  was
         accepted that the appellant had been  traumatised  by  some  events
         which he had not fully disclosed.

   viii) The evidence had been inconsistent about  the  petrol  bomb  as  to
         whether a can or bottle had been used.  A can would not  break  and
         scatter burning fuel on impact.  A further error by  the  appellant
         had been that he had not spotted that the missile  had  to  be  lit
         before being thrown.

     ix) Although acknowledging intelligent 15 year olds could  easily  make
         explosive devices the changing description  of  the  bomb  and  the
         appellant's failure  to  explain  how  he  acquired  the  necessary
         knowledge together with the lack of any evidence  of  testing  such
         device led the finding that the appellant was not credible.   There
         was no evidence which showed that the friend who had  assisted  was
         so disenchanted with the regime that  he  would  associate  himself
         with an attack on a police vehicle;

      x) The appellant had not discharged the burden  of  establishing  that
         the summons issued on 12 April 2009 was a genuine document.  He had
         not produced the envelope in which it had been sent, there  was  no
         evidence showing that it was in the  format  used  by  the  Iranian
         authorities and there was no evidence that the  impress  stamp  was
         genuine.  A petrol bombing of a police car was likely  to  carry  a
         charge more serious than disturbing public order;

     xi) The contents of the email  from  the  appellant's  sister  was  not
         accepted as truthful because the appellant had not told  the  truth
         about the events which he had said occurred before he left Iran.



 9. The grounds of  appeal  argue  that  the  analysis  by  the  judge  was
    undermined by a failure to  provide  sustainable  reasons  for  adverse
    credibility findings and so amongst those listed by Lord Brooke LJ in R
    (Iran) & Ors [2005] EWCA Civ 982 in the following respects:

      i) The judge had materially erred by failing to  understand  a  common
         feature of sexual abuse whereby the abusers were able  to  rely  on
         their power and influence as well as  the  vulnerability  of  their
         victim.

     ii) There was no reason for the appellant to  concede  details  of  any
         other trauma he had suffered.  The catalyst for  the  breakdown  in
         court was questioning about the sexual abuse he had suffered.

    iii) The judge repeated many of  the  previous  judge's  mistakes.   The
         Presenting Officer had been clearly so  concerned  about  the  case
         that she chose not to make detailed submissions merely adopting the
         refusal letter as a formality.

     iv) There was no contradiction over whether the appellant's father  had
         discussed his anti-regime activities.  His father's dislike of  the
         regime and politics he had discussed as  a  result  were  different
         from  the  appellant's  father  discussing  his   own   anti-regime
         activities.

      v) There was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  to  suggest  that  the
         accusation that the appellant's father had been accused  of  spying
         for the Israelis was true.

     vi) It is unclear what evidence the judge  expected  the  appellant  to
         provide regarding the  role  of  Hassan  and  the  release  of  the
         appellant's father.

    vii) All anti-regime activity in Iran is risky yet it  does  take  place
         and the judge had ignored the fact that clandestine activity can be
         undertaken in a public place.  The judge had failed to provide  any
         reasons for his finding that it was inevitable the appellant  would
         be caught.

   viii) The judge appeared to have based an adverse credibility finding  on
         the absence of further medical evidence and it made no  mention  of
         the various  personal  documents  served  showing  the  appellant's
         effort to get on with and improve his life.

     ix) As to the discrepancy regarding the reference to a  can  the  judge
         had ignored the fact that even in professionally drafted statements
         mistakes can be and are often made.  This applied also  to  whether
         the bomb was lit before it was thrown.

      x) The judge had accepted that petrol bombs were easy to make but then
         found the appellant had failed  to  explain  how  he  acquired  the
         necessary knowledge to make a petrol bomb and failed to mention any
         testing of such devices.  The appellant had not been asked where he
         had obtained his knowledge from nor was he asked if he had  carried
         out any tests.

     xi) The judge had stated  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  any
         evidence of how the attack was planned or how he would  escape  and
         although  the  judge  had  asked  a   number   of   questions   for
         clarification bordering on cross-examination these aspects had  not
         been asked about.

    xii) There was no evidence to suggest that the summons  was  not  in  an
         established format.

   xiii) The judge gave no consideration to the letter from the  appellant's
         father in which he had provided details of the  ongoing  harassment
         of the family.

10. I heard extensive oral  submissions  from  Mr  Gayle  during  which  he
    methodically took me through each  of  the  grounds  relied  on  cross-
    referenced to the evidence including two statements from the  appellant
    and the determination itself.  He  was  unable  to  confirm  whether  a
    missing page, which dealt with questions relating to the nature of  the
    device used for the bomb attack, from the record of interview (page 27)
    was in fact before the judge

11. In essence, Mr Walker argued that the grounds argued by Mr  Gayle  were
    no more than reasons  challenges  that  did  not  disclose  error.   He
    accepted that the judge had not specifically  referred  to  the  letter
    from the appellant's father but had referred  to  it  in  the  list  of
    documents that he had before him.  He did not consider  that  this  was
    material.  By way of response, Mr  Gayle  acknowledged  the  detail  in
    which the grounds had been examined in his submissions and did  nothing
    further except to refer to the failure  by  the  judge  to  follow  the
    guidelines set out by Upper Tribunal Judge Conway.  He also referred to
    the failure by the judge to have regard to the appellant's age when the
    events occurred as observed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  in
    granting permission to appeal.  He accepted that the judge had not used
    the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian as a starting  point
    when I reminded him of the direction of Judge Conway that none  of  his
    findings would stand.

12. The grounds of application begin with a reference to R (Iran)  and  are
    prefaced by an assertion that the analysis of the judge  is  undermined
    by a failure to provide sustainable  reasons  for  adverse  credibility
    findings.  In his oral submissions Mr Gayle  argued  in  addition  with
    reference to the rape that the findings were Wednesbury unreasonable in
    that no reasonable judge would have reached such a conclusion  on  this
    aspect.  Otherwise the grounds of  challenge  are  in  terms  that  the
    findings were not supported by the evidence that the  evidence  pointed
    to another conclusion  and  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account
    evidence.

13. At [9] of R (Iran) Brooke J referred to the guidance  which  the  court
    had given in Subesh as follows:

         "When the court gave this guidance in Subesh it was aware  that  it
         would not be of any relevance  to  an  appellate  regime  in  which
         appeals were restricted to points of law.  It may be convenient  to
         give a brief summary of the points of law that will most frequently
         be encountered and practised:

         (i)  making perverse or irrational findings on a matter or  matters
             that were material to the outcome ("material matters");

         (ii) failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons  for  findings
             on material matters;

         (iii)    failing to take into account and/or resolve  conflicts  of
             fact or opinion on material matters;

         (iv) giving weight to a material matter;

         (v)  making a material misdirection of law on any material matter;

         (vi) committing or permitting a procedural  or  other  irregularity
             capable of making a material difference to the outcome or  the
             fairness of the proceedings;

         (vii)    making a mistake as to a  material  fact  which  could  be
             established by objective and uncontentious evidence, where the
             appellant and/or his advisers were  not  responsible  for  the
             mistake, and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a
             mistake was made."

14. On the matter of perversity at [11] Brooke LJ observed:

         "It may be helpful to comment quite briefly on three matters  first
         of all.  It is well-known that "perversity" represents a very  high
         hurdle.  In Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  481  the  whole  court
         agreed that the word  meant  what  it  said:  it  was  a  demanding
         concept.  The majority of the court (Keene  and  Maurice  Kay  LJJ)
         said  that  it  embraced  decisions   that   were   irrational   or
         unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense (even if there was  no  wilful
         or conscious departure from the rational), but it also  included  a
         finding of fact  that  was  wholly  unsupported  by  the  evidence,
         provided always that this was a finding as to a material matter."

15. Brooke LJ cited with approval Lord  Phillips  MR  in  English  v  Emery
    Reimbold & Strick Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 605 at [19]:

         "If the appellate process is to work satisfactorily,  the  judgment
         must enable the [IAT] to understand why the  [Adjudicator]  reached
         his decision.  This does not mean that every factor  which  weighed
         with the [Adjudicator] in his appraisal of the evidence has  to  be
         identified and explained.  But the issues the resolution  of  which
         were vital to the [Adjudicator's] conclusions should be  identified
         in the manner in which he  resolved  them  explained.   It  is  not
         possible to provide a template  for  this  process.   It  need  not
         involve a lengthy judgment.  It does not require the  [Adjudicator]
         to identify and record those matters which  were  critical  to  his
         decision.  If the critical issue is one of fact, it may  be  enough
         to say that one witness was preferred to another  because  the  one
         manifestly had a clearer recollection of the material facts or  the
         other gave answers which demonstrate that  his  recollection  could
         not be relied upon".

16. The appellant's claim arises out of the consequences of the  arrest  of
    his father.  Against the background of  the  complaint  in  the  second
    refusal letter that the appellant had provided no further  evidence  of
    the actual activities he had undertaken or what his mother had done, it
    was open to the judge to draw an adverse inference  from  the  contrast
    between the claim that the appellant's father did not like  the  regime
    and always discussed politics within the  family  and  the  appellant's
    statement that he did not understand why the Secretary of  State  would
    expect  him  to  have  more  detail  about  his  father's   anti-regime
    activities.  It was also open to the judge to question the  credibility
    of that detention if the reason had been as explained to his mother  by
    the authorities that her husband had  been  held  for  spying  for  the
    Israelis.  I am less clear about the judge's reference to  there  being
    no evidence that the father was released as a result of efforts made by
    the policeman.  This aspect in isolation is not sufficient to undermine
    the reasoning as a whole.

17. As to the conclusions the judge reached about  the  likelihood  of  the
    risks taken by the appellant in writing the subversive material on  the
    school premises this is really no  more  than  a  disagreement  on  the
    evidence.  I also consider that the judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    doubting that the sexual assaults occurred.  In the context of a  state
    of affairs whereby  the  school  librarian  chose  not  to  report  the
    incident to the school or the security authorities but  instead  called
    his own brother who happened to be a bisexual policeman  and  who  then
    took advantage of the appellant's vulnerability to assault him  on  the
    promise of the release of his father is a chain  of  events  which  the
    judge rationally questioned as likely in the light  of  the  risks  the
    policeman would have taken by flaunting  his  sexuality  in  this  way.
    Essentially the judge was saying that this was not plausible and in  my
    view, the judge  was  entitled  to  reach  that  conclusion  which  was
    rationally open to him on the claim that had been made.

18. There clearly were difficulties caused by the appellant first referring
    to a can rather than a bottle.  I am satisfied from my reading  of  the
    determination that the judge gave sustainable  reasons  for  concluding
    that this event did not  occur.   I  should  be  slow  to  disturb  the
    findings of the judge who had the benefit of hearing evidence from  the
    appellant and evaluating that evidence in the context of the story as a
    whole.  The concerns expressed by the judge which led to him to  reject
    this aspect of the account were rationally open to him.

19.  The  final  challenge  relates  to  the  judge's  treatment   of   the
    corroborative evidence of the continuing interest in the  appellant  by
    the Iranian authorities.  It was open to the judge to observe that  the
    appellant did not produce the envelope in which the  summons  had  been
    sent to him and furthermore he was entitled to observe that  there  was
    no evidence showing that the summons  was  in  a  format  used  by  the
    authorities.  Mr Gayle acknowledged that the  US  Department  of  State
    Report on which he relied did not refer to the form of summonses.   The
    appellant's advisers were clearly aware of the credibility challenge in
    the refusal letter and it was incumbent upon them to  demonstrate  more
    than the production of the summons itself which it now  turns  out  was
    scanned and sent in an email.  The judge was entitled to  question  the
    description of the offence for which the appellant was  wanted  in  the
    light of what he claims to have done.

20. As acknowledged by Mr Walker the judge did not explain how he  factored
    in to his findings the letter from the appellant's father.  Here  again
    there was no evidence of why the father decided  on  this  occasion  to
    write.  The picture painted by this material from Iran is an incomplete
    one.

21. There is no challenge to the basis on which the  judge  considered  the
    evidence of the appellant's sister and there is no  reason  to  believe
    that he did not also have regard to the  letter  from  the  appellant's
    father in reaching his  conclusions  on  the  appellant's  credibility.
    Even if he had overlooked it, I do not consider that having  regard  to
    the reasons given for disbelieving the appellant that the  letter  from
    the father could have resulted in a different  outcome.   It  does  not
    address the matters of  concern  particularly  with  reference  to  the
    appellant's father's own circumstances.  There is no explanation why he
    was arrested in 2008 and why he was released.  It was  reasonably  open
    to him to do so if his statement was requested by the appellant  and/or
    his advisers in the light of  the  challenge  to  this  aspect  by  the
    Secretary of State in the refusal letters in  particular  [48]  of  the
    more recent one.

22. Apart from  the  unexplained  reference  to  the  absence  of  evidence
    regarding the manner in which the appellant's father's release had been
    obtained, the judge found he did not believe the appellant  because  of
    aspects intrinsic to the account and not  because  of  the  absence  of
    corroborative material.  In essence the letter asserts that the  police
    are still looking for the appellant.  It does not address  the  matters
    which the respondent had found undermined the claim and taking  account
    of its contents and source I cannot  see  how  it  could  have  made  a
    material difference in the face of the factors that led  the  judge  to
    reject the claim.

23. The final point is one which had not been  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal but referred to in the grant of permission to appeal.  There  is
    no doubt that the experienced judge was conscious  of  the  appellant's
    age and that  the  matters  he  found  against  him  cannot  simply  be
    explained by reference to that age.  His determination is not one which
    contains material error and for these reasons I dismiss the  appeal  in
    the Upper Tribunal.






Signed
                                                 Date 12 June 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


