
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10TH JANUARY 2017                 |On 18TH JANUARY 2017                 |


                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                           Ms Mariam Jasmine KOne
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this matter is  Ms  Kone  and  she  claims  to  be  an
    Ivorian national.  I shall refer to the parties as the "appellant"  and
    to the respondent as "the Secretary of State".  This is an error of law
     hearing  that comes before me for consideration as to whether  or  not
    there is a material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge B. Andonian) (FtT) promulgated on 31st October 2016  in
    which he dismissed the appeal on all grounds .

Background

2.   The appellant claimed asylum on the grounds that she was  a  victim  of
    forced marriage and trafficking to the UK.  After entry into the UK  in
    2006 she made various applications under the EEA Regulations which were
    dismissed.  Under a different name  she  then  applied  for  asylum  in
    August 2014.  She stated that her husband lived in the Ivory Coast  and
    was rich and influential.  She had a daughter born in 2003.  She stated
    that she had been the victim of abuse both physical and sexual from her
    husband and she had undergone Female genital mutilation (FGM).  She and
    her daughter escaped with the help of an agent to  Ghana  and  she  was
    given a French passport in the name of ML.   In  the  UK  she  met  and
    married a man LB who abused her and injured her shoulder.   She  turned
    to prostitution as she was unable to work as a hairdresser  because  of
    the injury to her shoulder.

3.   The appellant relied on  a  country  expert  report  from  Professor  B
    Lawrence and medical  evidence  from  Dr  Beeks  at  the  Helen  Bamber
    Foundation.

4.   The Secretary of State did not accept any aspect of her  claim  and  in
    particular relied on section 8 Asylum & Treatment of Claimants Act 2004
    as to credibility; the 8 year delay in making a claim  for  asylum.  It
    was not accepted that she was from the Ivory Coast given her failure to
    give correct details about the country. She had practised deception and
    used different identities.

FtT decision and reasons

5.   The FtT found that appellant's claim to be lacking  in  credibility  in
    its entirety.  It found that she was not  a  national  from  the  Ivory
    Coast and that her Ivorian passport was not a  reliable  document.   It
    considered that the appellant  previously  stated  that  she  was  from
    Senegal and she had no fear of return to that country  [32].  It  found
    that she had used deception and various identities and did  not  accept
    her explanation that she had been forced  to  follow  the  instructions
    given to her by her husband in the UK and she had limited  intellectual
    capacity and education.  The FtT rejected the  appellant's  claim  that
    she was a victim of torture  (sic).   The  FtT  considered  the  expert
    report to be lacking in  that  whilst  concluding  that  there  was  "a
    possibility" that the appellant was a victim of trafficking, there  was
    insufficient evidence before him to make a conclusive determination and
    he had suggested that another expert be consulted.  [29] The FtT  found
    that the expert had not met the appellant and  attached  little  weight
    given that  the  report  was  written  with  reference  to  documentary
    material only.  The FtT found that there was no medical evidence of any
    injuries sustained by the appellant as  a  result  of  abuse  from  her
    husband [13].  It found no medical evidence to show that  her  shoulder
    was so damaged that she  was  unable  to  work  as  a  hairdresser  and
    considered that the physical nature of working as  a  prostitute  would
    create similar limitations to working as a hairdresser  [17].  The  FtT
    found that she had not worked as a prostitute [33] and that  she  would
    not be forced to work as a prostitute if returned to the Ivory Coast.



Grounds of application for permission

6.   The appellant's grounds are summarised as follows.  The FtT

    a)   failed to assess the evidence that her  father  was  unwilling  to
    intervene in domestic abuse in the light of the background evidence  as
    to prevalent attitudes in the Ivory coast.

    b)   ignored the report from the Helen Bamber Foundation.

    c)   failed to make  a  decision  on  trafficking  which  infected  the
    findings made as to her marriage and  behaviour  in  the  UK  including
    deception  and  false  documents  in  relation   to   the   immigration
    authorities.

    d)   failed to take into account the report of  Professor  Lawrence  in
    assessing credibility as a whole.

    e)   wrongly recorded the appellant's evidence of facts (d & h).

    f)   failed to adjourn the hearing to allow for  further  investigation
    into trafficking.

Permission to appeal

7.   Permission was granted by FtT Judge Ford on 28th November 2016  on  the
    ground (b) that the FtT had ignored the medical evidence from the Helen
    Bamber Foundation.  As to the remaining 5 grounds FtT Judge Ford stated
    that these grounds were not arguable when consideration  was  given  to
    the assessment of credibility and  to  the  decision  as  a  whole.  In
    particular the appellant had ample opportunity to obtain evidence as to
    trafficking in 2014 and was assessed by the  Helen  Bamber  Foundation.
    It was not arguable that the FtT  failed  to  ensure  that  credibility
    matters were put to the appellant at the hearing.

Submisssions

8.   I heard preliminary submissions from both  representatives  as  to  the
    scope of the  application.  Permission  had  clearly  been  granted  in
    respect of one ground.  Ms Radford sought to rely  on  all  grounds  of
    appeal arguing that the appellant had not  been  provided  with  proper
    notice indicating the need to renew the application in respect  of  all
    grounds.  Mr Whitwell argued that it was clear that permission had been
    granted only on one ground in relation to  the  medical  evidence,  and
    that the Upper Tribunal should not hear arguments on the other grounds.
    I allowed Ms Radford to proceed to deal with the main ground for  which
    permission had been granted.   Mr  Whitwell  responded.   Thereafter  I
    heard brief submissions on the remaining grounds.

9.   Mr Whitwell relied on the Rule  24  response  arguing  that  given  the
    plethora of negative credibility findings the contents of  the  medical
    report could not outweigh the findings made by the FtTJ and as such the
    error was not material.

10.  Ms Radford relied on the detailed grounds  and  argued  that  the  main
    ground was a material error and that it infected all the other findings
    made, and the evidence was capable of demonstrating that the FtT  could
    have come to an alternative conclusion or reach a different outcome.

Discussion and conclusion

11.  It is clear from the decision and reasons that the FtT failed  to  take
    into account the medical report from Dr Beeks  from  the  Helen  Bamber
    Foundation.  The FtT further found that there was no  medical  evidence
    before the FtT to support the appellant's claim of domestic and  sexual
    abuse including  genital  injuries,  and  further  that  there  was  no
    evidence of any  injury  to  her  shoulder.   It  is  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that no reference was  made  to  the  report  of  Dr
    Beeks. These errors are errors in  law  as  there  was  expert  medical
    evidence before the FtT dealing with significant matters in her appeal.
     I now consider whether or not the errors are material to the  decision
    made.

12.  The  report   prepared  by  Dr  Beek,  whose  expertise  has  not  been
    disputed, concludes that, "  The  overall  picture  of  past  traumatic
    events with consequent post  traumatic  stress  disorder,  evidence  of
    female genital mutilation and  of  assaults  causing  scars  is  highly
    consistent  with  the  history  given  of  childhood   abuse,   genital
    mutilation , rape and domestic violence. "The appellant stated that she
    does not know if she was or was nota victim of trafficking, as recorded
    in the medical report.

13.  Mr Whitwell argued that the error was not  material  having  regard  to
    the credibility findings as a whole, the finding that the appellant was
    not from the Ivory Coast, and its conclusion that the appellant was not
    a victim of trafficking.  The expert report from Professor Lawrence was
    inconclusive  on  that  issue  and  in  a  supplementary  decision  the
    respondent had found that she was not a victim of trafficking.

14.  Ms Radford submits that  the  medical  report  which  details  findings
    "highly consistent" with the claimed attributions and makes a diagnosis
    of PTSD, is material evidence going to  the  core  of  the  appellant's
    account that she is  a  victim  of  domestic  violence,  sexual  abuse,
    subject to FGM and forced marriage.  Her skeleton argument argues  that
    the appellant's account is also supported by background material on the
    Ivory Coast.  I accept that this is the position.

15.  I am satisfied that the evidence from Dr  Beeks  of  the  Helen  Bamber
    Foundation was material to the core of the  appellant's  account.   The
    medical evidence was relied on by the appellant and reference  made  to
    it in the skeleton argument before the FtT.  The report is  capable  of
    corroborating the appellant's claim as to physical and sexual abuse  in
    the Ivory Coast and physical injury while in the  UK  from  her  second
    husband.  In the event that  the  FtT  had  taken  this  evidence  into
    account in reaching credibility findings it had the potential to impact
    on all other aspects  of  her  claim  including  her  poor  immigration
    history and the evidence as to  her  nationality.   Whilst  considering
    that the decision and reasons was detailed and  comprehensive  in  some
    regards, I am satisfied that it was flawed by the failure  to  consider
    the expert medical evidence in  order  to  reach  its  findings  as  to
    credibility and or to  given  cogent  reasons  why  such  evidence  was
    rejected. The FtT pursued neither avenue and  had  not  considered  the
    evidence as all which it was bound to do.  I reject the argument put by
    Mr Whitwell as to materiality because the failure arguably has infected
    the decision as a whole.  In view of my  decision  I  make  no  further
    observation as to the pursuance of the remaining grounds of appeal.



Decision

16.  There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside.

    No findings of fact are preserved.

    The appeal is to be remitted for rehearing before  the  FTT  (excluding
    FtT Andonian) at Taylor House on a date and time to be arranged.






                               Signed                 Date 16.1.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







NO ANONYMITY ORDER

NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                 Date 16.1.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


