
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07740/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Centre City Tower,         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 18th January 2016                 |On 28th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    h i d
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Jessica Pacey of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 19th November 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of the Ivory Coast born in 1972,  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor  in  November  2013,  and
    claimed asylum on 3rd December 2013.

 3. The Appellant's claim was that she  feared  persecution  in  the  Ivory
    Coast because she had worked for the former  President  Gbagbo  between
    1998 and 2011.

 4. The application was refused by letter dated 18th September 2014, and on
    19th September 2014 a decision was made to remove  the  Appellant  from
    the United Kingdom.

 5. The Appellant appealed, and the appeal was heard by  the  FTT  on  11th
    November 2014.  The FTT heard evidence from  the  Appellant,  and  took
    into account that she did not have legal representation.  The FTT found
    that the Appellant's account  was  not  credible  and  her  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and the grounds may be summarised as follows.

 7. Firstly the FTT had failed to make findings on key areas  of  evidence.
    The FTT had failed to make any findings of  fact  in  relation  to  the
    attacks upon the Appellant which  it  was  contended  had  occurred  in
    December 2012 and October 2013.

 8. Secondly the FTT had failed to make findings on a  detailed  letter  of
    support for the Appellant supplied by the chief spokesman in  exile  of
    the Ivorian Popular Front.

 9.  Thirdly  the  FTT  had  erred  in  paragraph  53  by  recording;  "the
    authorities in Ivory Coast found and returned people from  Ghana"  when
    it was clear that what should have been recorded was  "the  authorities
    in Ghana found and returned people to the Ivory Coast."

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grant-Hutchison of the FTT in
    the following terms;

         "2.  It is arguable that the judge erred in law by:

             (a)  failing to consider and make findings on various  aspects
                  of the Appellant's account for example in relation to  the
                  events in December 2012 and October 2013,

             (b)  failing to consider and make  findings  on  a  letter  of
                  support from the chief spokesman in exile  of  the  former
                  President  which  is  recorded  at  paragraph  22  of  the
                  Decision and Reasons under the  heading  'the  Appellant's
                  case' which states that 'he met the  Appellant  frequently
                  in the Ivory Coast and recently in London' and

             (c)  misinterpreting some background evidence when  the  judge
                  states at paragraph 53 of her Decision  and  Reasons  that
                  'the authorities in Ivory Coast found and returned  people
                  from Ghana' when it should read 'the authorities in  Ghana
                  found and returned people to the Ivory  Coast'  which  may
                  have made a material difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
                  appeal."

11. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    dated 12th December 2014 pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 contending that the  decision  of  the  FTT
    disclosed no material error of law.

12. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. The  Appellant  attended  the  hearing.   She  did  not  have  a  legal
    representative but was accompanied by DF acting a McKenzie friend.

14. The Appellant could not speak English  and  could  only  speak  French.
    Unfortunately there was no interpreter.  DF indicated that he is fluent
    in French, and I decided, without objection from Mr  McVeety,  that  it
    was appropriate to proceed and consider whether an  error  of  law  was
    disclosed in the FTT decision.

15. DF indicated that in relation to error of  law,  the  Appellant  relied
    upon the grounds contained within the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, and the grant of permission by Judge Grant-Hutchison.

16. Mr McVeety submitted that there was no error of law  disclosed  in  the
    FTT decision.  I was asked to accept that it was established  law  that
    the FTT did not need to make findings on  every  issue  raised  by  the
    Appellant, and need not forensically examine each point made on  behalf
    of the Appellant.

17. Mr McVeety submitted that the decision as a whole needed to make sense,
    so that the parties could understand why they had won or  lost,  and  I
    was asked to find that the  decision  in  this  appeal  satisfied  that
    criteria.

18. It was accepted that the FTT had made a mistake in  paragraph  53,  but
    that was not material.

19. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. As stated in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC)
    in the headnote to that decision,

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case."

21. However as also confirmed  in  Budhathoki,  judges  must  identify  and
    resolve key conflicts in the evidence and explain in  clear  and  brief
    terms their reasons for making findings.

22. In this appeal, the FTT erred in failing to make findings  on  material
    evidence.  The FTT made findings in relation  to  events  said  by  the
    Appellant to have occurred in the Ivory Coast, in paragraphs 51 - 53 of
    the decision.  The FTT found that the Appellant was not credible as  it
    was not accepted that when fleeing from FRCI members, she would flee to
    her own village where she could easily be tracked down.  The  Appellant
    claimed to have been attacked and raped in December  2012  in  her  own
    village, and detained and ill-treated in October  2013,  when  she  was
    again taken from the village.

23. At paragraph 34 of the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  the  Respondent
    accepts  that  the  Appellant  was  attacked  by  FRCI  members.   This
    acceptance must relate to the Appellant's claim to have  been  attacked
    in her village in December 2012.  Therefore, the FTT in  paragraphs  52
    and 53, in finding that it was not credible that the Appellant fled  to
    her  own  village,  was  making  a  finding  that  conflicts  with  the
    concession made by the Respondent.

24. The FTT makes no findings as to the events which the  Appellant  claims
    occurred in December 2012 and October  2013.   The  FTT  has  therefore
    failed to make findings on material aspects of the  Appellant's  claim,
    and in concluding that the Appellant did not flee to her  own  village,
    has gone behind a concession made by the Respondent.

25. The FTT has not made any findings upon the letter of support  from  the
    spokesman for the Ivorian  Popular  Front,  although  this  letter  was
    referred to at paragraph 22 of the decision.   That  letter  gave  some
    limited support to the Appellant's case, in that there was reference to
    the Appellant commencing employment  with  the  Residence  Surveillance
    Service in 1998.  Findings should have been made on this letter, and an
    explanation given as to whether any weight should be attached to it.

26. I conclude that the FTT decision must be set  aside  as  being  unsafe,
    because of the failure  to  make  findings  on  material  matters,  and
    failure to provide adequate reasons for the credibility findings  made.
    Although the FTT erred in paragraph 53 as contended in the  grounds,  I
    do not find that error to be material.

27. This is not a case where any findings made by the FTT can be preserved.



28. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal because no findings are preserved, which  means
    that there must be extensive judicial fact-finding to be  carried  out,
    and it is more appropriate that this is done by the FTT rather than the
    Upper Tribunal.

29. The appeal will be heard at the FTT Hearing Centre  at  Sheldon  Court,
    Birmingham by a judge other than Judge  Pacey.   The  parties  will  be
    notified of the date of the hearing in due course.   I  should  mention
    that I am aware  that  the  Appellant  lives  in  Stockton-on-Tees  and
    therefore Birmingham is not  the  nearest  hearing  centre.   This  was
    canvassed with her at the hearing, but in view of the fact that  DF  is
    based in Birmingham, the Appellant wished any further hearing  to  take
    place at Birmingham.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FTT made no anonymity direction.  However I make an anonymity  order  of
my own volition as this is an asylum claim and the Appellant claims to  fear
persecution if removed from the United Kingdom.

I therefore make an anonymity direction pursuant to rule 14 of The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of  her  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    21st January 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to be considered by the FTT.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    21st January 2016
