
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07021/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision sent to parties   |
|                                                |on:                        |
|On 15 April 2015                                |On 28 April 2015           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 rizwan ali
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Jones, instructed by Waterstone Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, appeals with  permission  against
    the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Adio) dismissing  his  appeal  against  respondent's  decision  to  set
    removal directions to  Pakistan  after  refusing  him  refugee  status,
    humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds.

 2. Before the First-tier Tribunal, Miss Jones for the  appellant  accepted
    that the appellant's  case  would  stand  or  fall  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.  She did not seek to argue Articles 2, 3 or 8 of  the  ECHR
    or that, on these facts, humanitarian protection was available  if  the
    refugee claim failed.

Background

 3. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on  17  May  2011  with  entry
    clearance as a student, on a Tier 4 visa, valid until 30 October  2014.
    However, the College he came  to  attend  closed  down  in  2011.   The
    appellant did not notify the Home Office: he just continued to make use
    of the visa he had been granted and remained  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Before coming to the United Kingdom, the  appellant  had  not  had  any
    homosexual or  heterosexual  relationship  in  Pakistan:  he  kept  his
    homosexual feelings private there.

 4. In September or October 2011, the appellant began a  relationship  with
    his room mate in London.  They both had visas  expiring  in  2014,  the
    appellant's on 30 October 2014 and his partner's in May of  that  year.
    They continued to live together in the same accommodation.  They stayed
    home together, but occasionally went out for meals.  On the appellant's
    evidence, in January and February 2013 they went to two  gay  clubs  in
    London.

 5. The couple told few people of their  relationship:   a  total  of  five
    friends, two of whom attended their civil partnership ceremony in March
    2014.  From the middle of November 2014, the relationship deteriorated,
    with 'continuous fighting' and, despite a lull over Christmas 2014.

 6. On New Year's Eve 2014, the appellant cooked for his  partner,  but  he
    did not come  home:   the  appellant  telephoned  him  repeatedly,  and
    eventually got  through  to  someone  who  also  claimed  to  be  in  a
    relationship with his partner, then hung up.

 7. On New Year's Day 2015, the appellant's partner returned to their home,
    and there was a row between them in which  the  appellant  accused  his
    partner of cheating on him.  They had  'a  severe  fight'  and  stopped
    speaking to each other.

 8. On 5 January 2015, while the appellant was out shopping for  groceries,
    his partner packed up all his possessions and left their home.  He  has
    not responded to telephone calls subsequently and the appellant has  no
    contact with him.  The appellant  accepts  that  the  relationship  has
    ended,  but  asserts  that  any  future  relationship   will   not   be
    heterosexual.  It is not suggested that there has been  any  subsequent
    relationship.

 9. The appellant has not told any of his family members in Pakistan of his
    homosexual orientation or about his relationship.  If returned now,  he
    will be returned as a single man.

First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision

10. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio  accepted  in  his  decision  that  the
    appellant was indeed a person of homosexual orientation but  considered
    that he was a  very  private  person,  who  had  lived  discreetly  and
    conducted his only gay relationship  in  secret  while  in  the  United
    Kingdom, his country of refuge.  He would be likely to continue  to  do
    so in Pakistan  if  he  returned  there.   He  considered  the  country
    evidence  and  concluded  that  there  was  no  well-founded  fear   of
    persecution for this appellant, on those facts.    His  family  members
    were unaware of his orientation and the appellant  would  not  have  to
    return and live with his family:  Pakistan  is  a  large  and  populous
    country where any risk,  if  it  existed,  could  be  met  by  internal
    relocation.

Basis of appeal

11. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  He  contended  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed  to  take  into  account  relevant
    evidence, in particular the couple's activity  in  attending  gay  bars
    (see questions 21, 29, and 74-76 of the asylum interview).   He  argued
    that,  applying  the  observations  in  questions  21  and  54  of  the
    interview, he should be taken to have told friends who  disapproved  of
    homosexuality, as well as those who were sympathetic.  He relied on the
    civil partnership into which he had  entered,  arguing  that  if  asked
    about his marital status in Pakistan, he would have to  either  lie  or
    admit to a marital status which put  him  at  risk  of  persecution  or
    treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    the basis that there  was  arguable  merit  in  the  relevant  evidence
    challenge, but less to the second ground, as the appellant was  not  in
    fact 'married' and would not be lying if he said that he was unmarried.



13. That was the basis on which the appeal came before us.

The hearing

14. In her submissions today,  Miss  Jones  continued  to  argue  that  the
    interview evidence had been overlooked.  She accepted that she had  not
    re-examined on the point.  She  contended  that  the  judge's  decision
    lacked anxious scrutiny, but could not explain why the  judge  was  not
    entitled to rely on the oral evidence which the appellant gave  at  the
    hearing.

15. For the respondent, Mr  Avery  relied  on  the  overall  tenor  of  the
    evidence, set out at paragraphs 14 and 16 of the decision.   He  argued
    that the judge had been entitled to make those findings,  and  to  draw
    the conclusions at paragraphs 27-28 of his decision.  The appellant was
    indeed a private person:  the couple had only invited two witnesses  to
    the civil ceremony and there  was  no  evidence  to  support  a  public
    profile for this appellant as a gay  man.   The  judge's  analysis  was
    adequate and contained no error of law, material or otherwise.

Discussion

16. The appellant's challenge concerns the judge's finding of fact that  he
    was  a  private  person  whose  homosexual  orientation  had  not  been
    expressed at all while he was in Pakistan,  and  while  in  the  United
    Kingdom had been kept  very  private.   The  Upper  Tribunal  may  only
    interfere with a finding of fact where  it  is  erroneous  at  a  level
    capable of being an error of law, as set out in  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in R (Iran) and others v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department  [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at sub-paragraph 90 (2):

         "90. (2) A finding might only be set aside for error of law on  the
         grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable  in  the
         Wednesbury sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly  unsupported  by  the
         evidence."

17. That is not the case in this decision.  The First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    had ample oral and written evidence before him of the private  approach
    taken by this appellant in his life as a gay man in the United Kingdom,
    and before that in Pakistan.  He considered  that  the  appellant  fell
    into the 'naturally discreet' category who would  not  herefore  be  at
    risk of persecution, as set out in the judgment of Lord Rodger  in  the
    Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department  [2010] UKSC 31 at  paragraph  80  thereof.   After
    directing Tribunals to consider first whether a person  was  gay,  then
    whether openly gay persons are persecuted in  his  country  of  origin,
    Lord Rodger's guidance continued as follows:

         "80. ...If so, the  tribunal  must  go  on  to  consider  what  the
         individual applicant would do if he were returned to that  country.
         If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby  be  exposed
         to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk   by   living
         "discreetly".

         If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so.

         If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose  to  live
         discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to  distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
         be rejected. Social  pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay."

18. The judge found that this applicant chooses to live discreetly, even in
    the United Kingdom where he is not at riks of persecution, and that  he
    would do the same on return to Pakistan.  On the evidence, there was no
    perversity or Wednesbury unreasonableness in that finding.   There  was
    evidence to support it, both in the oral and written  versions  of  the
    appellant's account.

19. It is right that the  appellant  did  say  at  interview  that  he  had
    attended some gay clubs and had entered into a civil  partnership  with
    his former partner, but his  oral  evidence  was  plain:   the  parties
    stayed at home and occasionally went out for a meal.  They did not tell
    many people, mainly because the appellant felt very private  about  his
    sexuality, and in relation to the civil partnership ceremony, they only
    had two witnesses.

20. We are not satisfied, taking the determination as  a  whole,  that  the
    judge overlooked any material evidence or that there is  any  error  of
    law in his approach to this appeal and we decline to reopen the  First-
    tier Tribunal determination, which therefore stands.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  We do not set aside the decision.



Date: 28 April 2015        Signed
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
