
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07942/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 February 2015                  |On 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                          MR MOHAMED HAROON CASSIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Kumudsena
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, a Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a Sri Lankan national who  was  born  on  9  September
    1984.

2.   The appellant originally came to the UK as the dependent of  his  wife,
    who had a student visa to travel to the UK, on 27 March 2011.  He  made
    an application for asylum in his own right on 16 July  2013  but  on  7
    August 2013 the respondent refused his application for  asylum  on  the
    basis that she was not satisfied that the  appellant  was  at  risk  on
    return.  The appellant appealed the refusal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (FTT).  His appeal came before Judge Colvin who  dismissed  the  appeal
    which had been supported by medical and other evidence.   Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rimmington found that the appellant's grounds of  appeal
    against that decision of the FTT was at least  arguable  on  the  basis
    that Judge Colvin had not attached proper weight to documents that  had
    been produced.  On 1 August 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Scott-Baker
    found in the appellant's favour because she  was  satisfied  he  was  a
    credible witness.  The respondent then sought permission to appeal that
    decision to the Upper Tribunal on 27 August 2014.  On 12 November  2014
    I heard submissions from both  representatives  and  decided  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law
    but it was necessary to hear further evidence in relation to the arrest
    warrants and other issues before a final decision was  reached  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Accordingly, a hearing was  convened  on  26  February
    2015 in order for this to be done.

Reasons for the Error of Law Finding

3.   Errors identified at the first hearing before the Upper Tribunal on  12
    November 2014 are summarised in paragraph 12-13 of the determination by
    that tribunal.  In summary, I questioned whether  the  appellant  would
    have been able to produce a copy of his own arrest warrant and  thought
    the timing of the production of that document was  suspicious.  I  also
    considered that his account of supplying uniforms to the LTTE  required
    closer consideration, given the background evidence.  Having regard  to
    those apparently material errors it appeared necessary to consider  the
    evidence as a whole to see whether the decision was sustainable.

The Hearing

4.   At the hearing I heard submissions by both representatives as  well  as
    additional oral evidence from the appellant. At the earlier  hearing  I
    gave permission for the appellant  to  provide  any  updating  evidence
    provided it was supplied in accordance with the  timetable  and  notice
    was given of that intention. Such evidence was filed in compliance with
    directions or, at least there was no objection to its omission.  On  28
    February 2015 that evidence was subject  to  cross-examination  by  the
    respondent.  By way of opening remarks I was referred to the  following
    cases:

       . MP [2014] EWCA Civ 829 (IAC)

       . GJ [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)

       . KK [2013] UKUT 00512 (IAC)

5.   I was told that those cases should give me a "complete picture" of  the
    risk a Tamil would face if forcibly returned to Sri Lanka.

6.   The appellant said that his first witness statement consisting  of  two
    pages as well as the 40 page bundle which accompanied it were  correct.
    There was a certain amount of argument as to  what  should,  or  should
    not, have been placed in the bundle before the Upper Tribunal and it is
    unfortunate that the parties appear not to have agreed these  documents
    in advance.  Nevertheless I proceeded to hear the oral evidence of  the
    appellant.  He confirmed that both his witness  statements  were  true,
    including the supplementary witness statement dated 28  February  2015.
    That statement refers to the difficulty in finding  a  lawyer  who  was
    "trustworthy" to secure his "confidentiality."  The  lawyer  eventually
    instructed had been able to obtain the court file from  Sri  Lanka  and
    provide the copies of the relevant pages  to  the  appellant.   In  the
    circumstances outlined in those documents  the  appellant  was  seeking
    asylum and international protection.

7.   The appellant was cross-examined.

8.   The appellant relied  on  the  evidence  given  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as supplemented by the  witness  statement  filed  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, which he confirmed was true.  The appellant  was  asked
    whether he had anything further to  add.   He  said  that  he  had  two
    children in this country.  It appears that the basis of their  presence
    within the UK was that their mother, the appellant's former  wife,  had
    been in the UK on a student visa but she had returned to Sri Lanka. The
    appellant believed that the children remained in  the  UK.   They  were
    therefore expected to return to Sri Lanka, their  mother's  country  of
    nationality, on expiry  of  the  visa.  The  appellant  no  longer  has
    anything to  do  with  them.  However,  I  understood  the  appellant's
    evidence to be that they had not in fact done so.

9.   The appellant was then cross-examined  by  Miss  J  Isherwood,  a  Home
    Office Presenting Officer.  The appellant said that he had recently had
    contact with his brother in Sri Lanka.  This had been  the  day  before
    the hearing  by  mobile  telephone.   He  said  that  his  brother  was
    presently residing in Ratumalana "doing a small  job."   The  appellant
    was asked how his brother was able to conduct his work and his  private
    life.  The appellant said that his brother had a visit from  the  "CAB"
    which,  as  far  as  he  knew,  had  not  resulted  in   any   untoward
    consequences.  However, the appellant said that if he returned  to  Sri
    Lanka the appellant's brother was required to tell the  authorities  of
    this.  The appellant was asked whether this would result in  him  being
    "stopped at the  airport."   The  appellant  could  only  say  that  he
    believed that to be so.

10.  The appellant was referred to paragraph 5 of his supplementary  witness
    statement where he states that his brother had "tried  and  managed  to
    instruct a lawyer to obtain my court file."  The  appellant  was  asked
    whether there had been any difficulty  in  obtaining  that  file.   The
    appellant thought he it had been difficult to obtain the documents  but
    did not provide any details.  The appellant was asked  whether  he  had
    any further documents to proffer.  He said that he had obtained as many
    documents as he could.  The appellant believed that  further  suspicion
    may be cast on him if  any  further  enquiries  were  made  as  to  the
    whereabouts of documents pertaining to  his  dealings  with  the  legal
    system in Sri Lanka.

11.  The appellant then went on to say that he was neither a  member  nor  a
    supporter of the LTTE and he had not suggested that any member  of  his
    family had been a member or supporter either.  However,  he  reiterated
    that "my company" had been implicated with supplying the LTTE with  its
    uniforms.  The appellant was asked why  the  company  would  have  been
    thought to have supplied uniforms.  He said that he "did not know"  why
    but he believed that the authorities thought that he had supplied  such
    garments.  The appellant was asked when he had first  become  aware  of
    this allegation.  He said that it was after he had been arrested.   One
    Silva Kumar had given him orders and told him he had a licence from the
    army and navy to supply uniforms.  The appellant was  asked  how  Silva
    Kumar had obtained these orders.  He said that he ran a garment factory
    and he had obtained  orders  through  a  third  party.   Garments  were
    usually ordered through a tender process for certain bodies for example
    football clubs.  Mr Silva Kumar had the army and navy order/tender  and
    came to the appellant with a  view  to  him  supplying  uniforms.   The
    appellant was asked whether he had himself tendered to get to the  army
    contract.  He said that he regarded that as a "waste of time."  He  had
    a "lot of orders from Silva Kumar" but had not been able to produce any
    invoices.  However, he did provide some orders, which are in  bundle  C
    at pages 13-17. The appellant said that his office had been  raided  by
    the CID and they had taken all his documents and therefore  he  was  no
    longer in possession of the invoices.

12.  The appellant was then referred to some further  documents  in  "bundle
    C."  Pages 3-12 consist of  payroll  information.   The  appellant  was
    asked whether he obtained a salary.  He said that in fact he only  took
    profits.   The  appellant  said  that  he  had  left  documents  behind
    following a CID raid.  The  appellant  said  that  any  documents  left
    behind following the CID raid were retained by his brother.   Following
    his Home Office interview  the  appellant  had  asked  his  brother  to
    produce these documents, which he had done.  However, the appellant was
    asked how his brother had obtained these documents.  The appellant  was
    unable to explain this or when the documents were obtained.

13.  The appellant was then asked about his  relationship  with  his  former
    wife and her family.  He  said  that  he  had  no  longer  had  a  good
    relationship with her family.  However, he had said  that  his  brother
    had obtained documents  from  an  office  in  his  wife's  house.   The
    appellant claimed that he had obtained these documents  after  he  made
    his claim for asylum, which posed the question: when had the  documents
    arrived?  The appellant was unable to say precisely  when  his  brother
    had sent the documents.

14.  Dealing with the separation from his wife and children,  the  appellant
    said that this had been in 2012.   The  appellant  was  asked  why  his
    wife's family had allowed him access  to  obtain  documents  given  the
    state of his relationship with his wife.  The appellant was  unable  to
    explain this.

15.  Finally, the appellant was asked about his arrest  on  28  April  2010,
    when he claims to have been taken to a room and beaten up.  Torture  is
    alleged to have been used.  He is said to have  been  kept  in  custody
    until 25 October 2010 and placed in Weakalidake Prison.  He  said  that
    the torture always accompanied the asking of questions.

16.  There was no re-examination.

17.   It  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  an  adequate
    explanation had been given as to the court documents and how these  had
    been obtained.  They required careful consideration.  I was referred to
    bundle C page 21 which is a report  into  an  alleged  offence  by  the
    appellant which refers to him being produced before the High  Court  in
    Colombo on 24 May 2010.  It was submitted that this document  confirmed
    that the information had  been  supplied  to  the  magistrates  by  the
    Terrorist Investigation Unit.  It also confirmed the appellant had been
    taken into custody on 20 April 2010, it seems, for a 90 day period  and
    corroborated  other  aspects  of  the  appellant's  account.   It   was
    suggested  that  the  document  was  consistent  with  the  appellant's
    account.  This included a reference to Silva Kumar and  the  nature  of
    the accusation against him in relation to the supply  of  uniforms  and
    other garments to the LTTE.

18.  At this point I was referred to the bundle referred to as  "bundle  B."
    According to page 16 of that bundle the lawyer who provided information
    about  the  charges  against  the  appellant  had  confirmed  his   Bar
    Association membership.  It was suggested  that  where  documents  were
    produced which were prima facie valid the burden shifted to  the  other
    party to  allege  that  they  were  forgeries.   It  was  submitted  by
    reference to pages B4-6 that the documents there were  at  least  prima
    facie genuine.  I was urged to look at the appellant's  statement,  his
    brother's  statement,  the  envelopes  produced  and   the   practising
    certificate for the lawyer in  Sri  Lanka.   These  all  supported  the
    appellant's case.  There was no ambiguity and no  clear  allegation  of
    forgery.  No such allegation could be sustained on the  facts  of  this
    case.

19.  At this point I was referred to  C47,  which  is  a  translation  of  a
    document  from  the  "TID"  (I  assume  the   Terrorist   Investigation
    Department) at Welikada.  This was supposed to be an arrest warrant for
    the appellant from Sri  Lanka.   Again,  it  was  consistent  with  his
    account.

20.  At this point  I  was  referred  to  the  "risk  factors"  set  out  at
    paragraph 355 et seq in the case of GJ and other  relevant  paragraphs.
    That guidance purports to be authoritative.  It points out that the Sri
    Lankan government's present objective is to identify Tamil activists to
    prevent a resurgence of LTTE activity.  Whilst the LTTE  was  a  "spent
    force" which no longer represented a threat to  the  Sri  Lankan  state
    those that were detained by the security services remained under a real
    risk of ill-treatment or harm requiring international protection.   The
    categories  of  individuals  concerned  included  those   who   had   a
    significant role in post-conflict separatism.  Generally speaking,  the
    Sri Lankan  authorities'  approach  was  based  on  intelligence.  Past
    history was only relevant to the extent that it was  perceived  by  the
    authorities as indicating a present risk  to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan
    state  or  government.   It  was  submitted  that  by  virtue  of   the
    appellant's past detention and documents disclosing the  interest  that
    the authorities have in him that he falls within an "at-risk" category.



21.  I was also referred to the case of KK  at  paragraph  47,  which  deals
    with the working together of the  security  services  with  a  view  to
    identifying those in relation to whom there are concerns.

22.   Miss  Isherwood  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant's account was incredible.  He claims that he ran  a  business
    which produced army uniforms but the business fell into  the  hands  of
    the  LTTE.   He  applied  for  a  visa,  but   this   application   was
    unsuccessful.  He left Sri Lanka travelling on his own passport without
    any problems.  It was  submitted  that  he  was  perfectly  capable  of
    applying for a visa as a dependant of his wife in 2010 and it  was  not
    until he separated from her in 2012 that he  made  the  present  asylum
    claim.  At question 2.1 of the screening  interview  (page  G5  of  the
    respondent's bundle) the appellant was asked about his journey  to  the
    UK.  He said that he left Sri Lanka on 27 March 2011 with his wife  and
    two children.  At page G15 of the  screening  interview  the  appellant
    said that he had not experienced "any problems" with the police looking
    for him up to the point when he left Sri Lanka (in 2011).   At  G10  of
    the same interview the appellant stated that one  of  his  reasons  for
    claiming asylum was that he had "problems with my wife."   I  was  also
    referred to question 165 in the main interview (at  H40).   There,  the
    appellant appeared to struggle to answer a question about the  clothing
    factory where he is said to have produced the garments  for  the  army.
    However, he did reveal that the office was in a "section of  my  wife's
    house."  He went on to explain how his wife had converted to Islam  but
    they had problems naming one of their children because her  family  did
    not want the child to be given a Muslim name.  Miss Isherwood commented
    that there was no reference to the wife's family's house in any of  the
    court documents.  It was also pointed out  that  the  Global  Solutions
    documents in bundle  C  did  not  show  any  work  being  done  at  the
    appellant's wife's address.

23.  At this point I was referred to the envelopes  in  bundle  B.   It  was
    pointed out by Miss Isherwood that the postal address for the appellant
    did not match the address in his witness statement.

24.  The Tribunal was invited  to  conclude  that  the  documents  were  not
    reliable and that the  application  for  asylum  seemed  to  have  been
    stimulated by a disagreement or falling out between the  appellant  and
    his wife.  The appellant was vague about the source  of  the  documents
    produced and how and when he came by these documents remained very much
    in issue.  It was submitted the Tribunal could not  be  satisfied  that
    they were genuine documents.  It was accepted that the document at  C21
    (part of information supplied to a magistrate in Sri  Lanka),  referred
    to a period of  detention  of  90  days.   However,  this  is  said  to
    contradict other evidence such as the screening interview (at  question
    5.1, B12) where the appellant refers to having been detained for  "five
    days" in Vellikadda Prison.

25.  It was accepted that I should look at the information  "in  the  round"
    but matters of weight were matters  for  the  Tribunal.   Just  because
    documents have been produced from an "attorney" did not mean that  they
    were "acceptable."

26.   The  appellant  had  produced  photographs  but  none  of  them   were
    demonstrably him.  At question 70 in the full interview (page  24)  the
    appellant had pointed out the lack of LTTE  activities  either  in  Sri
    Lanka or in the UK and this contradicted the  photographs  he  produced
    showing him attending a demonstration in London since he  came  to  the
    UK.  His answer to the question  posed  at  question  70  in  the  full
    interview (at H24): have you ever in Sri Lanka or the  UK  participated
    in activities aimed towards raising awareness of or  support  or  money
    for the diaspora activities in Sri Lanka?  The appellant answered  "no"
    to that question.

27.  It was  also  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  entirely
    consistent  in  his  account  of  his  garment  business  at  page  H30
    (questions 109 et seq).

28.  It was acknowledged by Miss Isherwood that the appellant  had  produced
    medical evidence from Dr Frazer,  a  GP,  but  that  evidence  was  not
    decisive.  The appellant had not shown that he was on any  "stop  list"
    within the GJ decision.  He had not had any significant role  with  the
    LTTE and the evidence pointed to him coming to the UK to  enjoy  a  new
    life with his wife for  economic  reasons.   Given  his  lack  of  past
    history with the LTTE it was not reasonably likely that  the  appellant
    would be of any interest on return to Sri Lanka.  The case  of  MP  had
    concluded that GJ was still good law.

29.  Mr Kumudsena responded to say that the appellant had travelled  to  the
    UK with the benefit of an agent (he dealt with this at question 205  et
    seq in his interview).  The fact that the appellant used his own ID did
    not necessarily mean a bribe  had  not  been  paid  to  facilitate  his
    departure from the country.  The court documents (at C21  et  seq)  did
    not  deal  with  the  length  of  detention.   They  suggest  that   an
    application was made to detain him for a lengthy period but  that  this
    was unsuccessful.  The appellant was  against  the  government  of  Sri
    Lanka in a number of respects and in this connection I was referred  to
    B24  which  shows  that  the  appellant  is  actively  opposed  to  the
    government.  The appellant had produced medical evidence to back up his
    injuries and question 165 in the main interview was consistent  because
    the company name had been given (presumably earlier in the  interview).



30.  In  all  the  circumstances  I  was  invited  to  leave  in  place  the
    favourable determination of Judge Scott-Baker and her decision that the
    appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant  asylum  was  unlawful
    should be allowed to stand.

31.  At the end of the hearing I reserved  my  decision  as  to  what  steps
    needed to be taken to correct  the  error  of  law  identified  at  the
    earlier hearing.

Discussion

32.  The appeal proceedings have a chequered  history.   The  appellant  has
    been before the First-tier Tribunal on  two  occasions.   On  the  most
    recent occasion the Immigration Judge had concluded that the  appellant
    was a credible witness.  But  it  is  not  clear  to  what  extent  the
    Immigration Judge reached this conclusion  as  a  result  of  a  flawed
    analysis  of  the  documents.   These  included  a  warrant   for   the
    appellant's arrest dated 7 June 2010.  Following the hearing before  me
    on 12 November 2014 I concluded that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not
    adequately consider how that document was  obtained  and  when  it  was
    obtained.  Having further considered the case following the hearing  on
    26 February 2015 at  which  full  argument  was  heard  and  additional
    evidence given I  am  reinforced  in  the  view  that  the  documentary
    evidence is at the heart of the case but that it must be judged in  the
    round taking into account  the  favourable  medical  evidence  and  the
    Immigration  Judge's   favourable   impression   of   the   appellant's
    credibility.

33.  I have been referred to the well-known case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]
    UKIAT 00439*.  In that case the IAT reminded  decision  makers  of  the
    fact that documentary evidence must be considered in the  same  way  as
    oral evidence; the burden being on the person producing the evidence to
    prove its reliability to the relevant standard.  In asylum  claims  and
    claims under Article 3 of the ECHR the standard is a low one:  has  the
    appellant established that his claim is reasonably likely to be true?

Conclusions

34.  I have sufficient concerns as to the evidence in this case to  conclude
    that the appellant was not able to  establish  his  claim  to  the  low
    standard which applied.  The appellant did not submit his  claim  until
    16 July 2013, having travelled to the UK with his wife and family on 27
    March 2011.  It appears that he was separated from his wife in February
    2012 although he did not inform  the  respondent  of  this  until  much
    later.  The timing of his  asylum/human  rights  claim  is  significant
    because the appellant did not advance this until his leave had expired.
     It appears to have been an opportunistic claim therefore.

35.  I find there to have  been  a  lack  of  evidence  that  the  appellant
    actually  supplied  the  Army  and  Navy  with  uniforms  or  that  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka would regard him as having  supplied  uniforms
    to the LTTE.  The appellant  claims  to  have  run  a  business  called
    "Global  Business  Solutions",  the  company  that   manufactured   the
    garments.   However,  the  appellant  was  unable  to  indicate  annual
    turnover in interview and in response to questions from Miss  Isherwood
    said he regarded the tendering for the supply of army uniforms to be  a
    "waste of time."  This did not appear to be  a  comment  I  would  have
    expected from  a  person  running  such  a  company.   There  are  also
    discrepancies  in  the  way  that  the  business  operated.   Different
    addresses were supplied for the company and even if this was  explained
    by the fact that one of the addresses was his wife's family's  address,
    I am not clear how the appellant was able to  retrieve  documents  from
    that address given that he had fallen out with his wife's family.

36.  I find it incredible that the appellant would come into the  possession
    of important documents pertaining to his own  arrest  so  late  in  the
    case.  At the date of the appellant's interview he claimed to  have  no
    documentary evidence to support his arrest or  his  imprisonment.   Nor
    did he provide  evidence  of  being  summonsed  to  court  (see  asylum
    interview at question 183).  However by an  undated  witness  statement
    incorporated within bundle B the appellant produced a  letter  from  an
    attorney at law enclosing documents from the High Court in  Sri  Lanka.
    The attorney at law's letter dated 8 July 2014  was  just  three  weeks
    before the hearing took place in front of the Immigration  Judge.   The
    documents produced included an arrest warrant which has been translated
    into English.   I find that there  no  adequate  explanation  has  been
    given as to why it took the appellant at least  two  years  to  produce
    this document.  The Immigration Judge does not attempt any  explanation
    as to how the lawyer in Sri Lanka came to be instructed at such a  late
    stage nor is she able to  explain  why  such  a  crucial  document  was
    released so late.  She says that there  is  an  "air  of  authenticity"
    about the warrant and arrest but, with respect, that does not  mean  it
    is genuine.  In addition, the Immigration Judge does not  explain  what
    she means by describing the appellant's account as "unusual."  Nor  did
    I find it credible that shortly before the  first  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal , on 10 February 2015, the appellant would  be  informed
    by his brother that "two people in civilian clothes" had questioned his
    brother about the appellant's whereabouts.  It is of note that this was
    no less then five years after the appellant had left Sri Lanka.

37.  The respondent says that such  documents  are  very  difficult  if  not
    impossible to obtain.  No proper explanation was given as  to  how  the
    appellant was able to obtain them.  A great  deal  of  the  appellant's
    evidence depends on what his brother tells him but  when  asked  during
    the hearing on 26 February about conversations  with  his  brother  the
    appellant said "you would have to ask him."  The lawyer's letter  gives
    the documents produced a cloak of authenticity.  But  it  does  not  of
    itself alter the basic premise that the appellant has to prove his case
    whether by oral or documentary evidence. The claim he now  advances  is
    generally inconsistent with his screening  interview  where  he  stated
    that "nothing happened" in Sri Lanka.

38.  Having heard the appellant give evidence and be cross-examined by  Miss
    Isherwood I am satisfied that his story is incredible.   The  documents
    produced cannot have been available from the outset and must have  been
    generated for the purposes of improving his claim.

39.  I bear in mind that the  appellant  has  produced  apparently  credible
    corroborative evidence in the form of a medical report from Dr  Frazer.
    However, Dr Frazer comments in his report on unusual  features  present
    in this case including a long period when the appellant claims to  have
    been blindfolded.  Dr Frazer was not able to offer an interpretation of
    the age of scars on the appellant but was able to  say  the  appearance
    was "highly consistent" with the account the appellant had  given.   As
    far as the psychological sequelae are concerned,  there  is  clearly  a
    connection with the appellant's marriage breakdown.  Therefore,  having
    carefully considered the medical evidence I remain  of  the  view  that
    this evidence does  not  prove  the  truthfulness  of  the  appellant's
    account.

40.  The photographs the appellant has produced of attending  demonstrations
    in the UK appear opportunistic and there is no evidence  that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities are aware of these activities.

41.  I have considered recent case law and in  particular  the  case  of  MP
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829, in which the Court of Appeal endorsed the approach
    of the Upper Tribunal both in that case and in the earlier case of  GJ.
    It was held that the Upper Tribunal had not erred in its  treatment  of
    the guidelines issued by failing to take  account  of  UNHCR  guidance.
    The  Upper  Tribunal  had  been  entitled  to  narrow-down   the   risk
    categories.  Broadly, the Sri  Lankan  state  is  interested  in  those
    working for Tamil separatism who pose a threat to the existence of  the
    Sri Lankan state.  They are  not  generally  concerned  with  punishing
    those responsible for Tamil violence in the past.  The finding  by  the
    Immigration Judge that the appellant was at risk on return to Sri Lanka
    as playing a "significant role" in relation to post-conflict separatism
    is highly questionable in the light of the guidance cases.  There is no
    evidence the appellant is on a "stop list" such as would require him to
    be arrested and detained and questioned.  The only evidence would  have
    been the documents produced after his initial claim but those documents
    appear thoroughly unreliable, for the reasons given above.

42.  The appellant also advanced an Article 8 claim  but  having  regard  to
    the breakdown of his relationship with his wife and his lack of contact
    with his children as well as his short period of residence in the UK  .
    I find that the respondent was entitled to reject the application under
    Article 8  and it has not been argued that  that  Article  provided  an
    alternative way of finding in the appellant's favour in this case.

Risk on return

43.  The appellant arrived in the UK  on  a  visa  but  later  submitted  an
    asylum claim.  He travelled here on his own  passport  experiencing  no
    problems in transit.  He only raised asylum in 2013 many  months  after
    his arrival and following the expiry of his visa.  He  claims  to  have
    run a business supplying uniforms to the army in Sri Lanka which became
    implicated with supplying uniforms to the enemy but there are  numerous
    inconsistencies in his description of the business,  its  premises  and
    his involvement with it.  There is no evidence that he  is  on  a  stop
    list.  He has never been a supporter of the  LTTE  and  the  events  he
    describes took place more than five years ago.  In the circumstances  I
    find him not to be a person at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

Notice of Decision

44.  Having carefully analysed the findings of fact made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the evidence given including the  favourable  evidence
    in the medical report I have concluded that the error of law identified
    at the earlier hearing was fatal to the decision and it is necessary to
    re-make the decision.

45.  It is necessary to set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    I re-make that decision which is to  dismiss  the  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 7 August 2013  to  refuse  leave  to
    enter or remain in the UK and to refuse to grant asylum.

No anonymity direction was made  by  the  Tribunal  and  no  fee  award  was
payable.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is payable.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

