

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07234/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7 July 2015                       |On 8 July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                  Mr M M M
                       (ANONYMITY Direction CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Garrod, Counsel (instructed by Leslie & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Astle on 4 June 2015 against the decision of  First-
         tier  Tribunal  Judge  Seifert  made  in  a  decision  and  reasons
         promulgated on 30 April 2015  dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum,
         humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.  The  substantive
         hearing before Judge Seifert had taken place at Hatton Cross on  17
         November 2014.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Tanzania, born on 4  March  1962.
         He is qualified as a medical practitioner,  and  had  worked  as  a
         doctor in Zanzibar.  He claimed that he was harassed and  had  been
         arrested there because of his active support of  the  Civic  United
         Front ("CUF"). He entered the United Kingdom on 20 September  2000,
         with a student visa, to undertake an MSc in public health which  he
         completed at  Cardiff  University  College  of  Medicine.  He  then
         undertook an IT course, with a student visa valid to January  2004.
         Thereafter he became an overstayer.  He claimed asylum on  7  April
         2014, asserting that he remained at risk  as  a  CUF  member.   The
         Respondent refused the  asylum  claim  on  8  September  2014.  The
         Appellant appealed against his removal from the United Kingdom.

    3.     When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Astle considered that it was arguable that Judge Seifert had  erred
         above all because of the significant delay between the hearing  and
         the promulgation of the decision and reasons,  which  rendered  her
         adverse credibility findings unsafe.  It was also arguable that the
         judge had failed to identify and apply the appropriate  burden  and
         standard of proof.

    4.     The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
         appeal was not opposed.   Standard  directions  were  made  by  the
         tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication of  whether  or
         not there was a material error of law.

    Submissions

    5.     At the start of  the  hearing  Mr  Bramble  for  the  Respondent
         clarified that the rule  24  notice  indicating  that  the  onwards
         appeal was "not opposed" was not a concession in terms.   In  fact,
         he wished to argue that the judge's decision and reasons should not
         be set aside, notwithstanding the delay.  The  tribunal  considered
         that it was appropriate to hear argument and there was no objection
         by Mr Garrod.

    6.     Mr Garrod for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal earlier submitted and the grant  of  permission  to  appeal.
         The key authority was RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868,  where  the
         Upper Tribunal's predecessor the IAT had delayed 29 months  between
         hearing and promulgation.   The Court  of  Appeal  had  cited  with
         approval from Sambasivam v Secretary of State (2000) Imm  AR  85  a
         statement from Mario  (1998) Imm AR 281 at 287: "In an area such as
         asylum, where evidence requires anxious scrutiny, the Tribunal will
         usually remit a  case  to  another  adjudicator  where  the  period
         between the hearing and the dictation of the determination is  more
         than 3 months". Here the delay was 6 months,  with  no  explanation
         provided.  The value of seeing the Appellant give evidence had been
         lost over time.  The decision and reasons should be set  aside  and
         the appeal reheard before another First-tier Tribunal judge.

    7.     Mr Bramble for the Respondent accepted that there had been delay
         but submitted that the appeal needed to be  seen  in  its  context.
         The country  background  evidence  showed  that  the  situation  in
         Tanzania and Zanzibar in particular had changed fundamentally.  The
         CUF now held 24 seats in parliament.  The current unrest  was  from
         militant Islamic threats, not the political scene.  The  judge  had
         examined the country background evidence and her  conclusions  were
         plainly correct.  RK (above) showed that a remitted hearing was not
         required in every case of delay.  The appeal would  have  the  same
         outcome if it were reheard.  The complaints made in the grounds  of
         appeal about the burden and standard of proof were  not  sufficient
         to establish a material error of law.

    8.     In reply, Mr Garrod emphasised  the  authority  of  RK  (above),
         which should be followed.  Credibility had not been  a  feature  of
         the reasons for refusal letter.  The  judge's  description  of  the
         burden  and  standard  of  proof  were  flawed.   The   credibility
         assessment  was  not  the  judge's  proper  starting  point.    The
         situation in Tanzania was not settled.  The fact that  there  could
         be disagreement over the judge's determination showed that it was a
         case for remittal and rehearing.

    No material error of law

    9.     The tribunal reserved  its  determination,  which  now  follows.
         The delay in the promulgation of the judge's decision  and  reasons
         is obviously regrettable, but the tribunal has  concluded,  in  the
         light of RK (above), that this is not an appeal  which  could  ever
         have had a different outcome.  No useful purpose would be served by
         remittal to a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

    10.    In the first place, there was no complaint about the conduct  of
         the hearing.  The judge's neat and comprehensive manuscript note of
         the appeal hearing indicates  that  the  judge  was  fully  engaged
         throughout.  The appeal file was in good order  and  contained  all
         relevant documents, which the judge set out at [6] to  [8]  of  her
         determination.  It  is  true  that  the  determination  offered  no
         explanation for the delay in promulgation but in  fairness  to  the
         judge perhaps two weeks or so of the period may be attributable  to
         Christmas and New Year.  There has also been a marked  shortage  of
         First-tier Tribunal judiciary, which has led to  extra  burdens  on
         the judges and a tendency to take on too  many  sittings.   But  of
         course these are peripheral matters so  far  as  the  Appellant  is
         concerned.

    11.    Mr Garrod submitted that the judge had taken the wrong  approach
         in two material ways, in placing an undue emphasis  on  credibility
         and in a confused understanding  of  the  burden  and  standard  of
         proof.  The judge described the burden and  standard  of  proof  at
         [14] of her determination as being for the Appellant to  show  that
         "there are substantial grounds for believing or a reasonable degree
         of likelihood  that  he  meets  all  of  the  requirements  of  the
         Qualification Regulations", contrasting that with  the  balance  of
         probabilities standard applicable to meeting  the  requirements  of
         the Immigration Rules.  While  there  may  be  scope  for  academic
         argument as to whether there is any difference between "substantial
         grounds for believing" and "a reasonable degree of likelihood",  in
         the  tribunal's  view,  these  amount   to   accepted   alternative
         definitions of the  asylum  standard.   The  judge  showed  by  the
         contrast she  drew  with  an  Immigration  Rules  appeal  that  she
         appreciated that the lower standard applied.   There  was  thus  no
         error of law.

    12.    As to the undue emphasis on credibility asserted by  Mr  Garrod,
         the tribunal considers that there is nothing objectionable in  [17]
         of the decision and reasons.  The judge  has  recited  a  formulaic
         self direction, in which caution is the watchword.  The credibility
         assessment was expressed  to  be  a  part  of  the  assessment  and
         analysis process, not  the  whole  process.   Moreover,  the  judge
         carefully examined the Appellant's account and his fear  of  return
         on the alternative basis that he should be  believed,  contrary  to
         her assessment of his credibility.  After considering  the  country
         background evidence which she succinctly and accurately summarised,
         the judge found that the Appellant was not at real risk today:  see
         [63] to [66] of the determination.

    13.    In the tribunal's  view,  not  only  were  all  of  the  judge's
         findings adequately  and  clearly  reasoned,  they  were  the  only
         findings which any judge could properly have reached  on  the  same
         evidence.   The  country  background  evidence  showed   that   the
         situation  had  fundamentally   changed   since   the   Appellant's
         departure, whether or not his claims of events prior to  that  date
         were credible  to  the  lower  standard.   His  enormous  delay  in
         claiming asylum, and  the  absence  of  corroboration  of  relevant
         matters (e.g., medical evidence) which could reasonably and  safely
         have been obtained by a person particularly well placed to  do  so,
         further undermined a weak case.

    14.    The guidelines discussed in RK (above) remain  a  useful  guide.
         Indeed, the President of the First-tier Tribunal has indicated that
         judges should aim to promulgate their decision and  reasons  within
         10 workings days, when possible.  That is  a  most  desirable  aim.
         Here the judge fell far short of such timeliness, but injustice  to
         the Appellant has not resulted.  Just as in RK (above),  where  the
         Court of Appeal declined in the  event  to  overturn  the  impugned
         determination despite the extraordinary delay in  promulgation,  in
         the present appeal the  tribunal  finds  that  the  delay  has  not
         affected the judge's credibility assessment or her general approach
         to the case.  There was no material error  of  law.   The  original
         decision stands.

    DECISION

    The tribunal finds that there was no material  error  of  laws  in  the
    original decision, which stands unchanged






    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
