
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
AA/07668/2015

                                                   AA/07734/2015

                                                   AA/07735/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 20th May 2016                       |        On 6th June 2016            |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                            PR (first Appellant)
                            NM (second Appellant)
                            CR (third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms A Seehra, Counsel instructed by Greater London
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants and each of them are citizens of Sri Lanka  whose  dates
    of birth are respectively 7th April 1977, 6th  October  1983  and  22nd
    November 2007.  On 24th October 2014 the Appellants and  each  of  them
    made application for international protection  as  refugees.   On  23rd
    April 2015 decisions were made  to  refuse  the  applications  and  the
    Appellants appealed.

 2. On 22nd February 2016 their appeals were heard by Judge of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Parkes  sitting  at  Sheldon  Court,  Birmingham.    He
    dismissed the appeals.  In issue was the extent to which if at all  the
    First Appellant had connections with the LTTE and the extent  to  which
    if at all he would be at  risk  on  return.   I  say  no  more  because
    findings will have to be made in the First-tier  Tribunal  because  for
    the reasons which follow this decision simply cannot stand.

 3. Not content with the decision to dismiss the appeals on all grounds, by
    notice dated 21st March 2016 the  Appellants  and  each  of  them  made
    application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds are lengthy, in fact they are longer than the decision, but  in
    short they criticise the judge for failing  to  engage  with  the  oral
    evidence of the First Appellant and to have regard to the  evidence  of
    the Second Appellant which was not challenged.

 4. The Appellants also relied upon evidence from two separate  Sri  Lankan
    attorneys which Mr Bramble very fairly accepted were  dealt  with  only
    "en passant" by the judge in his decision and reasons.  The reality  is
    that the decision is simply inadequately  reasoned  in  that  there  is
    insufficient regard to the totality of  the  evidence  and  it  is  not
    possible, reading the decision as a whole, to know what weight if  any,
    the judge gave most particularly to  the  evidence  of  the  Appellants
    whose case it was.

 5. The Secretary of State filed a  Notice  under  Rule  24  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008 but  as  Mr  Bramble  properly  conceded,
    those points taken in the notice go to issues  which  arise  under  the
    country guidance case rather than the more substantive issues raised by
    the Appellants in their grounds.

 6. Because there is, as the Americans  would  say  "no  contest"  in  this
    appeal, I need say no more other than to say that there is  a  material
    error of law in each of the appeals such that  they  cannot  stand  and
    should be set aside.

 7. The question then is whether the appeal can  be  remade  or  should  be
    remitted.  There is clearly a requirement for this case to be sent back
    to the First-tier Tribunal for proper findings to be made. No  findings
    are preserved. The Appellants will have to consider the extent to which
    they wish to give evidence again. That will be a matter for  those  who
    advise them, but  this  matter  will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Birmingham to be heard by a judge other than Judge  Parkes,
    with a Singhalese interpreter, with a time estimate to be  set  by  the
    Resident Judge at Birmingham.

 8. Given the involvement of a child I  deem  it  appropriate  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

Decision

The decision of the first tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside. The matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
Birmingham to be remade by a judge other than Judge Parkes.

Signed                              Date 6th June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 6th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

