
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07079/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               The secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M B V
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Kumudusena of Liyon Legal Ltd.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. For convenience, although the Secretary of State is  the  appellant  in
    this appeal, I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 24  June  1979.
    He last entered the United Kingdom on 3 March 2013 and on 7 May 2013 he
    claimed asylum.  On 12 July 2013, the Secretary of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application for asylum and  humanitarian  protection.   The
    Secretary of State also concluded that the  appellant's  removal  would
    not breach the Immigration Rules and Art 8 of the ECHR.  On that  date,
    the Secretary of State made a decision to remove the appellant  to  Sri
    Lanka by way of directions.

 4. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Following  a
    hearing, in a determination dated 28 August 2013, Judge Maciel  allowed
    the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

 5. On 13 September 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Plumptre)  granted
    the Secretary of State permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    the basis that:

         "It is an arguable error of law that the judge failed  to  consider
         the current country guidance case of GJ and Others (post-civil  war
         returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), and that the  risk
         factors identified in TK have been superseded."

 6. In a rule 24 notice, the appellant submitted that the judge  had  given
    due consideration to the country guidance  case  of  GJ  and  had  been
    entitled to find the appellant's favour for the  reasons  she  gave  in
    para 23 of her determination.  I will return to that paragraph  in  the
    judge's determination shortly.

 7. I turn first to consider the  judge's  factual  findings.   Before  the
    judge, the appellant and his wife gave evidence.  At para 19, the judge
    made a clear finding that the appellant was credible and  that  finding
    is not challenged by the Secretary of State. The judge also accepted as
    reliable a number of documents submitted by the appellant  including  a
    document from Human Rights Commission dated 22 February 2012.

 8. The appellant's claim that he had worked with his elder  brother  in  a
    company in Sri Lanka.  His brother was involved with the LTTE.   On  11
    September 2008, the appellant's brother was abducted by the Sri  Lankan
    government forces and the appellant was subsequently questioned by  the
    CID about the business and whether he supported the LTTE.  He lodged  a
    complaint with the police about the disappearance of his brother.   The
    judge accepted the  appellant's  evidence  that  in  2008  he  gave  an
    interview which was broadcast on Sri Lankan television dealing with his
    brother's abduction and disappearance.  Subsequently, the Human  Rights
    Commission became involved.  In March 2009, the appellant  started  his
    own business and in November 2010 the appellant's wife came to  the  UK
    to study.  The appellant (and their son) had visas as dependants.  As I
    understand it, their son came to the UK with the appellant's wife.  The
    appellant, on the other hand, remained largely in  Sri  Lanka  visiting
    the UK some five or six times.  In January 2013, the appellant,  having
    visited the UK returned to Sri Lanka.  The appellant says  that  on  10
    February 2013 whilst he was  in  Sri  Lanka  he  was  detained  by  the
    Terrorist Intelligence Department (TID).  He was questioned  about  his
    brother's activities and his reasons for making several  trips  to  the
    UK.  During the interrogation the appellant was beaten and sustained an
    injury to his upper lip.  He was asked about his  involvement  in  LTTE
    demonstrations in the UK and whether he knew any LTTE  members  in  the
    UK.  The appellant obtained his  release  through  a  bribe  which  his
    family paid.  Thereafter, he  left  Sri  Lanka  on  his  own  passport,
    returning to the UK on 3 March 2013 after which he claimed asylum, as I
    have said, on 7 May 2013.

 9. Judge Maciel accepted the appellant's account in  full,  including  his
    evidence that on  10  August  2013  the  authorities  had  visited  the
    appellant's father, enquiring of his whereabouts.  As I have said, none
    of these factual findings are challenged in the grounds and  none  were
    called into question in Mr  Richards'  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.

10. At para 23 of her determination, Judge Maciel set out  the  conclusions
    on the evidence which led  her  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  as
    follows:

         "23. I find that the Appellant was detained on 10 February 2013  in
             Sri Lanka by the Terrorist Intelligence  Department.   I  find
             that he was questioned about his brother's activities and  his
             own.  There was also enquiry as  to  his  reasons  for  making
             several trips to the United Kingdom.  I find that during  this
             interrogation the Appellant was beaten and sustained an injury
             to his upper lip as set out in the  medical  report.   I  find
             that the authorities in Sri  Lanka  were  concerned  with  his
             connection with demonstrations in London by the LTTE.  I  find
             that it is reasonably likely that the Sri  Lankan  authorities
             perceive the appellant as having a role in relation  to  post-
             conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora.   I  have  had
             regard to the decision in GJ.  I  note  that  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities have sophisticated, extensive intelligence  as  to
             those who are seeking to destabilise the unitary state  within
             the  diaspora  and  in  Sri  Lanka.   I  find  that  there  is
             intelligence on the Appellant which has  led  to  the  TID  to
             arrest, question and beat him.  I find that  the  TID  believe
             that [G] smuggled weapons for the LTTE and that the  Appellant
             worked with him at the time.  The Appellant  is  now  seen  to
             make regular trips between the UK  and  Sri  Lanka  which  has
             raised suspicions of his activities.  I find  that  since  the
             Appellant bribed his way out of detention, he continues to  be
             of adverse interest.  This is evidenced by enquiries made with
             his father as recently  as  10  August  2013.   I  accept  the
             Appellant's evidence that his departure was 'arranged'  as  he
             feared being stopped at the airport upon  departure.   I  find
             that there is a real risk that the Appellant is  on  a  'stop'
             list and will be stopped at the airport and handed over to the
             TID were he returned to Sri Lanka.  I find that, as before, if
             he is detained, he will be at real risk  of  ill-treatment  or
             harm.  I have  based  my  findings  on  the  totality  of  the
             evidence before me."

11. In his oral submissions, Mr  Richards  relied  upon  the  grounds.   He
    submitted that the appellant did not fall within the guidelines  of  at
    risk individuals set out in GJ.  In particular, he submitted  that  the
    judge had no evidential basis for finding that there was  a  real  risk
    that the appellant was on a "stop" list or  that  he  was  involved  in
    demonstrations in London by the LTTE.

12. Although Mr Kumudusena sought to persuade me that the  judge's  finding
    that there was a real risk that the appellant was on a "stop"  list,  I
    am not persuaded that there was any basis in the evidence for the judge
    making this finding.  In GJ the Upper Tribunal set out in [356(7)]  the
    current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution  or  serious
    harm on return  to  Sri  Lanka.   At  [356(7)(d)]  the  Upper  Tribunal
    identified the following category:

         "A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  'stop'  list
         accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against  whom
         there is an extant court  order  or  arrest  warrant.   Individuals
         whose name appears on a 'stop' list will be stopped at the  airport
         and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
         pursuance of such order or warrant".

13. There was no evidence  before  Judge  Maciel  that  the  appellant  was
    subject to an "extant court order" or  "arrest  warrant".   Indeed,  Mr
    Kumudusena accepted that in his submissions.  I do not accept that  the
    judge was, nevertheless, entitled to find that there was a "real  risk"
    that the appellant was subject to a court order or arrest warrant.  The
    risk, if any, to this appellant, did not arise as a result  of  falling
    into the category of person who was on a "stop" list.

14. That said, however, I do not consider that to be the  central  part  of
    the appellant's account which led Judge Maciel to allow the appellant's
    appeal on the basis that he would be at risk on return.   Judge  Maciel
    made a  number  of  clear  findings.   First,  she  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been detained on 10 February 2013 by the TID and had been
    questioned and ill-treated not, as Mr Richards appeared to  suggest  in
    his submissions, wrongly on the basis that he had been involved in LTTE
    demonstrations in London but rather to question him as  to  whether  he
    had been so involved.  Secondly,  the  judge  clearly  found  that  the
    appellant had a profile as a person who had  complained  to  the  Human
    Rights Commission about the abduction and disappearance of his  brother
    in 2008.  She accepted that the appellant had  given  an  interview  in
    respect of that in 2008 and that he had "sought to progress"  the  case
    before the Human Rights Commission (see para 21).  This aspect  of  the
    appellant's account was supported  in  documentation  which  the  judge
    accepted as reliable and which is not  now  challenged.   Thirdly,  the
    appellant was questioned when detained on 10 February 2013  as  to  his
    reasons for making a number of trips to the United Kingdom.

15. In para 23 the crucial finding of the  risk  category  into  which  the
    appellant fell in Judge Maciel's view was as follows:

         "I  find  that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the  Sri   Lankan
         authorities perceive the appellant as having a role in relation  to
         post-conflict Tamil separation within the diaspora".

16. She accepted that the TID had intelligence on the appellant  which  led
    them to arrest, question and beat  him.   She  accepted  that  the  TID
    believed that the appellant's brother had smuggled weapons for the LTTE
    and the appellant's regular trips between the  UK  and  Sri  Lanka  had
    raised suspicions of his activities.

17. In my judgment, the judge found that the appellant fell within  one  of
    the risk categories set out by the Upper Tribunal in GJ at  [356(7)(a)]
    as follows:

         "Individuals who are, or are  perceived  to  be  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separation  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka."

18. Given the acceptance by the judge of the appellant's history and of his
    arrest and the nature of his questioning in February  2013,  the  judge
    was, in my view, fully entitled to find that the appellant fell  within
    this category of individuals who would be at  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.  The appellant's involvement  with
    the Human Rights Commission in pursuing his brother's disappearance  in
    2008 only, in my judgment, served to  raise  his  profile  and  further
    cement the perception that he was an activist.  Even if  this  did  not
    fall within the risk category in [356(7)(c)] as someone who had  "given
    evidence  to  the  Lessons  Learned   and   Reconciliation   Commission
    implicating the Sri Lankan security forces, armed  forces  or  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities in alleged war crimes", it  raised  the  appellant's
    profile and together with  his  frequent  trips  to  the  UK  no  doubt
    contributed to the Sri Lankan authorities' perception  of  him  as  the
    judge found in paragraph 23 as "having a  role  in  relation  to  post-
    conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora".

19. Added to this, the appellant had been  detained  and  interrogated  and
    seriously  ill-treated  on  10  February  2013  and,  on  the   judge's
    unchallenged findings,  had  only  escaped  through  a  bribe  and,  as
    recently as 10 August 2013, the authorities had made enquiries  of  the
    appellant's father of his whereabouts.

20. For these reasons, I reject Mr Richards'  submissions  that  the  judge
    finding the appellant to be at risk on return to Sri  Lanka  failed  to
    consider and apply the country guidance case of GJ.   In  my  judgment,
    her ultimate finding in the appellant's favour was entirely  consistent
    with GJ.

21. The judge did not err in law in finding there was a real risk that  the
    appellant would be subject to persecution for a  Convention  reason  on
    return to Sri Lanka and to allow his appeal  on  asylum  grounds.   Her
    decision to allow the appeal on that ground stands.

22. For these reasons,  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.






                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

