
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07826/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 September 2015                 |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                               MAMBO YVES KORE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Solicitor, Brar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, born 5 October 1966,  is  a  citizen  of  the  Ivory
         Coast. He first came to the UK illegally in July 2005. On 14  April
         2006 he was served with illegal entry papers, whereupon he  claimed
         asylum. That claim was refused  on  9  June  2006,  and  a  removal
         decision was made against him as a result. His appeal  against  the
         removal decision was dismissed by the Tribunal on 31 July 2006,  so
         that his appeal rights were exhausted on 17 August 2006. He did not
         however leave the UK as a result, and instead he ceased  to  report
         to the Respondent, so that he was treated as an absconder.

      2. On 21 January 2010 the Appellant submitted  an  application  for  a
         grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules  based  upon
         his Article 8 rights, which was refused on 23 March 2010.  He  made
         further representations to the Respondent about  his  circumstances
         on 31 January 2014, relying upon  the  fact  that  he  was  by  now
         cohabiting with Mrs G, but the Respondent  once  again  refused  to
         grant him leave, and in addition made a further decision to  remove
         him as an illegal entrant on 17 September 2014.

      3. The Appellant's appeal  against  those  immigration  decisions  was
         heard  on  4  December  2014  when  it  was  dismissed  under   the
         Immigration  Rules,  and  on  Article  8  grounds,  in  a  Decision
         promulgated on 22 December 2014 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Duff.

      4.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal was refused by Judge Page on 23  January  2015
         because the application was made  out  of  time,  and  without  any
         explanation as to why time should be extended, and the  grounds  of
         complaint amounted to no more than a disagreement with the  Judge's
         conclusions.

      5. Undaunted the  Appellant  renewed  his  application  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal, whereupon it was granted by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Symes on 1 May 2015.

      6. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response to the grant of  permission
         dated 19 May 2015.

      7. Thus the matter comes before me.

    The hearing below

      8. The Appellant's case  before  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  was  that
         although he had entered illegally, and had never obtained any grant
         of leave, he had nevertheless established both a "family life" with
         Mrs G, and a "private life", whilst living in the UK.

      9. Although this is perhaps not entirely clear from the terms  of  the
         decision, Mr Selway confirmed to  me  that  it  had  been  accepted
         before Judge Duff, by the Appellant's then representative, that the
         Appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
         for a grant of leave to remain. He accepted  that  the  appeal  was
         pursued before Judge Duff solely on Article 8 grounds  outside  the
         Immigration  Rules,  on  the  basis  that   the   removal   was   a
         disproportionate interference  in  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
         Appellant and Mrs G [23].

     10. I also note that Mr Selway did not seek to resile from the position
         the Appellant's former  representative  had  adopted  before  Judge
         Duff, which was to accept that absent the Appellant's  relationship
         with Mrs G, the Article 8 appeal could not succeed.

     11. The Appellant's case before the Judge was that he no longer had any
         realistic connection with the Ivory Coast, and that he had made his
         life in the UK since July 2005. He said that he had first met Mrs G
         in May 2009, and that his relationship with Mrs G had been akin  to
         a marriage since the occasion in August 2013 when he had  begun  to
         cohabit with her at her home  in  Durham.  He  had  since  attended
         college courses that she had paid for.  Whilst  they  had  not  yet
         married, this was said to be simply the result of  their  financial
         circumstances.

     12. Mrs G is a British citizen, with two adult daughters, and one grand-
         daughter, all of whom live in the UK.  Her  evidence  was  that  it
         would be impossible for her to relocate from the UK  to  the  Ivory
         Coast because all of her roots and all the members  of  her  family
         were in Britain.

     13. Both the Appellant and the sponsor gave evidence to  the  Tribunal,
         and it is accepted before me  that  they  were  the  subject  of  a
         searching cross-examination by the Respondent's representative.

     14.  The  Judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence  given  under   cross-
         examination resulted in his finding that the Appellant was not free
         to marry Mrs G, and that despite the passage of time since  he  had
         travelled to the UK, he remained married to a woman  in  the  Ivory
         Coast [19]. The Appellant's attempt to distance  himself  from  the
         evidence he had given during the course of his asylum claim and his
         appeal (in which he had agreed that he was married to  a  woman  in
         the Ivory Coast) was rejected as untrue.

     15. Whilst the definition of  "partner"  in  the  Appendix  FM  to  the
         Immigration Rules was not met because  the  couple  had  not  lived
         together for the requisite length of time, nevertheless  the  Judge
         did accept that there was a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
         between the Appellant and Mrs G [17].

     16. That relationship had however been formed in the knowledge that the
         Appellant was in the UK illegally, and that he might have to return
         to the Ivory Coast before he could gain any immigration  status  in
         the UK. The couple's vicar gave evidence, and he had accepted  that
         he knew that there was an issue over whether the Appellant was free
         to marry Mrs G. He had not sought to resolve that issue, and  would
         not do so unless and until the couple requested that he marry them,
         which they had not yet done [20]. The vicar also believed  that  if
         the appeal failed, then despite his past behaviour,  the  Appellant
         would "do what was right" and return to the Ivory Coast,  and  that
         Mrs G would either go with him, or would at least visit  him  there
         [20]. Mrs G however told the Judge that she would  not  go  to  the
         Ivory Coast. She accepted that she knew that she might have to make
         a choice between doing so, and continuing her relationship with the
         Appellant.

     17. The Judge noted the Appellant's immigration  history,  his  illegal
         entry,  and  his  failure  to  claim  asylum  until  after  he  was
         encountered, and then his  decision  to  abscond  once  his  appeal
         rights were exhausted. He noted that the relationship  with  Mrs  G
         had only developed to one of cohabitation once the 2010 application
         for a grant of leave had been  refused  [25].  He  noted  that  the
         Appellant had no children in the UK, and that Mrs G's own  children
         were now adults. He concluded that there was no reason  why  Mrs  G
         could not go to, or visit, the Ivory Coast in safety.

    Error of law?

     18. In the light of those findings Mr Selway addressed me on the  basis
         that the two arguments that are set out in the grounds were  really
         one complaint, namely, that the  Judge  had  failed  to  adequately
         consider Mrs G's ties to the UK, and had failed to demonstrate that
         he had applied the correct legal principles in  his  assessment  of
         the proportionality of the removal decision. As Mr Selway  put  it,
         the complaint was that the  facts  of  the  case  required  a  more
         detailed consideration than they had received. Thus,  as  advanced,
         this was a complaint that the decision lacked adequate reasoning.

     19. Thus, contrary to the  remarks  made  in  the  course  of  granting
         permission to appeal, it was not suggested by Mr  Selway  that  the
         Judge had fallen into the trap identified  in  Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD
         [2008] UKHL 39 of a failure to consider the Article 8 rights of the
         individual with whom the Appellant was said to have  enjoyed  their
         Article 8 "family life". He was right  not  to  do  so.  The  Judge
         plainly did give consideration to Mrs G's position, and  Mr  Selway
         did not seek to argue that any material evidence was  left  out  of
         account.

     20. Mr Selway also confirmed that he accepted that the appeal  had  not
         been argued before the Judge on the basis that  it  was  impossible
         for the Appellant to return to the Ivory Coast in  safety,  or  for
         Mrs G to visit that country in safety. He also  confirmed  that  he
         accepted that the appeal had not been argued on the basis that  the
         Appellant was unable to make an application for entry clearance  to
         the UK as the partner, or fianc�e, of Mrs G, that had any  prospect
         of success under the Immigration Rules.

     21. Notwithstanding the terms in which permission was granted I am  not
         satisfied that there is any  merit  in  the  grounds,  which  I  am
         satisfied are in reality no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
         Judge's assessment of where the balance of  proportionality  lay(as
         Judge Page had also observed).

     22. It is in my judgement clear  that  the  Judge  quite  properly  had
         regard to the Appellant's extremely poor  immigration  history.  On
         any view the relationship that the Appellant relied upon  had  been
         formed under the most precarious of circumstances, and  Mrs  G  had
         always known that the Appellant might be required to leave the  UK,
         and that she might face a choice  between  living  in  the  UK  and
         living with the Appellant.

     23. Moreover it is clear that the Judge had well in mind that both  the
         Appellant and Mrs G could visit the Ivory Coast, or  live  together
         there, in safety.

     24. There was also no reason advanced  to  the  Judge  as  to  why  the
         Appellant could not return to that country  in  order  to  make  an
         application for entry clearance in the proper way, and the evidence
         did not establish clearly one way or the  other,  whether  such  an
         application would be successful. Accordingly this was  not  one  of
         those cases in which the claimant could argue  that  removal  would
         serve no purpose because  a  grant  of  entry  clearance  would  be
         inevitable, and nor could he argue that  removal  would  inevitably
         lead to permanent separation from the sponsor.

     25. Whilst the Judge made no reference to the  principles  set  out  in
         Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, and SSHD v Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054, it
         does not follow that his decision is inconsistent with them. Within
         the terms of those decisions the Appellant  clearly  did  have  the
         "poor immigration history" described in Chikwamba.

     26. In Hayat [2011] UKUT 444, the Upper Tribunal said;

             "23.      The significance of Chikwamba, however, is  to  make
             plain that, where the only matter weighing on the respondent's
             side of the balance is the public policy of requiring a person
             to  apply  under  the  rules  from  abroad,  that   legitimate
             objective will usually be outweighed by factors resting on the
             appellant's side of the balance.

             24.  Viewed  correctly,  the  Chikwamba  principle  does  not,
             accordingly, automatically trump anything on the State's side,
             such as a poor immigration history. Conversely, the  principle
             cannot be simply "switched off" on mechanistic  grounds,  such
             as because children are not involved, or that  (as  here)  the
             appellant is not seeking  to  remain  with  a  spouse  who  is
             settled in the United Kingdom.

             25. Like the absence of children, that last factor may be  one
             which diminishes the force of the principle;  but  whether  it
             will do so depends  upon  an  assessment  of  the  facts.  For
             example, if the position disclosed by the  evidence  had  been
             that the appellant's wife was due to finish her studies only a
             few weeks after the date of the hearing, and was intending  to
             return to her country of origin, and  the  evidence  was  such
             that she did not need the appellant to  be  present  with  her
             while she finished her studies and prepared to leave, then the
             Chikwamba principle would have  had  nothing  to  add  to  the
             appellant's case.  The  actual  facts  of  the  present  case,
             however, were very different. As we  have  already  seen,  the
             appellant's wife had the best part of a year to go before  the
             end of her first tranche of the ACCA course. She has now  been
             given leave to remain until 2014 in  order  to  complete  that
             course.  There  is  no  suggestion  that  her  practical   and
             emotional need for her husband to be with her  has  diminished
             in any respect.

             26. The fact that the presence in the United  Kingdom  of  the
             appellant's wife depends upon her status here  as  a  student,
             and only on that, has to be acknowledged  in  undertaking  the
             balancing exercise. However, as we have indicated,  that  fact
             alone does not negate the Chikwamba principle. She is entitled
             to remain and study here  until  2014.  In  practice,  if  the
             appellant were to be removed, it is  highly  likely  that  she
             would be without his help and support for a  very  substantial
             proportion of that time. The evidence is that  she  needs  the
             appellant's help and support. She has committed no  breach  of
             the Immigration Rules. Nor  has  the  appellant.  There  is  a
             likelihood that, if the appellant were removed, his wife  will
             find she is unable to continue her studies, thus negating  the
             rationale of requiring him to go back to Pakistan to  make  an
             entry clearance application.

             27. In short, on a proper analysis of the facts, the principle
             in Chikwamba points plainly to the factors in  favour  of  the
             appellant outweighing the  single  factor  relied  on  by  the
             respondent."

     27. As  explained  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Hayat,  the  Chikwamba
         principle does not therefore mean that no individual should ever be
         required to return  to  their  country  of  origin  to  seek  entry
         clearance in the usual way. On the contrary if  there  are  factors
         that  weigh  in  the  Respondent's  favour   when   balancing   the
         proportionality of removal, other than simply the public policy  of
         requiring entry clearance  to  be  sought  from  abroad,  then  the
         Chikwamba principle does not automatically mean that they carry  no
         weight.

     28. The Court of Appeal in Hayat [2012] EWCA  Civ  1054  approved  that
         approach. (I do not  consider  that  Zhang  [2013]  EWHC  891  adds
         anything to the analysis of the relevant principle by the Court  of
         Appeal.)  Nor does the Court of Appeal  approach  in  MF  (Nigeria)
         [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 alter the guidance given in Hayat,  indeed  in
         my judgement it reaffirms that guidance.

     29. On the facts of this case the significant fact in the  Respondent's
         favour are the findings as to when this  relationship  was  formed,
         and the circumstances in  which  it  was  formed.  Looking  at  the
         evidence in the round the Judge was perfectly entitled to  conclude
         that the removal decision was proportionate, and thus  dismiss  the
         Article 8 appeal. The arguments available to the Appellant did  not
         rely upon the core concepts of moral and physical integrity. In  my
         judgement it was well open  to  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  the
         evidence  relied  upon  did  not  establish  that  there  were  any
         compelling compassionate circumstances that meant the  decision  to
         remove the Appellant to the Ivory Coast, lead to  an  unjustifiably
         harsh outcome. He gave adequate reasons for that conclusion, and he
         was not required to itemise each and every element of the  evidence
         that had been placed before him  by  the  Appellant  in  doing  so.
         Moreover, despite the remarks made in the course of  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal, it is clear from the  decision  that  he  did
         have regard to the provisions of s117A-D of the 2002 Act.   He  did
         not make express reference to  the  guidance  to  be  found  in  AM
         (s117B) Malawi p2015]  UKUT  260,  but  I  am  satisfied  that  his
         decision is consistent with it, and Mr Selway did not argue to  the
         contrary. To the extent that the  decision  fails  to  address  the
         provisions of s117A-D in turn, and in detail, that failure does not
         amount to a material error of  law,  because  Mr  Selway  does  not
         suggest that any material provision has been overlooked.  Nor  does
         he argue that the provisions of s117A-D afford  the  Appellant  any
         material assistance. Moreover the Judge specifically addresses  the
         question of whether there were "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  the
         pursuit of the Appellant's relationship with Mrs  G  in  the  Ivory
         Coast. His conclusion that there were none was open to him  on  the
         evidence, and was consistent with the approach taken by  the  Court
         of Appeal to that test in Agyarko.

    DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    22 December 2014 did not involve the making of an error of law  in  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision  to  be  set
    aside and remade. The decision to dismiss  the  appeal  is  accordingly
    confirmed.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    The Appellant did not seek anonymity before the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
    and no request for anonymity is made to me.  There  appears  to  be  no
    proper basis for the Upper Tribunal to make such a direction of its own
    motion.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated  5 October 2015
