
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/07575/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th April 2015                             |On 28th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              mr Rashid Zegrab
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B E Jones of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria  born  on  9th  April  1976.   He
    appealed against the decisions of the Respondent dated  10th  September
    2014 in which she had refused to grant him asylum under  paragraph  336
    of the Immigration Rules and decided to remove  him  to  Algeria.   The
    Appellant argued that he was at risk of ill-treatment contrary to  both
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights and the Refugee or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    of 2006.  At first instance his appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds and under Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights but was allowed by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    under Article 8 (right to respect for private and  family  life).   The
    Respondent appealed against that part of the decision and there was  no
    cross-appeal against the  dismissal  of  the  asylum  claim.   For  the
    reasons which I have set out in some detail below I have set aside  the
    decision of the  First-tier  to  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8 and have remade the decision on the appeal in this case.  For
    the sake of convenience therefore I continue to refer to the parties as
    they were known at  first  instance  notwithstanding  that  the  appeal
    initially comes before me as the Respondent's appeal.

The Proceedings at First Instance

2.   The Appellant's asylum case was that he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution from Islamic extremists in Algeria.  He ran a snooker table
    on the roadside and he was singled out by a  group  who  harassed  him.
    The group were not happy with his use  of  the  snooker  table  at  the
    roadside because it was said to distract people  from  their  religion.
    Graffiti had been written about the Appellant on walls and he had  been
    sworn at.  His snooker table had been damaged  with  a  blade  and  the
    hostile group had threatened  to  set  fire  to  it.   This  particular
    extremist group had killed a police officer because the  policeman  had
    watched people playing snooker at the table.

3.   The Appellant conceded that his case did not attract the protection  of
    the Refugee Convention (on the basis of the matters put before  him  it
    would appear that his fear was of non-state actors).   He  did  however
    claim  to  qualify  for  humanitarian   protection   because   of   the
    indiscriminate violence in Algeria.  The Respondent did not accept  the
    Appellant's credibility and refused the claim.   In  his  determination
    the Judge found there were no grounds for believing that the  Appellant
    would face any threat on  return.   The  Appellant's  account  was  not
    credible.  Once the table had been destroyed the Appellant  would  have
    been of no further interest to any extremist group.  Given  the  length
    of time which had passed since the claimed incident (in 1997) any  such
    group would no longer have an interest in the Appellant.  If the  group
    had killed a policeman as the Appellant claimed the police  would  most
    certainly be interested in such a group. The Appellant  merely  thought
    it would be difficult for him to return to Algeria as he had been  away
    for so long and he had no home or work there.   His  mother,  aunt  and
    uncle were  still  living  in  Algeria.   The  Appellant's  father  had
    remarried  and  shared  his  time  between  Algeria  and  France.   The
    Appellant had a  half  brother  and  sister  living  in  Algeria.   The
    Appellant had not shown substantial grounds for believing he would face
    a real risk of serious harm in Algeria.

4.    The  Judge  considered  whether  under  the  Respondent's  enforcement
    instructions guidance regarding legacy cases some form of leave  should
    have been granted by the Respondent to the  Appellant.   The  Appellant
    had entered the United Kingdom on 26th October  2006  and  had  claimed
    asylum on 30th October 2006.  An asylum interview had been arranged for
    23rd April  2007  but  the  Appellant  had  not  attended  it  and  the
    Respondent had therefore decided the Appellant's asylum  claim  in  his
    absence refusing it.  On 17th November 2010 the Appellant wrote to  the
    Respondent asking for an update on his case sending further submissions
    which were ultimately rejected by the Respondent on 14th July 2011.  In
    June 2013 the Appellant attended an appointment with the Respondent  to
    make further submissions and on 15th November 2013 he was  invited  to
    attend an asylum interview which he did attend.  On 10th September 2014
    the Respondent refused the application.

5.   The Respondent referred the Appellant to the  Upper  Tribunal  decision
    in AZ [2013] UKUT 00270 which held that there was no obligation  either
    on the Respondent to delay consideration of an asylum  claim  or  on  a
    Tribunal to adjourn an asylum appeal where the issue  had  been  raised
    that the case should be considered as a legacy case.  Judge Blake found
    that the Appellant's case had not been severely mishandled between 2010
    and the eventual date of decision.  It had been subject to delay  as  a
    result of a backlog of cases but time had only run from 2010  when  the
    Appellant had  made  himself  known  to  the  Respondent  after  having
    wilfully absented himself.  The Appellant did not  enjoy  a  legitimate
    expectation that any  relevant  policies  would  be  exercised  in  his
    favour.  The cases were fact sensitive and even if the policy had  been
    applied there was no certainty  that  the  Appellant  would  have  been
    granted indefinite leave.  In fact the Judge found it was more probable
    the Appellant would not have been granted leave.

6.   That left only the issue of  Article  8  to  be  resolved.   The  Judge
    accepted that  the  Appellant's  claim  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  but  considered   that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances that needed to be taken into account in  the  Appellant's
    case.  He had been in the United Kingdom for some eight years  and  had
    sought to regularise his stay in the United Kingdom from 2010  onwards.
    He enjoyed a close  relationship  with  his  brother  and  had  behaved
    lawfully and not been a burden on the state.  He had  laid  deep  roots
    and ties during the passage of time which had not properly  been  taken
    into account by the Respondent.  If  the  Respondent  had  taken  these
    matters into account the result would  not  inevitably  have  been  the
    same, that is rejection of the Article 8 claim.  The Respondent  failed
    to properly  engage  in  a  fair  and  proper  balancing  exercise  and
    therefore her decision was not in accordance  with  the  law.   However
    rather than decide that because the decision of the Respondent was  not
    in  accordance  with  the  law  it  remained  outstanding  before   the
    Respondent to take a lawful decision, the Judge went on  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 outright.

The Onward Appeal

7.   The Respondent appealed against that decision arguing  that  the  Judge
    had failed to identify why: (i) the Appellant's relationship  with  his
    brother and (ii) that the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom  for
    eight years were exceptional factors such that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed outside the Rules.  The Judge had also failed to apply  Section
    117A to D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Section
    117A(2) mandated the First-tier Tribunal to have regard to the  factors
    set out in Section 117B when deciding a case under Article 8, this  the
    Judge had failed to do.  In particular the Judge had failed to consider
    that little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status  was  precarious.
    Had the Judge carried out the proportionality assessment correctly  the
    result might very well have been different.

8.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on 3rd  February  2015.   In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote:

         "It  is  arguable  that  the  Tribunal  fell  into  error  in   the
         consideration of the Article 8 appeal because no reference is made
         to Section 117A or 117B of the 2002 Act and arguably paragraphs 103
         to 123 of the decision  cannot  properly  be  read  as  making  any
         implicit reference thereto.  Thus the Article 8 appeal was arguably
         not considered in its proper context.

         The Appellant was always present in the  UK  unlawfully.   Arguably
         very little weight should properly have been given to the  "private
         life" he claimed to have  established  during  the  period  he  was
         evading the Respondent.  In any event little weight could have been
         given to anything established in the period since 2010 when he  had
         resurfaced and sought to renew  his  asylum  claim.   Arguably  his
         friendship with his brother (whose immigration status in the UK the
         Judge fails to comment upon) - a  friendship  that  the  Judge  had
         earlier characterised as normal relationship between adult siblings
         (paragraph 58) - was not a proper basis for allowing the Article  8
         appeal.  Absent that reason the Judge arguably gave no reasons  for
         doing so.

         Indeed arguably the decision  is  written  as  if  the  Judge  were
         conducting a review  of  the  legitimacy  of  the  decision  making
         process  rather  than  conducting  the  proportionality   balancing
         exercise demanded of him."

9.   Following the  grant  of  permission  directions  were  issued  by  the
    Principal Resident Judge to the effect that the parties should  prepare
    for the forthcoming hearing on  the  basis  that  it  was  confined  to
    whether the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside for legal error, and if so whether the  decision  in  the  appeal
    could  be  remade  without  having  to  hear  oral  evidence  in  which
    eventuality the Tribunal was likely to proceed immediately with a  view
    to remaking the decision."

The Error of Law Stage

10.  At the outset Counsel for  the  Appellant  sought  to  raise  an  issue
    regarding the Appellant's claim that he should have been  granted  some
    form of leave under the legacy arrangements.  I pointed out that  there
    had been no formal application to cross-appeal the Judge's dismissal of
    the legacy argument or any form of Rule 24 response  to  the  grant  of
    permission in this case. I was not therefore  prepared  to  permit  the
    Appellant at this late stage to raise any fresh issues arising  out  of
    the determination.  In fact the Judge had considered the  legacy  issue
    at some length and had decided that it did not apply to the  Appellant.
    I have seen nothing as to why that was wrong. Indeed the Judge at first
    instance could have referred to SH Iran [2014] EWCA Civ 1469.  In  that
    case the Court of Appeal said (at paragraph 36)  that  "mere  delay  in
    dealing with a case falling  within  the  legacy  programme  cannot  of
    itself give rise to any expectation or entitlement that  relief  should
    be granted as though the case had been dealt with what is  asserted  to
    be reasonable expedition". The  matter  therefore  proceeded  with  the
    error of law stage.

11.  In oral submissions the  Presenting  Officer  indicated  that  had  the
    matter come before the First-tier Tribunal as a judicial review  things
    might have been  different  but  that  was  not  the  case,  it  was  a
    straightforward statutory appeal.  There were multiple errors of law in
    the  determination.   The  first  was  that  there  was  no  structured
    consideration of Article 8.  There had been no finding of  family  life
    between the Appellant and his brother.  At paragraph 58 the  Judge  had
    stated that the Appellant had a "normal relationship" with his  brother
    as was  to  be  expected  between  adult  siblings.   That  finding  at
    paragraph 58 sat ill  with  the  finding  at  paragraph  118  that  the
    Appellant enjoyed a "close relationship" with his brother.

12.  In reply it was argued that the Respondent was merely disagreeing  with
    the result of the decision.  Whilst the Judge could have  made  matters
    more explicit the complaints were one of form not substance.  The Judge
    was right to cite Ganesabalan that there was no threshold test that had
    to be crossed before Article 8 had to be considered.  The Judge did not
    need to mention specifically the case of Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.   The
    Judge was aware of the unlawfulness of the Appellant's overstaying  and
    did not need to mention 117B in terms.  The Judge had not found in  the
    Appellant's favour solely on the basis of  his  relationship  with  his
    brother but also the fact that the Appellant had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for eight years.

13.  Between 2010 and 2014 the Appellant had been asking for a  decision  to
    be made on his case and yet the Respondent had done nothing about that.
     The Respondent's delay led to this case being similar to EB Kosovo and
    the Appellant's private life would have deepened and strengthened.   In
    finding that the Respondent had failed to properly engage in a fair and
    proper balancing exercise the Judge was merely saying that the decision
    was disproportionate. It was disproportionate to remove  the  Appellant
    after a period of nine years.

14.  At the conclusion of  the  submissions  I  indicated  that  there  were
    material errors of law in the determination. One  particular  point  of
    importance was that there had been no consideration by the Judge of the
    statutory provisions contained at Section 117A to D of the 2002 Act and
    his findings on Article 8 such as the Appellant's relationship with his
    brother had been unexplained.  As the Upper Tribunal explained in  Dube
    [2015] UKUT 00090:  "judges  are  required  statutorily  to  take  into
    account a number of enumerated considerations. Sections  117A-117D  are
    not, therefore, an a la carte menu of considerations that it is at  the
    discretion of the judge to apply or not apply.  Judges  are  duty-bound
    to "have regard" to the specified considerations.  In  accordance  with
    the directions given by the Upper Tribunal (see paragraph  9  above)  I
    enquired whether it was intended to call  any  further  oral  evidence.
    Counsel indicated that there was no  further  oral  evidence  that  the
    Appellant wished to give. I indicated that I would  proceed  to  rehear
    the appeal and the matter therefore proceeded by way of submissions.

The Substantive Hearing

15.  For the Respondent it was argued that the Appellant  was  only  putting
    forward two matters, his relationship with his brother  and  length  of
    residence.   It  had  to   be   taken   into   account   in   assessing
    proportionality that the Appellant had only put  his  head  "above  the
    parapet" from 2010 onwards.  The Appellant had no family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom and the length of residence and the issue of delay would
    not unduly tilt the scales in the Appellant's favour.

16.  For the Appellant Counsel relied on  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that there was a close relationship between the Appellant  and
    family members.  There had been no contrary findings made  against  the
    Appellant that he genuinely did not know  his  asylum  claim  had  been
    refused in 2007.  This was  not  a  case  of  non-compliance.   At  its
    highest it absolved the Appellant of delay.   There  were  elements  of
    emotional dependency between the Appellant and his brother.  They lived
    in the same household.  At page 27 of the Appellant's bundle  paragraph
    29 of the Appellant's statement of 18th  November  2014  the  Appellant
    said he considered the UK to be his home. He had  his  brother,  cousin
    and friends living in the UK and  had  a  good  relationship  with  his
    friends in the UK who offered him some financial  support.   There  had
    been delay on the part of the Respondent and the legacy  matter  needed
    to be considered in the context of Article 8.

Findings

17.  The  Appellant  seeks  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    provisions of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant has never had  any  leave
    to remain in this country.  He made a claim for asylum in  2006  a  few
    days after entering the country illegally.  The Respondent arranged  an
    interview for him but he did not attend.  His argument was that he  did
    not know the interview had been arranged as he did not receive a letter
    inviting him to attend.  At paragraph 90  of  the  determination  Judge
    Blake found that the Appellant had failed to attend  the  interview  in
    2007 without good reason.  Thereafter the  Appellant  appears  to  have
    "gone to ground" only resurfacing in 2010 to  ask  what  was  happening
    about his case.

18.  There was no obligation on the  Respondent  to  treat  the  Appellant's
    case as a legacy case.  What the Respondent did  do  was  to  give  the
    Appellant a further opportunity  to  be  interviewed  about  an  asylum
    appeal which resulted in the refusal of the claim for  asylum  and  the
    consequent proceedings.  The Appellant sought to put up something of  a
    smokescreen in this case claiming that the  Respondent  had  mishandled
    his case or that there had been delay but the Appellant had disappeared
    for three years between 2007 and 2010.   His  case  never  engaged  the
    Refugee Convention and, as the Judge found, it did not entitle  him  to
    humanitarian protection either.  The position was  that  the  Appellant
    was remaining unlawfully in this country despite having no good  reason
    why he should be here.   As  Judge  Blake  correctly  pointed  out  the
    Appellant could have no legitimate expectation in  those  circumstances
    that his case would receive a favourable response from the  Respondent.
    All the Appellant had to argue in his favour  under  Article  8  to  be
    allowed to remain outside the Immigration Rules was that  he  had  been
    here for eight years and he had a brother.

19.  As I have indicated the Judge's findings on  the  relationship  between
    the Appellant and his brother were contradictory. However  even  taking
    the Appellant's case at its highest and referring  to  the  Appellant's
    own witness statement the Appellant was merely receiving some financial
    support from his brother because the Appellant was unable to  work  due
    to his unlawful status. He was also socialising with his friends.  This
    would not in my view amount to more than normal emotional ties  between
    two adult siblings even allowing for the concept that the brothers were
    close. Indeed in a normal  relationship  between  adult  siblings  they
    would be close without going beyond normal emotional ties without more.
    In this case there is  no  more.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  this
    relationship of brothers could constitute family life  even  given  the
    relatively low threshold which needs to be crossed before Article 8  is
    engaged in a family life case.  As Judge Blake indicated the  Appellant
    has a number of family members remaining in Algeria and if returned  to
    Algeria he could resume his family life with them.

20.  The Appellant principally puts his case under Article 8  private  life.
    It  is  difficult  to  see  that  there  are  any   compelling   and/or
    compassionate circumstances in this case such that this  appeal  should
    be allowed outside the Immigration  Rules.   Firstly,  the  Appellant's
    private life that  he  has  established  in  this  country  during  his
    unlawful residence is limited.  It has consisted  of  him  evading  the
    attention of the authorities for several  years  and  then  pursuing  a
    hopeless asylum appeal.  During that time he has not worked because  he
    has  not  been  able  to.   The  Appellant's  presence  has  been  here
    unlawfully throughout and in those circumstances little weight is to be
    given to it in the proportionality exercise by reason of Section  117B.



21.  Applying the Razgar one can say that the Appellant's private life  will
    be interfered with by requiring him  to  return  to  Algeria  but  that
    interference will be pursuant to  the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
    control since the Appellant entered the country illegally  and  made  a
    hopeless claim for asylum.  The question is whether the interference is
    proportionate.  I find  that  it  is  since  there  is  little  on  the
    Appellant's side of the equation given the unlawful nature of his  stay
    in this country but considerable weight to be given on the  other  side
    of the equation to the legitimate aim pursued.   The  Appellant  cannot
    bring himself within the Immigration Rules, he has not resided here for
    at least twenty years.  He has not severed  all  social,  cultural  and
    family ties to Algeria.  There is no reason why  he  cannot  return  to
    Algeria and re-establish his life there, a country where he  has  lived
    the majority of his life before coming to this  country.   I  therefore
    dismiss the appeal under Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention.   I
    make no anonymity direction as there is no public policy reason for  so
    doing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.

I have remade the decision by dismissing the appeal under Article 8  of  the
European Convention on Human Rights.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.



Signed this 27th day of April 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and there can be no fee award.



Signed this 27th day of April 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
