
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07897/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|Birmingham                          |                                        |
|On 26th April 2017                  |On 23rd May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                              Ahmed Husni Bilal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Janjua, Counsel, instructed by Morden
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant, whose citizenship was in dispute, is a male said  to  be
    born on 1st January 1996.  He entered the UK illegally on  26th  March
    2014 when he applied for asylum.  That application was refused for  the
    reasons given in a Notice of  Decision  dated  14th  April  2015.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Chapman (the Judge) sitting at  Birmingham  on  6th  September
    2016.  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in  his
    Decision dated 12th September 2016.   The  Appellant  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision and such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he found  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant lacking in credibility and therefore did not believe that the
    Appellant was a citizen of Syria who was born in April 1988.  The Judge
    took  into  account  the  conclusion  of   a   Linguistic   Origin   ID
    Identification Report (LOIDR) which was that the Appellant  was  not  a
    citizen of Damascus in Syria.  The Judge also took into account an  Age
    Assessment Report which concluded that the Appellant was not  as  young
    as claimed.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Janjua argued that the Judge had erred  in
    law in coming to his conclusion about credibility.  He referred to  the
    Grounds of Application  and  argued  that  the  Judge's  assessment  of
    credibility was contaminated by his acceptance of  the  Age  Assessment
    Report even though it was not Merton compliant.  Further, the Judge had
    relied upon the  LOIDR  even  though  it  was  inconclusive  about  the
    Appellant's nationality.  The Judge  had  failed  to  comply  with  the
    decision in SSHD (Appellant)  v  MN  and  KY  (Respondents)  (Scotland)
    [2014] UKSC 30.  Finally, Mr Janjua said that the Judge had  not  taken
    into account all of the other evidence and in  particular  the  witness
    statements.

 5. In response, Mr Mills submitted that there was no such  error  of  law.
    As the Judge stated at paragraph 53 of the Decision, he had taken  into
    account all of the evidence in the round and had treated the  LOIDR  as
    only one factor.  Although not conclusive, the LOIDR had given a strong
    indication that the Appellant was not a Syrian from  Damascus  and  the
    Judge had treated it accordingly.  There had been  no  attempt  by  the
    Appellant to rebut the conclusion of the Report by way of other  expert
    evidence.  It was the case that  the  Age  Assessment  Report  was  not
    Merton  compliant,  but  two  social  workers  had  believed  that  the
    Appellant was over the age of 18 years  and  therefore  the  Judge  was
    entitled to attach weight to it.  In any event, the Judge had  given  a
    number of other factors for  finding  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant
    lacking in credibility.  He had  not  overlooked  any  of  the  witness
    evidence.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  In  my  view,  the  Judge  carried  out  a  thorough
    analysis of all the evidence  before  him  and  came  to  a  conclusion
    concerning credibility which was open to him  on  that  evidence.   The
    Judge  identified  a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
    evidence and found that the  Appellant  had  been  evasive  during  his
    interview.  The Judge carefully analysed the contents of the  LOIDR  in
    paragraphs 47 to 52 inclusive of the  Decision  and  explained  why  he
    attached weight to the conclusion of that Report that the Appellant did
    not originate from Damascus in Syria.  As the Judge stated at paragraph
    46 of the Decision, he took into account the guidance given in  MN  and
    KY.  Likewise, the Judge explained at paragraph 42 of the Decision  why
    he found that the Appellant had tried to manipulate his age in order to
    improve his chances of obtaining asylum, and it was open to  the  Judge
    to find that  this  factor  significantly  undermined  the  Appellant's
    credibility.

 7. To summarise, I find that the  Judge  came  to  a  decision  about  the
    Appellant's credibility which was open to him on the evidence and which
    he fully explained.

 8. Ground 2 of the Grounds of Application relate to the Judge's finding as
    to risk on return to Syria.  As there is no error of law in the Judge's
    decision that the Appellant is not a citizen of Syria, this  ground  is
    irrelevant.

Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside that decision.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  I was not
    asked to do so and indeed I find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Dated    22nd May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
