
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07779/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 29th August 2017                   |On 15 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Benfield, Counsel, instructed by York
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a Decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal, Judge Daldry, who allowed an asylum appeal in a Decision
    and Reasons promulgated on 27th March 2017.  The Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was a citizen of Sri Lanka and  a  Tamil.   He  had
    claimed asylum on the basis that he had been previously  supportive  of
    and working for the LTTE, that he had returned to Sri Lanka in 2011  in
    July and whilst there was abducted, detained,  severely  tortured  such
    that when he came back to the United  Kingdom  he  was  suffering  from
    serious mental health difficulties and attempted suicide and spent some
    time in hospital receiving psychiatric treatment.

 2. The judge heard and read  a  considerable  amount  of  evidence  before
    reaching her Decision to allow the appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds assert that the judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the Appellant's sur place activities in  the  UK  together
    with his previous experiences in Sri Lanka would place him  within  the
    risk categories of the country guidance case GJ and Others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

 3. The grounds I find to be completely without merit.  The  judge  had  an
    enormous amount of material in front of her in this  case.   She  heard
    the  evidence  of  the  Appellant.   She  had  various  expert  reports
    including evidence of  scars.   She  had  a  consultant  psychiatrist's
    report indicating how severely ill the Appellant was and in  a  lengthy
    and detailed Decision and Reasons accepted the evidence that  the  fact
    that he had returned two years after the cessation of  hostilities  and
    was detained then and severely tortured was a clear indication that  he
    remains at risk.  She further accepted evidence of sur place activities
    and the evidence that those are known to the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.
    She was therefore entitled to allow the appeal for the reasons she gave
    and Ms Ahmad in front of me did not  press  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal o the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

As the Appellant has been successful there is no need to make  an  anonymity
direction.
No anonymity direction is made.

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.







Signed                              Date 14th September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
