
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07176/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th December 2015                |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     YK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A de Ruano
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Pears of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 26th August 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Afghan citizen and is 19  years  of  age.   His
    appeal was considered by the FtT on 13th August 2015.  There had been a
    previous appeal hearing on 14th November 2014  which  had  resulted  in
    Judge Clapham of the FtT dismissing the appeal on asylum  grounds,  but
    allowing the appeal on human rights grounds in relation to Article 8 of
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 3. The Secretary of State was given permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and on 20th March 2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker  set
    aside the decision of the FtT and remitted the appeal back to the  FtT,
    to be considered by a judge other than Judge Clapham.  Directions  were
    given that the issues  to  be  considered  related  to  Article  8,  in
    relation to the Appellant's claimed family life  in  the  UK,  and  the
    issue of internal relocation within Afghanistan, and whether or not  it
    would be unduly harsh for the Appellant  to  relocate  to  Kabul.   The
    directions stated that the  credibility  findings  in  respect  of  the
    asylum claim should be preserved.

 4. In a decision promulgated on 26th August 2015 the FtT  found  that  the
    Appellant had a reasonable option of relocation to Kabul and that  this
    would not be unduly harsh.

 5.  The  FtT  considered  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  in  relation  to   the
    Appellant's private life, and concluded that  he  had  not  shown  that
    there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Afghanistan.

 6. The FtT found that the Appellant had not established family  life  that
    would engage Article 8 with his adult sister and her family.  There was
    no dependence beyond normal emotional ties.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grant-Hutchison  of  the  FtT
    and I set out below  the  grant  of  permission  which  summarises  the
    application, and confirms that permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on
    limited grounds:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission in time  to  appeal  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pears)  promulgated
             on 26th August  2015  whereby  it  dismissed  the  Appellant's
             appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse the
             Appellant asylum.

         2.   It is submitted that as there have been  developments  in  the
             case of R (on the application of) Naziri and Others v SSHD (JR
             - scope - evidence) IJR [2015] UKUT 437 (IAC) since  the  date
             of hearing and before the decision was  promulgated  to  grant
             the Appellants interim relief in the form of a stay on removal
             of all 30 Appellants and  in  view  of  the  general  security
             situation in Afghanistan there  is  at  present  a  reasonable
             degree of generic risk on return and that  the  risk  of  harm
             under Qualification  Directive  15(c)  for  returnees  remains
             unresolved following the grant of permission to appeal.

         3.   The grounds disclose no arguable error of law because (a)  the
             judge can only consider matters as at the date of hearing; (b)
             there was no request made to reconvene the hearing before  the
             judge promulgated his Decision and Reasons and (c) a  stay  on
             removal for others does not mean to say these Appellants  will
             be successful.  Each case has to be dealt with on its merits.

         4.   However it is arguable that the judge has misdirected  himself
             (a) by not making adequate findings in relation to the  expert
             report and (b) by not making adequate findings in relation  to
             why there would not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
             Appellant's  integration  in   Afghanistan   under   paragraph
             276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules  when  he  has  no  family
             support in Afghanistan  as  his  family  live  in  the  UK  or
             Pakistan and taking into account he is only 19."

 8. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 9. Mr de Ruano relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal, and paragraph 4 of the grant  of  permission.
    I was asked to conclude that the FtT had made  inadequate  findings  in
    relation to the expert  report  and  the  FtT  should  have  made  more
    specific  findings  on  that  report  and  the  FtT  had   not   stated
    specifically which conclusions of the expert report were not  accepted,
    and no reasons were given for not accepting those conclusions.

10. In relation to paragraph 276ADE(vi) Mr de Ruano  pointed  out  that  in
    paragraph 46 the FtT had simply stated that the Appellant had not shown
    there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Afghanistan,  and  there  was  inadequate  reasoning  given  for   that
    conclusion.

The Respondent's Submissions

11. Mrs Sreeraman stated that she was relying  upon  a  Rule  24  response.
    Neither the Tribunal nor Mr de Ruano had received this  response.   Mrs
    Sreeraman was  unable  to  provide  an  unmarked  copy,  and  therefore
    summarised the contents.  It was submitted that the FtT had  adequately
    analysed the expert report and had clearly engaged with the contents of
    the report, and I was referred in particular to  paragraph  34  of  the
    decision.

12. In that paragraph the FtT commented upon the contents  of  the  report,
    and reached a sustainable conclusion in paragraph 40, that  the  expert
    report was based on a  number  of  hypothetical  assumptions,  and  not
    accepted by the FtT.

13. In relation to paragraph 276ADE, the FtT had  taken  into  account  the
    country guidance case  AK  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163,  which
    indicated that in general, return to  Kabul  would  not  be  unsafe  or
    unreasonable.  The FtT had been entitled to  take  this  into  account,
    together with other background evidence referred to  at  paragraphs  32
    and 33, and it had been open to the FtT to conclude that there would be
    no very significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  integration  into
    Kabul.

The Appellant's Response

14. Mr de Ruano pointed out that AK was decided as long ago  as  2012,  and
    submitted that the situation in Afghanistan had  changed  significantly
    since  publication  of  that  case.   The  expert  report  specifically
    considered difficulties that the Appellant would face in Kabul.  I  was
    asked to note that the Appellant had lived in Pakistan for most of  his
    life.  With reference to paragraph  34,  Mr  de  Ruano  submitted  that
    comments by the FtT were not in fact findings, and  the  findings  were
    contained in paragraph 40.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I find no material error disclosed in the consideration by the  FtT  of
    the expert report.  The FtT recognised in paragraph 28 that the  expert
    report was relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  in  relation  to  internal
    relocation to Kabul.  I find that the FtT decision indicates  that  the
    FtT clearly engaged with the contents of that report.

17. The FtT also considered other  background  material  to  which  it  was
    referred, and this is evident from reading paragraphs 32 and  33.   The
    FtT also considered the relevant country guidance case, that  being  AK
    Afghanistan and the headnote to that decision is set out  in  paragraph
    9.  The FtT was aware of the decision made by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Naziri which considered a report and other evidence which postdated AK.
     The FtT was entitled to note that the Upper Tribunal in Naziri drew no
    basis for departing from the country guidance decision in AK.

18. In paragraph 34 the FtT summarises the expert report and comments  upon
    it.  The comments take the form of the FtT wondering whether the expert
    has reached a correct conclusion that it is the  official  position  of
    the Afghan government that the country is not safe for returning failed
    asylum seekers, and questioning whether the appropriate test  has  been
    applied by the expert.  It is correct  that  this  paragraph  does  not
    contain specific and clear findings.

19. However the FtT decision must be read  as  a  whole,  and  taking  into
    account paragraphs 40-42, I find that it is  clear  that  the  FtT  has
    rejected the conclusions by the expert, that the Appellant would be  at
    risk if returned to Kabul.  In  those  paragraphs  the  FtT  finds  the
    expert report is based upon a number of hypothetical  assumptions,  and
    the FtT does not accept "some of his conclusions and views."

20. The FtT does not specify exactly which conclusions and  views  are  not
    accepted, but in my view it is clear from reading  the  decision,  that
    the FtT does  not  accept  the  expert  report's  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk, or that it would be unduly harsh for him to
    relocate to Kabul.

21. The FtT has a duty to make findings and give adequate reasons for those
    findings.  This  may  be  summarised  in  the  headnote  to  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) which is set out below:

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they would have lost."

22. I conclude that the FtT has fulfilled the duties set out above.  It  is
    clear that the FtT does  not  accept  the  conclusions  in  the  expert
    report.   The  FtT  found  the  report  was  based  upon  a  number  of
    hypothetical assumptions.  The FtT noted that  the  Appellant  did  not
    fall within the risk categories  such  as  individuals  from  dangerous
    provinces, or those with serious illnesses, and that he was not a child
    or a lone female.  The FtT described the Appellant as a fit  young  man
    who speaks English and who has some expertise in his chosen field.

23. Having considered the decision in  the  round,  I  find  that  adequate
    findings were made in relation to the expert  report,  and  sustainable
    reasons given for those findings.

24. I then turn to consider paragraph 276ADE(vi) and it is correct that the
    conclusion in paragraph 46 of the FtT decision, that the Appellant  has
    not  shown  very  significant  obstacles  to   his   integration   into
    Afghanistan is brief, if read in isolation.

25. However when the decision is read as a whole, I conclude that  adequate
    findings have been made and adequate reasons  given  for  reaching  the
    conclusion that there would be no very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's integration into Kabul.

26. At paragraph 42 of the decision the FtT has considered Januzi which  is
    a leading authority on the option  of  internal  relocation.   The  FtT
    concludes in that paragraph that  relocation  to  Kabul  would  not  be
    unduly harsh.  In paragraph 30 the FtT  set  out  in  some  detail  the
    Appellant's oral evidence, and noted his  evidence  that  he  had  only
    previously lived in Kabul for about two weeks in 2011 when  he  was  14
    years of age.

27. In assessing whether there would be very significant obstacles, the FtT
    has taken into account the Appellant's relatively young  age,  and  his
    evidence that he does not have family in Kabul.  The FtT has also taken
    into account that he is a fit young man with  no  medical  difficulties
    who can speak English.  The FtT has considered the background  material
    to which it was referred, and there is reference to this in  paragraphs
    32 and 33 of the decision.  This background  material  is  more  recent
    than AK.

28. The FtT was entitled, because AK is a  country  guidance  decision,  to
    take account of the finding in that decision which is summarised in the
    headnote on country conditions in Afghanistan.  The FtT sets  out  sub-
    paragraph (iv) in which  guidance  is  given  that  if  the  Respondent
    asserts  that  Kabul  City  would  be  a  viable  internal   relocation
    alternative, it is necessary to take into account,  both  in  assessing
    safety and reasonableness, not only the level of violence in the  city,
    but also the difficulties experienced by that city's poor and also  the
    many internally displaced persons living there.  The guidance  confirms
    that these considerations will not in  general  make  return  to  Kabul
    unsafe or unreasonable.

29. The FtT considered  the  individual  circumstances  of  the  Appellant,
    taking into account the preserved findings from the  earlier  decision,
    which are summarised in paragraph 24.  The FtT, as  I  have  previously
    stated, gave adequate reasons for not accepting the conclusions of  the
    expert report, and it is clear that the FtT did engage with  background
    evidence which postdated AK, and also took into account the guidance in
    AK, and concluded that the Appellant  had  not  proved  that  he  would
    encounter very significant difficulties on his integration into Kabul.

30. In my view the FtT took into account all the relevant  evidence  placed
    before it, and did not omit to consider any relevant evidence, and  did
    not take into account and attach weight to irrelevant factors.

31. Findings made in relation to paragraph 276ADE when the decision is read
    as a whole, are clear, and are supported by adequate reasoning.

32.  The  grounds  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant   disclose   a
    disagreement with the findings  made  by  the  FtT,  but  they  do  not
    disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction,  and  I  continue  that
order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.


Signed   Date 17th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or is payable.  The appeal is dismissed.  There  is  no  fee
award.


Signed   Date 17th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
