
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07725/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Upper Tribunal Manchester        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7th November 2017                      |On 14th November 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     SI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Wood, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  27th
    January 2017 dismissed her claim for protection.

The background:

 3.  The  Appellant's  immigration  history   is   set   out   within   the
    determination. The appellant entered the United Kingdom with her spouse
    and children on the 24th March 2013 having applied for a visit visa  on
    the 5th December 2015 valid from the 27th December 2015 until 27th June
    2013. On the 11th April 2013 the  appellant  claimed  asylum  with  her
    family members as her dependants.

 4. The Appellant was interviewed and her claim was refused in  a  decision
    letter of the 11th September 2014.

 5. The basis of her claim  related  to  problems  which  had  occurred  in
    Pakistan in or about January 2013 where a man came to her place of work
    and had made threats  against  her  and  her  family  and  he  proposed
    marriage to her notwithstanding that she was already married  and  also
    that she convert to his faith. In March 2013 it was claimed  that  this
    man and others came to the family house and began shooting. The  attack
    was reported to the police whilst they made  a  report,  they  did  not
    follow it up. It was asserted  that  this  was  because  of  the  man's
    position and his membership of the Sipah-i-Sabah. She also claimed that
    she had been accused of blasphemy as a result of comments that she  had
    made to this man about his religion during phone calls made to her.

 6. The Appellant exercised her right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the  21st  January  2015.
    The judge had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of the  Appellant
    and that of her husband and for that evidence  to  be  the  subject  of
    cross-examination.   The  judge  in   the   determination   found   the
    Appellant's account to be implausible and dismissed the appeal.

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  provide  sufficient  or
    sustainable  reasons  for  the  adverse  credible  findings  that  were
    contained within the determination and in particular that the judge had
    failed to make findings on the evidence  of  the  Appellant's  husband.
    Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the 28th May 2015.

 8. The hearing came before  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  5  May  2016.  In  a
    determination promulgated on 16 May 2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith
    found errors of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In
    particular, the judge found that  there  was  a  failure  to  make  any
    finding on the Appellant's husband's evidence which on the face  of  it
    was capable of corroborating two parts of  the  Appellant's  case;  the
    man's pursuit of the Appellant and  her  rejection  of  him  which  she
    stated led to the allegations made against  and  the  attack  on  their
    house, which if accepted, may support her case as having been targeted.
    As recorded at  paragraph  15,  the  presenting  officer  accepted  the
    materiality of that error. At  paragraph  16  the  judge  recorded  for
    completeness that she was satisfied that there was a material error  of
    law in the treatment of the background  material.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge therefore set aside the decision and remitted the appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a second hearing.

 9. The appeal then came before the First-tier Tribunal on 13 January 2017.
    The judge again heard the evidence from  both  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband but reached the overall conclusions at paragraph  73  that  the
    Appellant had not demonstrated to the lower standard of proof  required
    that she had a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  Pakistan.  It  is
    plain from reading the determination as a whole  and  the  findings  of
    fact made that he did not accept that the Appellant or her husband  had
    given a consistent and credible account  as  to  the  circumstances  in
    Pakistan. In the alternative, at paragraph 70, he stated that  even  if
    the claim was "entirely credible" that this  was  a  case  whereby  the
    family could relocate to a further area within Pakistan.

10. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  on  three
    grounds and on 29 March 2017 permission was granted by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker for the following reasons;

    "it is arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  have
    regard to the Appellant's evidence, failed have proper  regard  to  the
    documentary evidence submitted on her behalf and failed to address  the
    evidence adequately or at all."

11. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on the  14th  August  2017  Mr
    Wood, who represented the Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal,  relied
    upon the grounds that were before the Tribunal. In  respect  of  ground
    one, he submitted that the judge misdirected himself in law in relation
    to his assessment of the documentary evidence. At  paragraph  [62]  the
    judge rejected the documentary evidence provided by the  Appellant  (in
    particular the FIR and threatening letters) by reaching the  conclusion
    that they had been "simply provided the purposes of this appeal and are
    not  genuine"  and  therefore  did  not  attach  any  weight  to  them.
    Furthermore, the judge failed to demonstrate that he is considered that
    documentary evidence in conjunction with the  Appellant's  account  and
    that the judge not engage with the evidence. He submitted that  it  was
    an error of law to approach the assessment of documentary  evidence  by
    considering whether the documents were genuine or not. This is  a  case
    in which the respondent  had  made  no  assertion  that  the  documents
    provided were forgeries or were "not  genuine".  He  further  submitted
    that in relation to the evidence from CLAAS, the judge fell into  error
    at paragraph [63] by discounting that  material  as  information  given
    solely by the Appellant when there had been reference at page 12 of the
    bundle as to an investigation having taken place and at page 17 of  the
    Appellant's bundle, and email which referred to the genuineness of this
    report.

12. Thus he submitted that the judge by concentrating on the genuineness of
    the documents rather than their reliability when seen in the context of
    the evidence as a whole was a misdirection in law.

13. There were also other documents that the judge had not  considered.  Mr
    Wood made reference to the newspaper reports at pages 25  and  26,  the
    evidence relating to the telephone call at pages 27 and  28  which  was
    relevant to the factual account given.

14. As to ground two, it was submitted that the judge erred in law  in  his
    assessment  of  the  evidence  and  in  particular  the  assessment  of
    plausibility of the account.  In  this  regard  he  submitted  that  at
    paragraphs 56 to 71, the judge  did  not  engage  with  the  background
    evidence  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  when  reaching  an
    assessment on the plausibility of the Appellant's  account.  He  relied
    upon the decision of HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 and  in  particular
    paragraphs 28 and 30.

15.  Thus  he  submitted  that  the  judge  failed   to   demonstrate   any
    consideration of the Appellant's account against the background country
    evidence. He referred the Tribunal to parts of the background  material
    which he stated should have been  considered  when  making  an  overall
    assessment.

16. As to ground three, he submitted that the judge purported  to  consider
    the Appellant's account at its highest. This would mean that the  judge
    accepted the entirety of her account  and  if  that  was  so  it  would
    include that there was a fatwa. In those circumstances  the  conclusion
    at [70] family could internally relocate was lacking in  reasoning  and
    also  was  inconsistent  with  the  country  guidance  in  AK  and   SK
    (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569.

17. Thus he submitted that the judge had  fell  into  error  and  that  the
    determination should be set aside.

18. Mr McVeety on behalf of the Respondent agreed that there was a material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  He  accepted
    that the submissions made by Mr Wood both in the  written  grounds  and
    his oral grounds relating to the assessment of the documentary evidence
    were correct. He submitted that it was not  an  issue  of  whether  the
    documents were genuine but whether the  documents  were  reliable  when
    seen in the context of the  claim  as  a  whole.  He  stated  that  the
    respondent had made no allegation that the documents were forged or not
    genuine but that the judge should have considered them in  the  context
    of the claim as a whole and assess their reliability.

19. He recognised that whilst some of the findings made by the  judge  were
    open to him, in the light of the error identified  in  ground  one,  it
    could not be said that the overall findings made were sustainable.  The
    judge  was  required  to  consider  all  the  evidence,  including  the
    documentary evidence in reaching an overall conclusion and findings  of
    fact.

20. He considered that in those circumstances that was a material error  of
    law which required the decision to be set aside.

21. In those circumstances, he  invited  the  Tribunal  to  set  aside  the
    decision and for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    so that all issues could be considered.

22. In the light of that concession made by Mr McVeety, that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    I reached the conclusion that the determination  could  not  stand  but
    should be set aside. I gave my conclusions on  the  error  of  law  for
    paragraphs 24 onwards and they are replicated below:

        "24. I consider that the submissions made by  Mr  Wood  as  set  out
        earlier in this determination are made out in  any  event,  even  if
        that  concession  was  not  made.  It  is  plain  from  reading  the
        determination that the judge approached the issue of the documentary
        evidence provided in support of her claim on the wrong footing. This
        is apparent from  paragraph  62  in  which  the  judge  reached  the
        conclusion that the documents referred to had been provided for  the
        purposes of the appeal and were not "genuine documents".  There  had
        been no assertion made that the documents were forged  or  were  not
        genuine and the issue was whether  those  documents  that  had  been
        provided in support of her claim were reliable documents upon  which
        the judge could place weight when seen in the context of  the  claim
        as a whole. By rejecting them as being "not genuine"  there  was  no
        assessment of the contents of those documents in the  light  of  the
        claim  made  and  this  was  an  error  (see  decision  in   Tanveer
        Ahmed[2002] UKIAT 00439). There were also other documents  that  had
        been provided which had not been the subject of any assessment.

    25. As to ground 2, there had been background country materials provided
        in order to support the Appellant's factual  account.  In  order  to
        make the credibility findings and to assess the plausibility of  the
        account, it was necessary to set that account alongside the  country
        materials to make an overall assessment as set out in  the  decision
        of HK (as cited above). To rely on the implausibility of the account
        without setting it in the correct context was also an error of law.

    26. As to ground three, whilst the judge stated  at  paragraph  70  that
        even if the claim was "entirely  credible"  it  would  fail  because
        internal relocation was available, it was unclear  whether  in  fact
        the judge had considered in the alternative the full factual  matrix
        relied upon which included a countrywide fatwa. There  was  also  no
        consideration of the background material in reaching that decision.

    27. In the light of the  acceptance  by  Mr  McVeety  that  there  is  a
        material error of law in the decision and for  the  reasons  that  I
        have set out above, the decision  cannot  stand  and  therefore  the
        decision shall be set aside".

23. As to the remaking of the decision, I reached the  conclusion  that  in
    the view of the nature and background of the litigation and that it has
    already been the subject of two earlier remittals,   that  the  correct
    course to take is for the appeal to be heard and re-made by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The re-making of the appeal:

24. At the hearing before the Tribunal the appellant was represented by  Mr
    K. Wood  and  the  respondent  by  Mr  McVeety  ,  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.

The Law:

25. The Appellant appeals to the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  pursuant
    to Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, (the
    2002 Act), as amended by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, (the 2004 Act), by a Notice of Appeal  dated
    17th September 2014 and the Tribunal has borne in mind the  Grounds  of
    Appeal set out in that  notice,  which  refer  to  alleged  prospective
    breach of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status  of  Refugees  and
    its 1967 Protocol, as well as prospective breach of the  1950  European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms
    (ECHR), as that Convention has been incorporated  into  United  Kingdom
    domestic law by the Human Rights Act 1998.

26. In reaching my decision I have borne fully in mind the relevant law and
    Immigration Rules, including the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
    of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, and the Handbook on  Procedures  and
    Criteria for Determining Refugee Status ( 'The  Handbook  )  (  Geneva,
    January 2000).  By Article 1(a)(2) of the Refugee Convention  the  term
    "refugee" shall apply to any person who:-

           "Owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
           race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
           group or political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of  his
           nationality, and is unable, or, owing to such fear, is unwilling
           to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who,  not
           having a nationality and being outside the country of his former
           habitual residence  is  unable,  or,  owing  to  such  fear,  is
           unwilling to return to it."


27. The provisions of SI [2006] No.2525 "The Refugee or Person in  Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006"  now  bring
    into United Kingdom domestic law the  Council  of  the  European  Union
    Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on 'minimum  standards'  for  the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need protection and the
    content of the protection granted, normally referred to in  the  United
    Kingdom as the Qualification Directive.  Commensurate changes were made
    in the Immigration Rules by  means  of  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules also taking effect on 9 October 2006.

28. The determination I have made has approached the issues in this  appeal
    from the perspective of the 2006  Regulations  and  in  particular  has
    applied the  definitions  contained  there,  in  deciding  whether  the
    Appellant is a refugee under the 1951 Geneva Convention.  I  have  also
    applied the amended Immigration Rules.   These  have  permitted  me  to
    consider whether the Appellant is in need of Humanitarian Protection as
    being at risk of serious harm, as defined  in  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Rules.  Finally, I have gone on to consider whether the Appellant is at
    risk of a violation of her human rights under  the  provisions  of  the
    ECHR.

29. The burden of proof is upon the Appellant.  The standard of  proof  has
    been  defined  as  a  'reasonable  degree  of  likelihood',   sometimes
    expressed as 'a reasonable chance' or  a  'serious  possibility'.   The
    question is answered by looking  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
    assessed at the time of hearing the appeal.  I regard the same standard
    as applying in essence  in  human  rights  appeals  although  sometimes
    expressed as 'substantial grounds for believing'.   Although  the  2006
    Regulations make no express reference  to  the  standard  of  proof  in
    asylum appeals, there is no suggestion  that  the  Regulations  or  the
    Directions were intended to introduce a change in either the burden  or
    standard of proof.  The amended Rules, however, deal expressly with the
    standard of proof in deciding whether  the  Appellant  is  in  need  of
    Humanitarian Protection.

30. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules defines a person  eligible  for
    Humanitarian Protection, as a person who does not qualify as a  refugee
    but in  respect  of  whom  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that the person concerned, if returned,  would  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm.  It seems to us  that  this  replicates
    the standard of proof familiar in  the  former  jurisprudence  and,  by
    implication, applies the same standard in asylum cases.

31. Accordingly, where below I refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' this is to be
    understood as an abbreviated way of identifying respectively:

    i.       whether on return  there  is  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
         persecuted under the Geneva Convention;


    ii.      whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing
         the person would face a real risk of suffering serious harm  within
         the meaning of paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration Rules; and


    iii.     whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing
         that the person would face a real risk of being exposed to  a  real
         risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.



In reaching my conclusions as to whether the Appellant will be at real  risk
on return, I have been further mindful that the  amended  Immigration  Rules
contain  among  other  provisions,  paragraph  339K  which  deals  with  the
approach  to  past  persecution  and   paragraph   339O   headed   "Internal
Relocation".


The Evidence:


32. The Appellant's  legal  advisors  produced  a  consolidated  bundle  of
    documents in support of the appeal which consists of a  bundle  of  198
    pages containing a  skeleton  argument,  witness  statements  from  the
    appellant and her husband, a letter from  CLAAS  and  email,  emergency
    telephone call log, FIR with  translation,  newspaper  article,  threat
    letters  with  translation  and  envelopes,  Pakistan  church  letters,
    medical notes, school letters and objective material at pages 58 -  198
    including a copy of the CG decision in AK  and  SK  (Christians:  risk)
    Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569 (IAC).

33. The respondent relies upon the material placed before the Secretary  of
    State  which  includes  the  appellant  screening   interview,   asylum
    interview  and  decision  letter  of  11  September  2014,  documentary
    evidence  provided  to  the  respondent  and  also  exhibited  in   the
    appellant's bundle, extracts from  the  objective  material,  and  Visa
    application details.



34.  The  Appellant  gave  evidence  with  the  assistance  of  the   court
    interpreter and gave evidence in the Urdu language.  I carried  out  an
    introduction of the proceedings so that the Appellant was familiar with
    the procedure that would be adopted during the  court  hearing  and  in
    particular I ensured that  the  Appellant  and  the  interpreter  could
    understand each other.  There were no difficulties identified.  I  note
    that during the hearing there were no difficulties with  the  Appellant
    being able to give evidence or with the interpretation and no  concerns
    were raised at any time during the hearing in relation to that.


35. There is a full record of oral evidence of the  Appellant  who  adopted
    her witness statements as evidence in chief  ,  which  appears  in  the
    Record of Proceedings.

36. I also heard evidence from the appellant's spouse who similarly adopted
    his two witness statements as evidence in chief and was asked number of
    questions in cross examination. That evidence is recorded in the record
    of proceedings but also is referred to  in  my  findings  of  fact  and
    analysis of the evidence.

The submissions of the parties:

37. Mr McVeety on behalf of the respondent made the following  submissions.
    He submitted that the case came down to one of credibility  or  in  the
    alternative the availability of internal relocation.

38. He submitted that  he  accepted  the  background  material  which  made
    reference to a level of discrimination and harassment of the  Christian
    population, however,  the  account  given  by  the  appellant  was  not
    credible. The factual account made reference to a brief meeting between
    two individuals which appeared to begin on the basis of  an  attraction
    between the man concerned and the appellant. However there was a period
    of harassment including threats and it was  not  until  later  that  it
    became religious in context. Following this period of  harassment,  the
    appellant did nothing to raise any concerns with  her  employers  other
    than contact the IT department. Given that she worked for a  well-known
    bank it is unlikely that her fellow employees would not  have  provided
    any help. The reasons given by her were not plausible and that  if  she
    did tell  someone  the  reaction  would  have  been  positive  and  not
    negative.

39. He submitted there be no explanation as to how he had been able to find
    out her name address and telephone number and that in  the  context  of
    the evidence, her remaining family members were in Pakistan  and  other
    than threats had not been harmed in any way. It was not  credible  that
    someone who was able to obtain personal details would not have  carried
    out further acts upon family members still in Pakistan.

40. In the alternative, if her account was  accepted,  there  had  been  no
    evidence of any harm  to  family  members  remaining  in  Pakistan  and
    therefore she could return with her family members to her  former  home
    area. In the alternative she and her family members could  relocate  to
    another area in Pakistan. The country guidance case and  the  objective
    material did not demonstrate that all Christians will  be  at  risk  of
    harm and that there were different areas were Christians were  able  to
    live with some sufficiency of protection.

41. Mr Wood on behalf of the appellant relied upon  his  skeleton  argument
    exhibited in the bundle.  In  addition,  he  made  the  following  oral
    submissions. He noted the concession made by Mr McVeety that there  was
    no inconsistency in the evidence given by the appellant and her husband
    and also that there was no inconsistent information in the  content  of
    the documents that had been provided by the appellant  to  support  her
    factual claim. As to her failure to tell her manager, he  referred  the
    Tribunal to her witness statement at paragraph 10 and made reference to
    the circumstances as a Christian woman in  Pakistan  as  treated  as  a
    subordinate and that it was plausible against that background that  the
    appellant would think that she would not be believed. Whilst it  was  a
    well-known bank, it was one operating in Pakistan.

42. As to the documentary evidence he submitted that  when  taken  together
    they supported the factual account  as  truthful.  Whilst  the  letters
    appear to be self-serving they were not inconsistent  in  any  way  and
    therefore corroborated her  account  as  required  by  the  Immigration
    Rules. He recognised that the  objective  material  made  reference  to
    fraudulent documents being obtainable in Pakistan but that it  had  not
    been asserted that any of the documents provided had been forged in any
    way. The issue related to whether they were documents upon which weight
    could be attached. In this context the letter from CLAAS  came  from  a
    well-known source and gave details based on an investigation  that  had
    taken place and was not solely  based  on  the  account  given  by  the
    appellant to the author of the letter. Thus he  submitted  the  factual
    account should be accepted.

43. As to risk on return, he conceded that in light of the country guidance
    decision of AK and SK (as cited) the fact that the  appellant  and  her
    family members are Christians did not  without  more  demonstrate  that
    they would be at risk of persecution on return and that they would need
    to demonstrate something more than their religion. However in this case
    there  was  a  credible  evidence  that  they  could  not  re-establish
    themselves in their home area safely nor by relocating to  a  different
    part of Pakistan. The letters made reference to a  fatwa  being  issued
    and that her photograph had been circulated and in those  circumstances
    there would be no sufficiency of protection.

44. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.


Assessment of Evidence and Findings of Fact

45. I must make findings as to the credibility of  the  Appellant  and  the
    claim in the light of the totality of the evidence that is  before  me,
    including the documentary evidence, the background evidence and that of
    the witnesses. The Respondent took the view that the Appellant's  claim
    was not credible for the reasons indicated in her letter  of  the  11th
    September 2014.  However, it is not in issue, I should  say,  that  the
    Appellant  and her family members are nationals of  Pakistan  and  that
    they are Christians and I so  find.  I  confirm  that  in  reaching  my
    findings I have considered all the evidence "in the round" in making an
    assessment.

46. The relevant CG decision  is  that  of  AK  and  SK  (Christians;  risk
    Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569. The head note to that decision sets  out
    the following:

    1. Christians in Pakistan are a religious  minority  who,  in  general,
    suffer discrimination but this is not sufficient to amount  to  a  real
    risk of persecution.

    2. Unlike the position of Ahmadis, Christians in general are  permitted
    to practise their faith, can attend church,  participate  in  religious
    activities and have their own schools and hospitals.

    3.  Evangelism  by  its  very  nature  involves  some   obligation   to
    proselytise. Someone who seeks to broadcast their faith to strangers so
    as to encourage them to convert, may find themselves facing a charge of
    blasphemy. In that way, evangelical Christians face a greater risk than
    those Christians who are not  publicly  active.  It  will  be  for  the
    judicial fact-finder to  assess  on  a  case  by  case  basis  whether,
    notwithstanding attendance at an evangelical church, it is important to
    the individual to behave in evangelical ways that may lead  to  a  real
    risk of persecution.

    4. Along with Christians, Sunnis, Shi'as, Ahmadis and Hindus may all be
    potentially  charged  with  blasphemy.  Those  citizens  who  are  more
    marginalised and occupy low standing social positions, may be less able
    to deal with the consequences of such proceedings.

    5. The risk of becoming a victim of a blasphemy allegation will  depend
    upon a number of factors and must be assessed on a case by case  basis.
    Relevant factors will include the place of residence, whether it is  an
    urban or rural area, and the individual's level of education, financial
    and employment status and level of public religious  activity  such  as
    preaching. These factors are not exhaustive.

    6. Non state agents who use  blasphemy  laws  against  Christians,  are
    often motivated by spite, personal or business disputes, arguments over
    land and property. Certain  political  events  may  also  trigger  such
    accusations. A blasphemy allegation, without more, will  not  generally
    be enough to make out a claim under the Refugee Convention. It  has  to
    be actively followed either by the authorities in the form  of  charges
    being brought or by those making the complaint. If it is, or  will  be,
    actively pursued, then an applicant may be able  to  establish  a  real
    risk of harm in the home area and an insufficiency of state protection.

    7. Like other women in Pakistan,  Christian  women,  in  general,  face
    discrimination and may be at a heightened risk but this falls short  of
    a generalised real risk. The need for  a  fact  sensitive  analysis  is
    crucial in their case. Factors such as their age,  place  of  residence
    and socio-economic milieu are all relevant factors when  assessing  the
    risk of abduction, conversions and forced marriages.


    8. Relocation is normally a  viable  option  unless  an  individual  is
    accused  of  blasphemy  which  is  being  seriously  pursued;  in  that
    situation there is, in general, no internal relocation alternative.

47. I shall set out the factual basis of the appellants claim.

48. There is no dispute between the parties at the appellant when living in
    Pakistan was employed by a bank as a  receptionist/telephone  operator.
    The core of the appellant's account centres on a man,  Mr  K,  who  has
    identified himself as a member of the Sipah-i-Sahaba and has threatened
    the appellant at her place of work, had made  threats  to  her  by  the
    telephone and has sent threatening letters to her home and on 2nd March
    2013 saw her in the street and made further verbal threats.

49. The appellant's account is that in or about 2012 a man had entered  her
    workplace to open a personal account but that as the branch only  dealt
    with corporate accounts, she gave him information for  another  branch.
    According to her oral testimony, she did not give him the name nor  did
    she wear a name badge. She also did not get his name and  confirmed  in
    cross examination that nothing inappropriate was said by  this  man  at
    the initial meeting.

50. Following this, her evidence before  the  Tribunal  was  that  sometime
    later he continued to return to the bank and tell her  that  he  "loved
    her" and that he had telephoned her a  number  of  times  on  her  work
    number and had made nuisance telephone calls.  She  further  stated  in
    oral evidence that he had come to the branch of the  bank  subsequently
    between 2 to 4 occasions. In her written evidence she referred  to  him
    telephoning in January 2013 whereby he had made threats to her and that
    she should marry him and convert to Islam. When she  told  him  of  her
    religion and of her marriage he told her that he was aware of that  but
    that if she did not do as he had told it would kill her.

51. Her evidence also referred to a telephone call made to her mobile  that
    was answered by her husband (see witness  statement  paragraph  11  and
    witness statement of husband at paragraph 11). The man referred to  the
    appellant as his "would be wife". The details of that conversation  are
    set out in the parties respective witness statements.

52. A further call was received at the bank whereby he threatened  her  and
    in this context made reference to her religion as a Christian. In  that
    conversation, the appellant had become angry and had made  a  reference
    to the Prophet Muhammed and she was accused of blasphemy (paragraph  12
    of the witness statement).

53. There was then a further phone call to the office relating to  "insults
    to Islam" making it plain that the person calling knew about the family
    members and their religion. There were  threatening  letters  that  had
    then been sent to the home address.

54.  It has also been asserted that he was responsible for an  incident  at
    the family home on 10 March 2013 whereby the man and a number of  other
    people broke into the house whilst the appellant was  asleep  with  her
    husband and children. The noise of someone trying to open the door woke
    the appellant and her husband. The assailants opened fire on  the  door
    with guns and they then fled the house, firing their guns in  the  air,
    shouting "blasphemy". Her husband  contacted  the  emergency  telephone
    services and reported the attack to the police.

55. Her account and that of her husband is that the police attended at  the
    property and took bullet samples from the house and found  a  piece  of
    steel wire which it was assumed was used for opening doors.  They  were
    advised to attend the police station and  give  further  details.  When
    they attended there, the police took details of what they had told them
    but the police did not want to mention the link with the Sipah-i-Sahaba
    and did not file the report on that day because it was  said  that  the
    deputy superintendent of police was not available. The police  took  no
    further action until her husband went back to them on 14 March 2013 and
    a First Information Report (hereinafter referred to  as  a  "FIR")  was
    filed. It is said that the police did not use all of  the  detail  that
    they had given and declined to mention the  name  of  the  organisation
    that he belonged to all the threat letters that had been sent.

56. On 11 March 2013 after the attack on their home, the  family  moved  to
    her brother's home where they stayed for a period of five days and then
    moved on to her sister-in-law's home and remain there until  they  left
    Pakistan on 24 March 2013. A  further  letter  was  sent  to  the  home
    address in Pakistan which was then taken to the police.

57. In her oral evidence the appellant confirmed in cross examination  that
    her family members had continued to be subjected to  threats  of  harm.
    Her husband in his oral  evidence  also  independently  confirmed  that
    there had been threats to the  family  members  that  had  remained  in
    Pakistan although no physical harm had come to  them.  It  was  further
    stated in evidence that the man Mr K had instructed  households  nearby
    to to tell him if they had returned home and had threatened  them  with
    harm.

58. Both the appellant and  her  husband  gave  oral  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal concerning the events that occurred in Pakistan which  I  have
    recited in the preceding paragraphs. It  is  correct  to  observe  that
    despite cross-examination both accounts were consistent with each other
    in all respects. Mr McVeety, on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  properly
    conceded that in all material  respects  the  evidence  given  by  both
    parties as to the events in Pakistan had been consistent when answering
    questions as to the detail and the recollection of events. He, however,
    bases his submissions on the inherent implausibility of the appellant's
    account in the context that if such threats  had  been  made,  but  the
    appellant would have made a report to her manager and a failure  to  do
    so demonstrates that the account given is not a credible one.


59. Mr Wood relied upon the decision of HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037  and
    in particular paragraph 28 where it was stated:

    "further, in many asylum cases, some, even  most,  of  the  Appellant's
    story may seem inherently unlikely but that does not mean  that  it  is
    untrue. Ingredients of the story, and the story as a whole, have to  be
    considered against the available country evidence and  reliable  expert
    evidence, and other familiar factors, such as consistency with what the
    Appellant has said before, and with other factual evidence (where there
    is any)".

60. Furthermore, guidance on assessing plausibility was set out at [30]  of
    that decision where it was stated that it was not "proper to reject  an
    applicant account merely on the basis that it is not  credible  or  not
    plausible. To say that applicant account is not credible is the state a
    conclusion..."

61. I have therefore taken that into account when reaching my  decision  on
    credibility. Furthermore I have considered the evidence  given  in  the
    light of the background material that is before the Tribunal  contained
    in the appellant's bundle and that which is referred to in the  country
    guidance decision of AK and SK(as cited).

62. The material before me demonstrates  that  both  evangelical  and  non-
    evangelical  Christians  face  increased  discrimination  and  targeted
    attacks  because  of  their  faith  and  that  discrimination   against
    Christians extends to many aspects of their life  including  employment
    and education and that there are reports  of  harassment,  threats  and
    violence  including  targeted  attacks  by  non-state  actors-sometimes
    resulting     in     deaths-against      Christians      and      other
    representatives/defenders  (see  2.22-2.26  country   information   and
    guidance 2016 ;page 83AB).

63. In the country guidance case of AK and SK(as cited), where a large body
    of evidence, both oral and documentary, was considered, it was reported
    that  women  from  religious  minorities  were  said  to  be  the  most
    vulnerable  of  targets  of  violence.  Women  were  disproportionately
    affected (paragraph 124) and  expressly  considered  issues  of  forced
    conversion (paragraphs 1 to 4 - 127 and HRW report  at  paragraph  135)
    although it is right to observe that much of that  information  relates
    to women of the younger age from a lower socio-economic group  to  that
    of this appellant.

64. The objective material also makes reference to the Pakistan Penal  Code
    and the blasphemy laws. It is not suggested by the  parties  that  they
    material set out in the country guidance decision has  changed  to  any
    significant degree nor is it argued that the case does  not  accurately
    reflect the current  situation  in  Pakistan.  In  that  decision,  the
    Tribunal set out at length the background  to  the  blasphemy  laws  at
    paragraph 37 - 50 including the frequency of blasphemy allegations  and
    in particular that there was agreement on the evidence  that  extremist
    groups present the largest obstacle to freedom of beliefs in  Pakistan.
    The risk of blasphemy allegations from  the  instigation  of  extremist
    groups were considered at paragraph 74 and that the Christian  minority
    being subject to discrimination and  harassment  as  well  as  acts  of
    religiously motivated violence at the  hands  of  militant  groups  and
    fundamental  extremists.  The  criminal  provisions,  particularly  the
    blasphemy laws are  said  to  be  used  by  militant  organisations  to
    intimidate and harass Christians as well as to exact revenge and settle
    business and personal scores. The Tribunal concluded at  paragraph  209
    that the accusations of blasphemy were made for a  variety  of  reasons
    and could be "unpredictable".


65. The UNHCR  (at  paragraph  101)  reported  that  members  of  religious
    minorities may be  subject  to  religiously  motivated  harassment  and
    violence at the hands or at  the  instigation  of  extremist  elements.
    Failure  to  prosecute  perpetrators  of  such  violence  as  well   as
    institutionalised   discrimination   against   religious    minorities,
    reportedly contributes to a climate of impunity and the  growing  sense
    of insecurity amongst those communities.


66. The UNHCR at paragraph 104 considered that  members  of  the  Christian
    community, including those targeted by Islamic  extremist  elements  or
    charged with criminal offences under the blasphemy provisions,  victims
    of bonded labour, severe discrimination, forced conversion  and  forced
    marriage, as well as Christians perceived as contravening social mores,
    may, depending on the individual circumstances of the case, be in  need
    of international protection on account of their religion or  membership
    of a particular social group.


67. The objective material also refers to the group known as  the  Sipah-i-
    Sahaba which is described as a "militant extremist group" based in  the
    Punjab.


68. It is against this  background  that  I  have  considered  the  factual
    account of the appellant and her witness. As set out above  there  were
    no issues of  credibility  arising  from  any  inconsistency  in  their
    evidence, either internally  or  between  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and her husband. Nor  was  it  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that her account was inconsistent with any of the background
    material. Indeed, on my analysis  of  the  background  material,  I  am
    satisfied that her account is a plausible account when looking  at  her
    circumstances placed in  the  context  of  Pakistani  society  and  the
    material which describes the harassment  and  discrimination  faced  by
    Christians in Pakistan.


69.  The thrust of the submission made by Mr McVeety is that her account is
    implausible because she did not seek to tell anyone of the  threats  in
    her workplace and in particular her superiors. I take into account that
    the appellant was employed by an international bank in an urban city in
    Pakistan but that there is no evidence before the Tribunal  as  to  any
    formal grievance procedure or otherwise available to any employees. Her
    explanation of not taking any internal action is that  she  was  afraid
    that no one would listen to her being both a Christian and a woman. She
    set this in context and that her colleagues were Muslim  and  that  she
    was the only Christian working in the bank and that this ranked her  as
    being on a "lower scale". She also set out  in  her  witness  statement
    (paragraph 10) that she initially did not tell her husband as  she  was
    worried that  he  might  think  that  she  had  offered  some  form  of
    encouragement to the man to act in this way.


70. I am satisfied against the particular background and in  the  light  of
    the material which shows a level  of  societal  discrimination  against
    Christians and the women, that she may have perceived her circumstances
    as such that she did not feel able to report threats and harassment  to
    a male superior. I do not find it implausible that she did  not  do  so
    and in any event, the evidence was that she had  made  some  effort  to
    stop the nuisance calls by contacting the IT department  and  therefore
    it is not the case that she did not attempt any action whatsoever.


71. Her husband's account of having spoken to Mr K on the telephone and his
    behaviour was consistent with the appellant's evidence  as  Mr  McVeety
    properly  accepted.  Whilst  it  might  be  said  that  he  is  not  an
    independent witness being a member of  her  family,  he  has  given  an
    account which under cross examination has remained consistent with that
    of his wife and therefore should be given some  weight  when  assessing
    the overall credibility of the factual account given by the appellant.


72. In the light of the nature of the conversation  between  the  appellant
    and Mr K, it is entirely plausible that he would treat her rejection in
    the way described. The objective material makes reference to threats of
    blasphemy being triggered by a number of events  and  of  the  Tribunal
    concluded were "unpredictable" and occurred involving personal disputes
    as well in the context of religion. Here there were two  reasons  given
    by the appellant - her rejection of him and also her religion.


73. As to the events that took place on 10 March 2013, the account given by
    the appellant and her husband has been consistent  as  to  the  offence
    that had taken place and the description surrounding those  events.  In
    addition the appellant has provided documentary evidence in support  of
    her claim.

74. When considering documentation, I remind myself of the  guidance  given
    in the decision of the Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439  in
    which the  Tribunal  acknowledged  the  argument  that  "documents  and
    information contained in them may be either genuine or false; documents
    may be genuine but that information itself may be false; documents  may
    not be genuine but the  information  may  nonetheless  be  true."   The
    Tribunal in that case went on to state


         "It is trite in immigration and asylum law that we must  not  judge
         what is or is not likely to happen in other countries by  reference
         to our perception of what is normal within in the  United  Kingdom.
         The principle applies as much to documents as to any other form  of
         evidence.  We know from experience  and  country  information  that
         there  are  countries  where  it  is  easy  and  often   relatively
         inexpensive to obtain 'forged' documents.  Some of them  are  false
         in that they are not made by whoever purports to be the author  and
         the information they contain is wholly or partially  untrue.   Some
         are 'genuine' to the extent that they emanate from a proper source,
         in the proper form, on the proper paper, with the proper seals, but
         the information they contain is wholly or  partially  untrue.   ...
         The permutations of truth, untruth, validity and 'genuineness'  are
         enormous.  At its simplest we need to  differentiate  between  form
         and content; that is whether a document is properly issued  by  the
         purported author and whether  the  contents  are  true.   They  are
         separate questions.  It is a dangerous oversimplification merely to
         ask whether a document is 'forged' or even 'not genuine'."

    The only question is whether the document is one  upon  which  reliance
    should properly be placed.  Such documentation should be not looked  at
    in isolation but should be assessed along with other pieces of evidence
    and therefore "in the round".  I confirm that I have had in mind  those
    words of the Tribunal when making  an  assessment  of  the  variety  of
    documents that have been produced in this case.

75. I have considered this part of the Appellant's account  with  care  and
    the documents produced in support of it in the light of  Tanveer  Ahmed
    and in the light of the background country materials.



76. The country report for Pakistan (Country Information  and  Policy  Note
    dated June 2017) makes reference to fraudulent documents as follows:

      15. Forged and fraudulent documents
   15.1.1 Sources dated between 2012 and December 2014, identified by the
   Research Directorate, Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, indicated
   that the availability and accessibility of forged and fraudulent
   documents, including academic qualifications, bank statements and
   property deeds, was widespread in Pakistan.
      15.1.2 DFAT stated in its January 2016 report on document fraud in
      Pakistan, noting that:
   'NADRA has improved the CNIC and passport-issuing process, reducing the
   incidence of CNIC and passport fraud. However, genuine documents are
   sometimes issued under false pretences. In late August 2015, for example,
   Pakistan's Federal Investigation Authority was reportedly investigating
   NADRA's alleged issuance of fake CNICs to militants in return for bribes
   as low as US$100. Pakistani authorities have put in place measures to
   combat fraudulent issuance of CNICs and can cancel CNICs which are bogus.
   DFAT has a high degree of confidence in NADRA's ability to determine the
   identity of Pakistani nationals using biometric and other information,
   with or without valid travel documents.
   'Document fraud is endemic in Pakistan, particularly in those forms of
   documentation not issued by a competent central authority such as NADRA.
   For example, it is relatively simple to fraudulently produce police-
   issued FIRs using existing FIR book numbers. FIRs are hand-written
   standard forms. There is credible evidence of police in Pakistan
   accepting bribes to verify fraudulent FIRs. The existence of an FIR does
   not therefore constitute evidence that the described events actually
   occurred.
    'More broadly, DFAT is aware of numerous cases of false school and
    academic records, birth certificates, death certificates, medical
    records, bank records and documents issued in a legitimate format
    without proper verification by Pakistani authorities. Pakistan
    journalists have advised DFAT that people can publish false stories in
    newspapers for a fee, although this trend appears to be in decline.'
77. The country reports for Pakistan ( Country Policy and Information  Note
    dated June 2017) makes reference to FIR's as follows:-

10.2 First Information Reports (FIRs)
      10.2.1 The USSD Human Rights report stated 'A First Information Report
      (FIR) is the legal basis for any arrest, initiated when police receive
      information about the commission of a "cognizable" offense.'  A
      cognizable offence is defined as an offence for which the police may
      arrest a person without a warrant. The USSD report continued:
      'A third party usually initiates an FIR, but police can file FIRs on
      their own initiative. A FIR allows police to detain a suspect for 24
      hours, after which a magistrate may order detention for an additional
      14 days if police show detention is necessary to obtain evidence
      material to the investigation. Some authorities did not observe these
      limits on detention. Authorities reportedly filed FIRs without
      supporting evidence in order to harass or intimidate detainees, or did
      not file them when adequate evidence was provided unless the
      complainant paid a bribe. There were reports of persons arrested
      without judicial authorization.' [71]
      10.2.2 DFAT noted that in practice investigations often took longer
      than the requisite 14 days, particularly for complex cases. DFAT added
      'Although Pakistan's provinces and territories have independent
      prosecution services, police are exclusively responsible for
      investigations and consequently have a substantial influence on the
      outcome of individual cases.' [72]
     3. According to a Human Rights Watch (HRW) report of September 2016:
   2. 'Several people interviewed for this report, particularly members of
      marginalized socioeconomic groups, raised concerns about not being
      able to register a First Information Report (FIR) with police because
      of what one activist described as the "financial cost of doing
      business with the police" -an allusion to bribe-taking - or the fear
      of harassment or threat. It is difficult for those without political
      or financial influence to file an FIR, particularly if they seek to
      implicate someone more powerful in a crime. As one senior police
      officer said, the FIR is often used as a "tool of oppression... by
      the ruling elite against the weak and powerless"...
    'Investigation of registered cases is another area of concern
    particularly for vulnerable categories including women, minorities, and
    the poor. Human rights organizations have noted that registration and
    subsequent investigation of cases is particularly arduous for female
    victims of sexual assault. Such cases remain highly underreported
    because of the misogynist and biased attitude of state institutions,
    such as the police and judiciary, and society at large; in many
    instances, women who are sexually assaulted are not considered
    "victims" but are instead blamed for inviting the attack.".' [73]
      .10.2.4 The HRW report further noted that, in practice, the police
      usually make a note of a complaint in the roznamcha (a register that
      records the daily activities of a police station) rather than formally
      recording a FIR. HRW noted:
   'Human rights activists say police are less likely to register complaints
   brought by those from marginalized groups [e.g. women, religious
   minorities], and also those alleging that a crime was committed by a
   powerful person. In many instances where perpetrators have ties with
   powerful citizens, FIRs may ultimately be registered but against "unknown
   persons," allowing them to escape investigation.
   'By not registering FIRs, police are able to avoid their legal obligation
   to investigate the matter. Officials explained that according to the law,
   once an FIR is registered, the police are bound to investigate the
   complaint unless they provide written reasons for not doing so.
   Furthermore, canceling a registered FIR is "extremely difficult and
   ultimately entirely at the discretion of the courts".'


78. The documents consist of a FIR, newspaper report, a letter from CLAAS,
    copies of threatening letters, details of a call made to the emergency
    services.


79. Dealing with the FIR it is set out at pages 25 - 28 and gives the name
    of the police station where it was filed and has given a particular
    number. The date of the incident is recorded at 3:55 AM and the date of
    10 March 2013. The content of the document makes reference to the date
    and time of the report on 14 March 2013 and is signed by a designated
    supervising officer. The document sets out the events that took place
    as recorded from the appellant, giving her address and a prcis of the
    events leading up to the attack on the home on 10 March 2013.

80. The document demonstrates that an incident took place as the appellant
    and her husband have set out. Whilst the filing of an FTIR by itself
    does not demonstrate the truth of such an incident having taken place,
    it lent some support to the appellant's case as to what action they
    took following the incident. Mr McVeety accepted that contrary to the
    matters in the refusal letter, there were no discrepancies in the
    content of any of the documents that had been placed before the
    Tribunal.


81. The evidence of the appellant that it took some time for the police to
    file the FIR is supported by the time that elapsed between the incident
    and the police investigation on the night and the eventual FIR being
    filed on 10 March 2013.


82. There is also a newspaper report. I have seen the original document
    that is in the respondents paper file. It is a small section on the
    front page. The translation at [30) makes reference to the factual
    circumstances of an attack on her home on 10 March 2013. Again, it is
    not been asserted on behalf of the respondent before this Tribunal that
    it is inconsistent in its content with any of the details given by the
    appellant or that a legal case had yet to be filed.


83. There is also a document at pages 22 - 23 which purports to support
    that a telephone call was made at 4.09 am supporting the factual
    account of the appellant's husband having called the police. Again,
    this may be referred to as entirely self-serving but nonetheless it
    should not be disregarded on this basis.


84. There is a letter from CLAAS dated 11 June 2014. This is referred to in
    the respondent's decision letter as "completely self-serving" and
    operates on the basis that it simply recites information given by the
    appellant. In his submissions, Mr McVeety submitted that whilst it was
    accepted that it was a genuine letter, it having been confirmed by
    email that it emanated from the person concerned, that it was a
    document that should not be afforded any weight. He submitted that
    whilst the oral evidence of the appellant in cross-examination referred
    to an investigation  having been carried out by CLAAS, the author of
    the letter did not say by whom or in what way such an investigation was
    carried out or the circumstances in which the events had been
    authenticated. Mr Wood on behalf of the appellant submitted that the
    source of the document was important it coming for a well respected
    source in Pakistan and that the document itself made regard to having
    conducted an investigation before confirming the events described.


85. I have considered the document in the light of its source. Mr Wood has
    referred the Tribunal to a document in a previous bundle (page 100) it
    sets out that CLAAS is a partner NGO for the British High Commission
    and in particular its work on forced marriages. The main focus of CLAAS
    is religious intolerance on which they are reported to be a trustworthy
    source. They have campaigned extensively against the blasphemy laws.
    Joseph Francis has been awarded an MBE for his services in this role.


86. I have also considered the content of the document. The letter sets out
    in essence the account given by the appellant as to the events in
    Pakistan. At page 17 it refers to the methodology employed by CLAAS and
    that the teams carry out fact-finding at incidents and locations and
    issue an update report on cases reported and handled by CLAAS. It
    states, "during the fact-finding missions the CLAAD team meet with the
    people in the area, affected, people the police as well in the cases
    where needed." At page 18 it refers to CLAAS having investigated. The
    report however does not set out the nature of any investigation
    conducted for the purposes of the letter/report. Whilst it referred to
    its general methodology which I have set out above, in the context of
    this particular investigation it is not known who they spoke to other
    than the appellant and her husband. The appellant's account makes
    reference to a number of witnesses (neighbours who had come out at the
    result of hearing firing at the home) however there are no sources
    named in the document. Similarly there is no reference made to the
    identity of any members of the police force to confirm the events.


87. In the light of those matters, I do not discount the evidence is having
    no weight but any weight to it as independent support is of limited
    value.


88. There are also two threatening letters (pages 31 and 35 translations)
    which make reference to threats made against the appellant and her
    family members. Included in the documentation are copy envelopes in
    which those letters were sent which make reference to the appellant's
    home address.


89. I have therefore considered the written and oral testimony of the
    appellant and her husband and the written documentary evidence as set
    out above in the context of the background material. Having done so, I
    accept to the lower standard of proof and find that the account given
    by the appellant and supported by the evidence of her husband is made
    out. The evidence of the appellant and her husband was accepted by Mr
    McVeety to be consistent both internally and with each other and I find
    it to be plausible when set out against the objective material to which
    I have made a reference to above. Whilst the appellant's failure to
    mention these threats to the management team on the face of it may seem
    to be unusual, for the reasons given which relate to her reluctance to
    make a complaint when seen in the context of the objective material
    both in relation to religious minorities and their position and that of
    women generally supports the explanation given. Consequently I am not
    satisfied that her explanation is implausible as submitted on behalf of
    the respondent.


90. The documentary evidence when seen in its totality lends some support
    for the account given and I attach some weight to the material in the
    context of the evidence "in the round". I therefore accept that the
    core elements of the account given by the appellant were credible and
    that this therefore forms the basis of any assessment of risk.


91. Mr McVeety submits that other than having received threatening letters
    after the family left that there had been no further interest in the
    appellant's family who remain in Pakistan and thus they can return back
    to their home area.

92. The threatening letters are exhibited in the papers at ages 31 and 35
    (translations). The perpetrators of the incident whereby guns were
    fired on the home and the person sending the letters are self
    identified as members of Sipah-i-Sahaba. As the objective material sets
    out, they are an extremist group. The contents of one of the letters
    make reference to knowing the appellant's home address and also the
    school that the children attend (page 31). At page 35, it makes
    reference to her having filed an FIR report and also refers to people
    in the area who would "keep them informed" of their whereabouts and
    that her photograph had been showed to the Mullahs and that a fatwa had
    been pronounced.


93. The evidence before me from the appellant demonstrates that an FIR was
    filed against the man concerned. However, it was not filed immediately
    and given the lapse of time it indicates a lack of expedition and real
    interest in apprehending the person concerned. There is no further
    evidence that the perpetrators of the incident have been arrested or
    interviewed. The objective material in the country guidance case
    (paragraph 276] is that the evidence must be considered holistically.
    In this context I note that there are no blasphemy charges yet filed in
    Pakistan according to the evidence (see paragraph 225 of the CG case).
    Whilst there are no blasphemy charges there is evidence, which has not
    been challenged from both the appellant and her husband, that since
    they had left Pakistan, members of their family had been threatened. In
    conjunction with the continuity of the threats and the contents of the
    letter (asserting that households in the vicinity will be asked
    information as to their return) and the previous threats of attack, I
    find that there is a reasonable likelihood that if they return to their
    home area that they would face a real risk or reasonable likelihood of
    further threats and violence for which they may not receive effective
    protection.


94. The letter refers to the profile of the perpetrator as a leader of the
    organisation concerned. The country guidance case refers to individuals
    who are being pursued by such individuals will not be safe in the
    Punjab but may also be unsafe elsewhere in Pakistan due to the wide
    geographical reach of these groups. At paragraph 2.4.2 (page 87 of AB)
    it records that as regards protection from non-state actors, despite
    constitutional rights and a Supreme Court ruling calling for the
    protection of religious minorities, many reports suggest that the
    government fails to provide sufficient protection to minority citizens
    against societal violence including the states general failure to bring
    perpetrators to justice. Some sources indicated infiltration into the
    police force by extremists who are then able to access individual's
    personal information and thus seek persons of interest.


95. In the light of the above factors, I accept the submission made by Mr
    Wood that there is a reasonable likelihood to demonstrate that upon
    return to the home area in Pakistan that they would face continued
    threats, harassment and further violence for which they would not
    receive effective protection.


96. In the alternative, it was submitted by Mr McVeety that even if the
    appellant's account was credible that the family could internally
    relocate to live in a different part of Pakistan. I have therefore
    considered that issue.

The issue of internal relocation:

The Law

97. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive reads as follows:-

         "Article 8

         Internal protection

         1.   As part of the assessment of the application for international
             protection, Member States may determine that an  applicant  is
             not in need of international protection if in a  part  of  the
             country of origin there  is  no  well-founded  fear  of  being
             persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm  and  the
             applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of
             the country.

         2.   In examining whether a part of the country  of  origin  is  in
             accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall at  the  time
             of taking the decision on the application have regard  to  the
             general circumstances prevailing in that part of  the  country
             and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.

         3.   Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical  obstacles  to
             return to the country of origin."

98. Paragraph 339O of the Immigration Rules sets out as follows:-

         "339O.   Internal relocation

                (i)    The Secretary of State will not make:

                    (a)    a grant of asylum if in the part of  the  country
                        of origin a person would not  have  a  well-founded
                        fear  of  being  persecuted,  and  the  person  can
                        reasonably be expected to stay in that part of  the
                        country; or

                    (b)    a grant of humanitarian protection if in part  of
                        the country of return a person  would  not  face  a
                        real risk of suffering serious harm, and the person
                        can reasonably be expected to stay in that part  of
                        the country.

                (ii)   In examining whether a part of the country of  origin
                    or country of return meets the requirements in  (i)  the
                    Secretary of State when making his decision  on  whether
                    to grant asylum or humanitarian  protection,  will  have
                    regard to the general circumstances prevailing  in  that
                    part of the country and to the personal circumstances of
                    the person.

                (iii)  (i) applies notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
                    return to the country of origin or country of return."

    As it can be seen the paragraph refers  to  a  different  part  of  the
    country where that person would not have a well-founded fear  of  being
    persecuted and the person can reasonably be expected to  stay  in  that
    part of the country.  In  making  that  assessment  sub-paragraph  (ii)
    directs the decision maker to have regard to the general  circumstances
    prevailing  in  that  part  of  the  country  and   to   the   personal
    circumstances of the person.

    In Jasim v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 342 Sedley LJ said:-

         "16. The possibility of internal relocation is relevant to  refugee
             and human rights claims because it may demonstrate that a fear
             of persecution or harm though  warranted  by  the  applicant's
             experience in his place of  origin,  is  not  well-founded  in
             relation to other parts of the  state  whose  duty  it  is  to
             protect him.  But while the two issues - fear and relocation -
             go ultimately to the single question of safety, they cannot be
             decided in the  same  breath.   Once  the  judge  of  fact  is
             satisfied  that  the  applicant  has  a  justified   fear   of
             persecution or harm if returned to his home  area,  the  claim
             will ordinarily be made out unless the judge is satisfied that
             he can nevertheless be safely returned to another part of  his
             country of origin.  Provided the second issue has been flagged
             up, there may be  no  formal  burden  of  proof  on  the  Home
             Secretary (see GH [2004] UKIAT 00248); but this does not  mean
             that the judge of fact can reject  an  otherwise  well-founded
             claim  unless  the  evidence  satisfies  him   that   internal
             relocation is a safe and reasonable option.

         17.   It  is  necessary  to  stress  both  adjectives  -  safe  and
             reasonable.  It is well established that relocation to a  safe
             area is not an answer to a claim  if  it  is  unreasonable  to
             expect the applicant to settle there.  There may be no work or
             housing.   He  may  not  speak   the   language.    Similarly,
             relocation to an area may be  perfectly  reasonable  by  these
             standards but unsafe, for  example  because  of  the  risk  of
             continued official harassment or - as in this case -  revenge-
             seeking."

99. Thus if a person is at risk  in  his  home  area,  internal  relocation
    should be considered as a potential means of affording him  protection.
    The decision of the House of Lords in AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 related
    to three Appellants all of whom were in their  30s  and  were  Sudanese
    nationals.  The judicial committee considered the position  of  members
    of black African tribes who formerly  lived  in  Darfur.   Two  of  the
    Appellants were subsistence farmers.

100. It is clear from the opinion of  Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill  that  the
    enquiry has  to  be  directed  to  the  situation  of  each  particular
    applicant whose age, gender, experience, health, skills and family ties
    may all be relevant in the enquiry.   It  is  said  that  there  is  no
    warrant for excluding  or  giving  priority  to  consideration  of  the
    applicant's way of life in the place of persecution or for excluding or
    giving priority to consideration of conditions generally prevailing  in
    the home country.  Instead there has  to  be  a  consideration  of  all
    circumstances of the case.  That conclusion  is  to  be  found  between
    paragraphs 12 and 14 of his opinion.

101. The scope of the consideration was also dealt with by Baroness Hale  in
    paragraph  20  of  her  opinion.   In  referring  to  Lord  Bingham  of
    Cornhill's opinion in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5, Baroness Hale recorded this
    passage from Lord Bingham's thinking in the earlier appeal:

         "The decision maker taking account of  all  relevant  circumstances
         pertaining to the claimant and his country of  origin  must  decide
         whether it is reasonable to expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
         whether it will be unduly harsh to expect him to do so."

102. In approaching that task Baroness Hale also drew upon a UNHCR  document
    which also considered that the task was a holistic exercise  where  the
    decision maker looks at the individual personal circumstances including
    past  persecution  or  the  fear  of  it,  psychological   and   health
    conditions, family and social situations and survival  capacities.   In
    setting out those categories there was not meant to be  any  limitation
    on the scope of what must be considered.

103. It follows from the findings of fact made in the earlier part  of  this
    determination  that  the  appellant  and  her   family   members   have
    demonstrated a reasonable likelihood that they will face persecution or
    serious harm in their home area, which is an urban city. It is  however
    submitted on behalf of the respondent that notwithstanding the risk  of
    harm in their home area that the appellant and her family  members  can
    relocate to another area of Pakistan where they will not  face  such  a
    risk. It was submitted that  in AK and AS (Pakistan) (at paragraph  225
    and 22 6) that a sufficiency of protection will  be  available  to  the
    appellant, when  taking  into  account  that  she  is  not  facing  any
    blasphemy or other charges, hence she and her family members should  be
    able to live in an alternative area of Pakistan as a Christian  without
    facing a risk of serious harm and a level of redress will be  available
    to them should they require the assistance of the state in any new area
    they may relocate to.

104. In this context I have had regard to the Country Guidance  decision  of
    AK and SK (Christians; risk) Pakistan  CG[2014]  UKUT  005569   and  in
    particular paragraphs 227-231 which expressly deals with that issue and
    is replicated below.



    "Internal relocation

       227.  Figures  of  blasphemy  charges,   deaths   and   attacks   on
            individuals,   communities and churches are all of concern  but
            they must be viewed     against the size of the population  and
            the fact that most  take  place  in      Punjab  where  radical
            Islamists have a strong  presence.  The  option  of    internal
            relocation must be viewed against that background.


       228. The correct approach as laid out  by  Lord  Bingham  in  Januzi
            [2006]     UKHL 5 is whether an individual  can  reasonably  be
            expected to    relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh  to
            expect him to do so.    The test must not  be  equated  with  a
            well founded fear of persecution     or  a  real  risk  of  ill
            treatment.
       229. According to the UNHCR, internal relocation will generally  not
            be an      option in areas  of  FATA,  Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa  and
            Baluchistan which  are all currently affected by  security  and
            military  counter-insurgency       operations  and  retaliatory
            attacks. In  other  areas,  the  availability  of  a     viable
            relocation option needs to be assessed on an individual basis.


       230. Individuals who are being seriously pursued by  armed  militant
            groups     such as  the  Lashkar-e-Jhangvi  and  Sipah-i-Sahaba
            will generally not be   safe in Punjab where these  groups  are
            based. They may also be unsafe    elsewhere  due  to  the  wide
            geographical reach of these groups. The   nature of the threats
            received,  the  individual's  personal  circumstances       and
            availability of support from influential  connections  are  all
            relevant   considerations.  It  is  not  likely  that  ordinary
            community members will  have the resources or  the  inclination
            to pursue their victims outside the  local area  and  so  those
            facing harm from  localised  groups  or       individuals  will
            generally be  able  to  relocate  to  one  of  the  many  large
            cities. However, individuals subject  to  criminal  prosecution
            under the   blasphemy  laws  will  not  generally  be  able  to
            relocate.




       231. Those against whom an  FIR  has  been  issued  may  in  certain
            circumstances be able to relocate. The seriousness  with  which
            an FIR is  lodged and pursued will need to  be  assessed  along
            with the   individual's personal circumstances,  the  existence
            of traditional     support mechanisms such as the  presence  of
            friends and relatives in    the area of prospective  relocation
            and whether  the  individual  would  be   readily  identifiable
            there. Relocation to urban centres will generally be   possible
            where the factors identified above do not come into play. "




105. There were no  submissions  made  by  Mr  Wood  which  related  to  the
    individual circumstances of  the  family  themselves.  As  the  factual
    account demonstrates the  family  consists  of  husband  and  wife  and
    children. On the evidence before me all their extended  family  members
    reside in the same city where the  events  occurred  and  where  it  is
    unsafe to return to. Therefore it has not been  established  that  they
    have any relatives in any other part of  Pakistan  to  enable  them  to
    resettle. Considering their personal circumstances, the  appellant  and
    her husband have both been in paid employment in the  banking  industry
    and are educated. There were some medical records in the bundle  but  I
    have not been referred to their relevance. There is no  evidence  about
    any identifiable needs for the children other than that they require to
    be brought up in a safe environment.

106. Applying the Country Guidance case, the risk of harm emanates from non-
    state actors and in this case from members of the  Sipah-i-Sahaba  whom
    the objective material refers to as a militant extremist group. In  the
    light of the interest and  action  taken  by  this  group  towards  the
    appellant and her family members,  it  is  not  possible  for  them  to
    relocate to the Punjab where radicals have a strong  presence  and  the
    country guides decision at paragraph 229  identifies  other  places  in
    Pakistan such as FATA or Baluchistan, where internal relocation is  not
    possible. The question is whether there is  availability  of  a  viable
    relocation option elsewhere and this must be assessed on an  individual
    basis.

107. There is no FIR registered  against  the  appellant  or  any  blasphemy
    charges yet instituted. The  evidence  nonetheless  points  to  ongoing
    interest and threats to the  appellant's  family  members  although  no
    violent reprisals have been made (I refer to the oral evidence  of  the
    appellant  and  her  husband).  The  Country  Guidance  decision  makes
    reference to the individual circumstances  on  relocation  and  whether
    those involved will be readily identifiable. In this context the family
    are Christians therefore are  readily  identifiable  as  members  of  a
    religious minority. They have no  other  family  members  elsewhere  to
    provide any traditional support mechanisms.

108.  Paragraph 230 of the CG decision makes reference  to  individuals  who
    are being seriously pursued by the group Sipah-i-Sahaba and that  there
    would be no safety in the Punjab. It also makes reference that  it  may
    be unsafe elsewhere due to the wide geographical reach of the group. In
    this context I have considered  the  nature  of  the  threats  and  the
    individual's personal circumstances and  the  availability  of  support
    from  influential  connections  (if  any).  The  country  guidance   at
    paragraph 230 also makes reference to ordinary  community  members  not
    having reason or inclination  to  pursue  victims  beyond  their  area.
    Applied to the circumstances of this particular appellant,  the  family
    have no access to support from any connections  of  influence  or  even
    from family support elsewhere in Pakistan. The threats set out  in  the
    letters are not localised but as Mr Wood  submits,  make  reference  to
    having issued  a  fatwa  (which  is  countrywide)  and  also  that  her
    photograph has been sent to the religious Mullahs and therefore she  is
    readily identifiable. The author of the letter could not  be  described
    as an "ordinary community member" but is described as a leader  of  the
    organisation.

109. Therefore taking all those circumstances together and  considering  the
    matter  holistically  reminding  myself  that  asylum  claims  made  by
    religious  minorities  in   Pakistan   require   particularly   careful
    consideration, I have reached  the  conclusion  that  it  is  not  been
    demonstrated that there is any viable internal relocation available  to
    this particular appellant.  As  the  country  guidance  decision  makes
    clear, there will be circumstances  in  which  internal  relocation  is
    viable and each case must be considered on its  own  particular  facts.
    Having carried out an assessment of the evidence set  out  earlier,  it
    follows that the appellant has succeeded in demonstrating that there is
    a reasonable likelihood that she will be at risk of harm upon return to
    Pakistan for a Convention reason and therefore succeeds in her appeal

Decision:

110. I allow the claim for asylum and on human rights grounds






Signed                              Date    9/ 11/ 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

