

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
AA/07482/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London            |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated |
|On Thursday 2 May 2019                  |On Monday 20 May 2019             |
|                                        |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                    A T P
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair, Counsel instructed by Wilson solicitors
                    LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.           The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Foudy promulgated on 9 January 2019  ("the  Decision").
      By the Decision, the Judge dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against
      the Respondent's decision dated 28 April 2015 refusing his  protection
      claim.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Vietnam.  He came to  the  UK  on
      30 March 2015 and claimed asylum on arrival.  His claim is set out  at
      [9] of the Decision and I need to refer to the  detail  of  that  only
      insofar as it is affected by the Appellant's  grounds  to  appeal  the
      Decision.

3.          Judge Foudy accepted that the  Appellant  had  been  trafficked.
      She also accepted that the Appellant's account of his fears of  return
      to Vietnam may well be genuine, but she  concluded  that  those  fears
      were objectively ill founded.

4.          The Appellant raises five  grounds  of  appeal  challenging  the
      Decision which I deal with in more detail below.  Permission to appeal
      was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach on 14 February 2019  in
      the following terms so far as relevant:

            "...3.     It is clear from the  decision  that  the  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge  had  in  mind  that  the  Appellant  was  to  be
           considered to be a vulnerable witness.   She  clearly  addresses
           all the expert evidence which was before her and  gives  reasons
           as to why she prefers the 'up to date information' contained  in
           the CPIN over the expert report of Dr Tran [16].  The First-tier
           Tribunal Judge also considers the medical  evidence.  She  gives
           cogent  reasons  for  her  doubts   regarding   Ms   Robertson's
           conclusions.  The fact that Dr Sinha is 'medically trained' [20]
           is one reason for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  preferring  Dr
           Sinha's report over that of Ms Robertson but other  reasons  are
           also given [20]  which  cannot  be  said  to  be  irrational  or
           perverse reasons.
            4.   The First-tier Tribunal has considered  Article  8  outside
           the Immigration Rules but has concluded that the  Appellant  has
           not  established  any  'meaningful  private  life'  in  the  UK.
           However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not consider whether
           the   appellant   fulfils   the   requirements   of    Paragraph
           276ADE(1)(vi)  i.e.  whether  the  appellant  would  face   very
           significant obstacles in reintegrating into Vietnam.   This  was
           specifically raised in Counsel's skeleton argument [32-33] which
           was  prepared  for  the  appeal.   It   is   arguable   that   a
           consideration of very significant obstacles is distinct  from  a
           consideration of whether the appellant would  face  persecution,
           serious harm or a breach of Article 3 on return to  Vietnam  and
           that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's failure  to  consider  this
           argument means that  she  has  not  made  findings  on  all  the
           relevant issues which were to be decided before  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.
            5.   Permission to  appeal  is  granted  on  that  ground  only.
           Permission to appeal is refused on grounds 1-4."

5.          The Appellant renewed his application for permission  to  appeal
      on grounds one to four.  A decision was made on  that  application  by
      Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 13 March 2019.  Having  set  out  the
      basis of the four grounds, she continued as follows:
            "5.  I find that the grounds are all arguable.   The  fact  that
           the appellant is not  aware  of  any  efforts  by  his  previous
           traffickers to find him in the  UK,  see  paragraph  16  of  the
           decision, is arguably not sufficient reasoning to find  that  he
           will not be re-trafficked.  There was  an  arguable  failure  to
           deal with the information in the CPIN at paragraph 8.4, which is
           found to be more useful, at paragraph 16 of the decision.  There
           was also an arguable failure  to  deal  with  the  other  expert
           evidence on the issue of risk as outlined in the  third  ground.
           The criticism of the assessment of the psychological evidence at
           paragraph 20 has arguable weight for the reasons set out in  the
           grounds.  For these reasons, the conclusion that this  appellant
           is not at  real  risk  of  serious  harm  in  the  form  of  re-
           trafficking as he has sufficiency of  protection  on  return  is
           arguably unsound."

6.    The matter comes  before  me  to  assess  whether  the  Decision  does
      disclose an error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Ground One: Error with regard to vulnerability assessment

7      The  Appellant  submitted  that  as  a  victim  of  trafficking  with
      significant mental health issues, he should be treated as a vulnerable
      witness.  He relied upon the guidance provided in AM  (Afghanistan)  v
      Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123
      ("AM"), the Practice Direction of the First-tier and  Upper  Tribunals
      relating to vulnerable adult  witnesses  and  the  Joint  Presidential
      Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 ("the Guidance Note").  This was raised  in
      the Appellant's skeleton argument for the hearing before Judge Foudy.

8.    The only reference to this submission  is  at  [15]  of  the  Decision
      where the Judge says this:

           "I find that the Appellant has been trafficked as that  was  the
           finding by the NFR when his claim was  investigated.   I  remind
           myself of the President's Guidance on vulnerable witnesses."

9.    The grounds refer to what is said in AM at [33].  The reference  there
      is to the Guidance Note and the complete citation is as follows:

           "13. The weight to be placed upon factors of vulnerability may
           differ depending on the matter under appeal, the burden and
           standard of proof and whether the individual is a witness or an
           appellant.
           14.  Consider the evidence, allowing for possible different
           degrees of understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to
           those [who] are not vulnerable, in the context of evidence from
           others associated with the appellant and the background evidence
           before you.  Where there were clear discrepancies in the oral
           evidence, consider the extent to which the age, vulnerability or
           sensitivity of the witness was an element of that discrepancy or
           lack of clarity.
           15.  The decision should record whether the Tribunal has
           concluded the appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable or
           sensitive, the effect the Tribunal considered the identified
           vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it and this
           whether the Tribunal was satisfied whether the appellant had
           established his or her case to the relevant standard of proof.
            In asylum appeals, weight should be given to objective
           indications of risk rather than necessarily to a state of mind."

      Attention is also drawn to [30] of AM where it is said that a  failure
      to follow the Guidance Note will "most likely be a material  error  of
      law".

10.   The grounds say that this is relevant  because  of  the  other  errors
      made by the Judge.  In oral submissions, Ms Mair said that  the  error
      (which she said was a failure to make a finding in  this  regard)  was
      material because it impacted on the Judge's failure to consider  other
      evidence in relation to indicators of risk.

11.   In light of that submission, I do not consider it  necessary  to  look
      at this ground separately.  Whether it is  made  out  depends  on  the
      Appellant making out his other grounds.  I only observe at this  stage
      that, at [16] of the Decision, the Judge accepts the Appellant's fears
      as genuine  and  her  findings  thereafter  are  based  on  the  other
      background evidence which is consistent with the Guidance Note as  set
      out in AM.  It can also be readily implied from what is said  at  [15]
      of the Decision  that  the  Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
      vulnerable.

Ground two: Unlawful  treatment  of  the  medico-legal  report  of  Ms  Mary
      Robertson

12.   In order to understand this ground, it is necessary to have regard  to
      the factual and evidential context relied upon.  As noted at  [18]  of
      the Decision, the Appellant originally relied on a psychiatric  report
      of Dr Sinha.  That was dated 24 April 2017, some two years  after  the
      Appellant's arrival in the UK.  Dr Sinha is  medically  qualified  and
      provides medico-legal reports on behalf of Medical Justice.  Dr  Sinha
      concluded that the Appellant did "not  meet  diagnostic  criteria  for
      depression" and although he  "exhibits  trauma  related  symptoms  and
      shows some symptoms and traits of PTSD" he did not at that  time  meet
      the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD. Dr Sinha diagnosed the Appellant
      as suffering from a "mild depressive episode".

13.   Before Judge Foudy, the Appellant relied on a report from  a  Clinical
      Psychologist, Ms Mary Robertson, dated 6 September 2018.  Ms Robertson
      specialises in "Post Traumatic Stress, specialising  in  working  with
      complex  trauma,  refugees  and   asylum   seekers".     She   reached
      conclusions  that  the  Appellant  "meets  the  full  criteria  for  a
      diagnosis of  PTSD  in  the  severe  range",  "meets  full  diagnostic
      criteria for PTSD according to DSM-V in the moderate range" and "meets
      the diagnostic criteria for a Major Depressive Disorder".  Her  report
      describes the methodology used to reach those conclusions.  At  [24.1]
      of the report, she says the following:


           "Based on [the Appellant]'s account of his mental  health  prior
           to being detained, he had some PTSD and depressive symptoms  but
           probably did not meet the clinical threshold for a diagnosis  of
           either disorder.  In my view, detention caused  his  psychiatric
           injury to worsen to the degree that he now meets  the  threshold
           for PTSD and depression in the moderate range of severity."

14.   The Judge dealt with that evidence as follows:

           "[20] I find  that  I  can  attach  only  little  weight  to  Ms
           Robertson's opinion for the following reasons:
               - Ms Robertson is  a  Psychologist.   She  is  not  medically
                 trained, whereas Dr Sinha is;
               - Ms Robertson identifies the fact that Dr Sinha  found  that
                 the Appellant did not have PTSD when seen by  Dr  Sinha  in
                 2017 but simply and baldly states that when she saw him  18
                 months later, he did have PTSD  (report  paragraph  17.10).
                 Ms Robertson offers no explanation for the deterioration in
                 the Appellant's condition and, in fact  confirms  that  the
                 Appellant's reported symptoms  were  similar.   It  follows
                 that on largely the same symptoms Ms Robertson and Dr Sinha
                 reached very different diagnoses.  I prefer the opinion  of
                 Dr Sinha due to her medical qualifications."

15.   As  is  immediately  apparent  by  reference  to  the  passage  of  Ms
      Robertson's report which I set out at [15] above, the second of  those
      reasons does not withstand scrutiny.  Although Ms  Robertson  did  not
      say what she did by reference  to  Dr  Sinha's  earlier  report,  that
      passage evidently includes some explanation as to why the  Appellant's
      symptoms might be different and worse.  Further, it  is  difficult  to
      see how it can be said that the diagnoses are  "very  different".   Dr
      Sinha accepted that the Appellant was showing signs of trauma but that
      those were not sufficient to reach the threshold for  a  diagnosis  of
      PTSD.

16.   Whilst the Judge was entitled to  take  into  account  the  respective
      qualifications of the authors of the two reports, it was also an error
      to fail to note their respective experience.  In fact, as appears from
      a comparison of the CVs, if anything, Ms Robertson has  more  relevant
      experience.  As such, I reject Mr Tufan's submission that Dr Sinha  is
      clearly better qualified.  Whilst I accept his point  that  the  Judge
      did not give Ms Robertson's report  no  weight  but  gave  it  "little
      weight" and whilst I obviously accept that  a  Judge  is  entitled  to
      prefer one  report  over  the  other,  the  Judge's  treatment  of  Ms
      Robertson's report for the reasons given does  disclose  an  error  of
      law.  I also observe as an aside that this error may also be  relevant
      to the Appellant's first ground in terms of the Judge's  treatment  of
      the Appellant as vulnerable.

Ground   three:   Failure   to   consider    fundamental    evidence    from
      medical/trafficking  experts  with  regard  to  vulnerability/risk  on
      return

17.   The Appellant relied on the reports of Robert  A  Sellwood,  Chartered
      Psychologist, dated 21 June 2018 and  Elizabeth  Flint's  "Trafficking
      Indicator Report" dated  6  June  2017.   The  first  dealt  with  the
      Appellant's cognitive abilities and opined that although  he  did  not
      meet the formal criteria for  a  diagnosis  of  learning  disabilities
      nonetheless  those  were  "low  enough  to  place  him  at   risk   of
      exploitation".  Ms Flint opined that it was "more likely than not that
      [the Appellant] would be at risk of re-trafficking again".
18.   Neither of those reports is  mentioned  in  the  Decision.   Mr  Tufan
      submitted that Mr Sellwood's report did not add materially to what was
      said by Ms Robertson.  I have of course  already  concluded  that  the
      Judge's treatment of her report involved an error of law and  so  this
      submission does not assist.   He also submitted that the other  report
      was mainly generic and made general points about risk on return  which
      was for the Tribunal to determine.  Whilst that is undoubtedly  right,
      one of the main risks claimed was of re-trafficking on return and  the
      assessment of risk required consideration of all  relevant  background
      and expert evidence.  As such, I accept that there is  also  an  error
      disclosed by this ground.

Ground four: Error with regard to risk on return

19.   The Judge gave reasons at [16] of the  Decision  why  the  Appellant's
      claim was objectively ill-founded.  Those were in summary as follows:
      (1)   The Appellant was not trafficked in Vietnam.  He had been  taken
      advantage of as a homeless child but was not trafficked until he moved
      to Laos.
      (2)   The Appellant did not say that  his  overseas  traffickers  were
      interested in him or had taken steps to find him  which  affected  the
      likelihood of re-trafficking.
      (3)   There was a sufficiency of protection for victims of trafficking
      in Vietnam.  In that regard, the Judge considered the expert report of
      Dr Tran on whose views the Appellant relied and  the  content  of  the
      Home  Office  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  ("CPIN").   She
      preferred the latter and criticised the opinon of Dr Tran as "not well-
      reasoned".


20.   This ground is formed of a number of separate submissions.  First,  it
      is said that the Judge  irrationally  focussed  only  on  whether  the
      Appellant claimed that others would be interested in him;  he  had  in
      any event said that he feared his traffickers amongst others.  Second,
      the Appellant repeats  the  point  that  the  Judge  has  ignored  the
      evidence of Ms Flint.  Third, the  Appellant  points  to  the  Judge's
      comment about Dr Tran's report that "Dr Tran acknowledges that Vietnam
      has passed comprehensive laws against trafficking however  she  opines
      that enforcement is patchy.  I can attach weight to that  opinion  but
      sadly that criticism can be levelled at many developed countries  too,
      even the UK".  As the Appellant points out, the issue whether there is
      a sufficiency of protection in Vietnam is one  of  assessment  of  the
      evidence about what happens in that country and  does  not  involve  a
      comparison  with  the  situation  in  other  countries.   Fourth,   in
      preferring the CPIN over Dr Tran's evidence, the Judge failed to  have
      regard to all relevant passages (see [25] of the grounds for details).
       Fifth, the Judge placed reliance on the Upper Tribunal's decision  in
      Nguyen (anti-trafficking Convention; Respondent's duties) [2015]  UKUT
      170.  As the Appellant points out, the guidance in that case does  not
      relate to the position in relation to trafficking  in  Vietnam  but  a
      point about trafficking generally. All of  those  matters  go  to  the
      issue whether the Appellant was at  risk  of  being  re-trafficked  on
      return to Vietnam.

21.   As Mr Tufan submitted, some of those criticisms are not  well-founded.
       The 2018 CPIN on which the Judge relies does contain passages largely
      supportive of  the  Judge's  conclusions  about  the  availability  of
      protection.  I have however already noted that the Judge did not  deal
      with Ms Flint's report and, whilst  that  may  well  be  generic,  was
      relevant evidence which should have been considered.  This ground  may
      have less force (and I accept that if not made out  might  affect  the
      materiality of other of the grounds).  However,  as  Ms  Mair  pointed
      out, although the fact  that  the  Appellant  was  not  trafficked  in
      Vietnam in the past is relevant, there is the additional factor of the
      Appellant's vulnerability and exploitation in Vietnam which is  simply
      not taken into account in what is said at [16] of the  Decision.   For
      that reason, I accept that this ground also is made out and  that  the
      other errors which I have already found to be made out are capable  of
      impacting on the findings in any event.

Ground five: Failure to consider very significant obstacles

22.   This is the ground  on  which  permission  to  appeal  was  originally
      granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  FTJ  Beach  observed,  the
      Article 8 ground of appeal was specifically raised by Counsel for  the
      Appellant.  As such, the Judge  should  have  dealt  with  it.   Also,
      irrespective of the Judge's findings on  the  risk  issue,  given  the
      facts of this particular case,  the  question  whether  the  Appellant
      would be able to integrate in Vietnam was a highly pertinent one.   As
      Ms Mair pointed out, the Appellant's case which was  accepted  by  the
      Judge was that he left  Vietnam  as  an  orphan  child  who  had  been
      significantly exploited in the past and had no  resources  or  support
      there.  The medical evidence to which I have already referred also has
      some bearing on this issue. There is no reasoning given at all for the
      bald assertion at  [32]  of  the  Decision  that  "Article  8  is  not
      disproportionately breached by removal." Given the background to  this
      case, I do not accept Mr Tufan's submission that the  error  which  is
      clear on the face of the Decision could not be material.

 Summary of Conclusions

23.   For those reasons, I am satisfied that the grounds disclose errors  of
      law as set out above.

Next Steps

24.   Ms Mair asked that if I set aside the Decision,  I  should  remit  the
      appeal to the First-tier Tribunal as she said that there  would  be  a
      significant amount of fact finding to be carried out in light  of  the
      deficiencies in the Judge's consideration.  That may be one reason  to
      remit but remittal might not be justified for that reason alone.  This
      Tribunal is able to make findings of fact  and  the  issues  here  are
      quite narrow.

25.   I take into account that this  would  be  the  second  time  that  the
      Appellant's appeal would be remitted (an earlier decision having  been
      found to also contain an error of law).  I take into account also that
      on the previous occasion, the error of law was a  procedural  one  and
      the remittal was to ensure that the Appellant has a  fair  hearing  of
      his appeal.  I have set out above why I have  reached  the  conclusion
      that the consideration of his appeal  on  this  occasion  was  flawed.
      Having regard to the Practice Statement in relation to  the  remittals
      of appeals and the reason why the appeal was remitted on the  previous
      occasion, I have reached the conclusion  that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to ensure that the Appellant has a fair determination of  his
      appeal.


DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy  promulgated
on 9 January 2019 is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judges Foudy and McAll.

Signed                 Dated: 17 May 2019

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
