
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/07373/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 11 January 2016                   |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             NAJMUDIN MOHAMMADI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T D Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who gives a date of birth  as
    21 March 1987.  He has not asked for an anonymity order,  and  none  is
    made.

 2. The appellant  claims  to  have  left  Afghanistan  in  December  2006,
    arriving in the UK on 7 May 2007.  He sought asylum then but  absconded
    before his claim could be fully  considered.   He  made  himself  known
    again to the respondent through his solicitors in 2013.  The respondent
    refused his claim for reasons explained in a letter dated 9 April 2015.



 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Debra  Clapham  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal for reasons explained in  her  determination  promulgated  on  9
    October 2015.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
    grounds set out over 10 pages.

 5. On 5 November 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cox  granted  permission,
    observing:

         "... the grounds are of considerable length and do  not  altogether
         escape  the  charge  of  being  "a  tedious  litany   of   forensic
         criticism."  Nevertheless, having ploughed through them, I am  just
         persuaded that there is an arguable core ... namely that the  judge
         may have failed adequately to engage with the material  aspects  of
         the  evidence  and  have  given  inadequate  reasons  for  material
         findings ..."

 6. The grounds cannot escape the charge of being in large part restatement
    of the  appellant's  case  in  terms  which  amount  to  no  more  than
    disagreement with the judge's view of the evidence.

 7. The appellant's essential  claim  was  that  while  he  was  at  school
    representatives of the Afghan authorities recruited him to report  upon
    local members of the Taliban, who included his  brother.   The  Taliban
    came to know of this, called at his house while he was out  and  killed
    his father.  His  uncle  arranged  for  him  immediately  to  flee  the
    country.

 8. I note in passing that the respondent (paragraphs 17-33  in  particular
    of the decision) considered that even if credible this claim failed  on
    grounds of sufficiency  of  protection  and  availability  of  internal
    relocation.  Those issues appear to have been  lost  sight  of  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The judge should have reached conclusions even in
    the alternative, as these are issues capable of deciding the case,  and
    rendering the credibility debate sterile.

 9. The appellant supported his claim with a statement purportedly  from  a
    Major Omar, a Director of Intelligence in the Afghanistan Army based in
    the  Presidential  Palace  with  responsibility  for  security  of  the
    President, his senior officials, and senior visiting foreign officials.
     The statement was initially obtained by the appellant's  solicitor  in
    Glasgow speaking through an interpreter in Glasgow to a private  mobile
    telephone number.  A statement prepared by the solicitor bears to  have
    been  read  over  in  Pushtu  to  the  witness  in  Afghanistan  by  an
    Afghanistan Army interpreter  and  signed  there.   Photocopy  identity
    documents of Major Omar (an Afghan National Army  card  and  a  vehicle
    access permit) were also produced.

10. Mr Ruddy's submissions centred on criticising the various reasons given
    by the judge for rejecting the credibility  of  the  evidence  for  the
    appellant, most  importantly  those  going  to  the  rejection  of  the
    evidence from Major Shah.  It was said that the  judge  overlooked  the
    appellant's explanations of how this evidence became available to  him;
    that inadequate explanations were given for rejecting it; and  that  to
    focus on further evidence which  might  have  been  forthcoming  (death
    certificates) disregarded the evidence that was  there.   Cumulatively,
    Mr Ruddy submitted, there  were  such  errors  as  to  require  another
    hearing.

11.  Mr  Matthews  submitted  that  although  the  appellant  made  a   few
    superficially attractive points of criticism, they were not  borne  out
    on looking at the case and  at  the  determination  as  a  whole.   The
    appellant could give no good reason for leaving Greece,  for  his  tour
    around Europe or for his disappearance from sight of the UK authorities
    from 2007 to 2013.  It  was  for  the  judge  whether  the  appellant's
    statement and oral evidence together  were  sufficiently  detailed  and
    persuasive for her to accept his  case  as  established  to  the  lower
    standard.  The judge had been entitled to find it  "bizarre"  that  the
    appellant would refuse to accept  money  for  his  activities  for  the
    authorities.  Paragraph 107, where the judge found it "strange that  he
    would agree to betray his brother, effectively"  this  was  not  to  be
    interpreted as meaning that the judge thought he agreed to  betray  his
    brother directly, rather it was a comment that he agreed to act on  the
    other side and so to betray his brother's general cause.  In  the  same
    paragraph the judge found it incredible that  the  appellant  was  "not
    aware of the consequences ... if he were to have been found out by  the
    Taliban."  That was more than justifiable.  The appellant was bound  to
    know the nature of the  Taliban  and  how  they  dealt  with  spies  or
    traitors.  The appellant criticised paragraph 109 where the judge  says
    simply that there are inconsistencies and a lack  of  detail,  but  the
    judge  had  earlier  set  out  the  appellant's  evidence   about   his
    communications with his uncle and with Major Omah, how they came to  be
    in touch, how long he had the information, and so on (paragraphs  66-70
    in particular, being re-examination).  The judge was entitled  to  find
    that it was far from clear how contact among the appellant,  his  uncle
    and the Major had been established or carried on, that that the claimed
    mode of communication with Major Shah was frankly  incredible  and  the
    evidence unreliable.  A point of fairness was  taken  about  the  judge
    referring to the absence of  death  certificates  for  the  appellant's
    brother and father but that was  no  more  than  a  brief  and  factual
    statement at paragraph 113, plainly not  a  matter  of  great  decisive
    importance.  It was said that the respondent might have a duty to check
    details made available, through the Major's telephone number, but  that
    did not apply where contact details given were  private  and  personal.
    The matter might be different if an official means of communication  by
    email or otherwise had been offered.  It was incredible that a Director
    of Intelligence in the Afghan Army would have no official email address
    and would choose to communicate through a  colleague's  private  g-mail
    address.  The determination as a whole and in particular at 105 to  113
    was a legally sound explanation of why the claim was rejected.

12. I reserved my determination.

13. This is a case to stand back from minute points of disagreement and  to
    take an overall view.

14. It would be powerful and unusual support to corroborate an  account  by
    direct evidence from a Major in Afghan Intelligence  who  recruited  an
    appellant as a source of information.  However, all communications with
    this individual were by way of a personal mobile number and of a g-mail
    address of a third party, said to be his junior  in  rank.   The  judge
    found it incredible that such a person would  have  no  official  email
    address or would provide photocopies of his  identification  documents.
    The appellant gave  a  plainly  unsatisfactory  account  of  how  these
    communications came to be set up and why there was such a long lapse of
    time.  There were no details given which arguably  imposed  a  duty  of
    verification on the respondent.  The  appellant's  representatives  did
    their best with the materials provided, but this is  a  story  which  a
    judge was plainly entitled to reject.   I  do  not  consider  that  her
    reasons for doing so have been shown to be less than legally  adequate.
    The proposition that Afghan intelligence services responsible  for  the
    security of the President do not have any official e-mail available  to
    them and that they use g-mail addresses (which anyone  can  create)  is
    plainly absurd.  Whatever minor criticisms might be formulated  of  the
    decision, no significant doubt is cast on the overall conclusions.

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           14 January 2016


