
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07971/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd June 2017                             |On 03 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                     mp
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                   DETERMINATION BY CONSENT AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This matter last appeared before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Saini  on
    4th April 2017.  In a determination promulgated on 11th May 2017  Judge
    Saini found that there were material errors of law and gave directions.
     Those directions included that the matter be retained within the Upper
    Tribunal to be listed with an ELH of three hours.

 2. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me today.   Mr  Jarvis
    appears on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Paramjorthy on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  Mr Jarvis points out:-

      1) That this is a case which is listed for three hours for  re-hearing
         but it has never been provided to him for preparation.

      2) That he in such circumstances asks for an adjournment on the  basis
         that he is not in a position to proceed, and

      3) that if I do grant the adjournment that the correct procedure would
         be to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis
         that none of the findings of fact were to stand and that that would
         have been the correct and proper approach for Judge Saini  to  have
         adopted when the matter last appeared before him in April.

 3. Mr Paramjorthy, who has considerable experience of this matter and  who
    advises that he has discussed the matter with his client indicates that
    he consents to the request for an adjournment and for transfer  by  way
    of remit back to the First-tier Tribunal.  He indicates that  the  only
    reason that the matter was kept within  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Judge
    Saini was because of the length of time that the case had been going on
    and that it was felt that it would be quicker to get a listing  in  the
    UT.  He is however of the view that as none of  the  findings  of  fact
    were, or are, to be preserved then a level of appeal has been lost  and
    that it is not an appropriate argument (and  indeed  not  one  that  Mr
    Jarvis seeks to put forward) that there is  a  level  of  appeal  still
    maintained to the Court of Appeal from an Upper Tribunal,  particularly
    bearing in mind that there is a different test to be  applied  in  such
    appeals.

Decision and Directions

 4. In the light of the circumstances and it remains unclear as to  whether
    the administrative failure to provide papers  to  Mr  Jarvis  were  the
    responsibility of the Secretary of State or the administration  of  the
    Tribunal and on hearing the consent submissions made by Counsel for the
    Appellant I find:-

      1) That the request made by the Secretary of State for an  adjournment
         be allowed.

      2) That the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard
         at Hatton Cross on the first available date 28 days hence  with  an
         ELH of three hours before any  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         excluding Immigration Judge Woolf.

      3) That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

      4) That there be leave to either party to file and serve an up-to-date
         bundle of objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they seek
         to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

      5) That in the event of either  party  seeking  to  rely  on  skeleton
         arguments, such skeleton arguments be lodged at  the  Tribunal  and
         served on the other party at least seven days prior to the restored
         hearing.

      6) That a Tamil interpreter do attend.

Anonymity

 5. That on the directions hearing of 11th May 2017 anonymity  was  granted
    to the Appellant.  That anonymity direction is to continue.





Signed  D N Harris                               Dated:  22nd June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.





Signed  D N Harris                               Dated: 22nd June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
