
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07487/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 May 2016                        |On 11 May 2016                       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
  DESIGNATED FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT SITTING AS A DEPUTY JUDGE OF
                             THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                            MIR SHOWQAT ALI TUHIN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Azmi instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Turquet promulgated on the 2 October 2015.

Background


    2. The appellant was born on the 1  March  1991  and  is  a  citizen  of
       Bangladesh.  The  decision  under  appeal  is  the  refusal   of   an
       application for asylum or any other form of international  protection
       dated 23 and 28 April 2015. The appeal was refused on all grounds.

    3. An application for permission to appeal was rejected  by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Pitt on the following basis:

           It is arguable that the FTTJ erred in failing to adjourn  for  a
           medical report coving both  psychological  and  physical  issues
           even where the events alleged to  have  given  rise  to  medical
           problems were 5 years earlier and the appellant had not been  to
           see a GP since coming to the UK.  His case was taken out of  the
           fast-track because of  acceptance  for  referral  by  the  Helen
           Bamber Foundation and that Foundation's inability to  offer  him
           an appointment by the  time  of  the  hearing  was  out  of  the
           appellant's control.   It is also arguable that  the  First-tier
           Tribunal was not entitled to  place  weight  on  an  absence  of
           detail  from  the  asylum  claim  in  the  appellants  screening
           interview given the limited scope and purpose of that interview.

Discussion


The Adjournment issue

    4. The application to adjourn for the medical  assessment  was  made  in
       writing on the 4 September 2015 but refused by a different  judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal on the same date in the following terms:

           Adjournment refused. A has been in the UK for more than 5  years
           and a report from the HBF is unlikely to  assist  the  tribunal.
           The issue is credibility and that is a matter for the Judge  not
           an "expert".

    5. The application was renewed at the hearing, it being  submitted  that
       refusal would deprive the appellant of a fair hearing  and  that  the
       value of  the  report  would  be  an  assessment  of  torture  by  an
       acknowledged expert and for the court to consider what weight  should
       be given to it. It is also noted that the application was opposed  by
       the Presenting Officer who referred to the  fact  the  appellant  had
       submitted medical evidence from Bangladesh and had been released from
       Fast  Track  detention  to  obtain  the  reports  and  that  it  was,
       accordingly, unreasonable to delay proceedings.

    6. The judge's findings in relation to the application are as follows:

           "7.     Having  considered  the  overriding  objective  of   the
           Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) Immigration and  Asylum
           Chamber) Rules 2014, I was satisfied  that  the  case  could  be
           dealt with fairly and justly without an adjournment.  In  Naigwe
           (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) the President of
           the Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the  test  to  be  applied  is
           fairness. "Was there any deprivation  of  the  affected  party's
           right to a fair  hearing"?   This  Appellant  is  requesting  an
           adjournment to obtain medical evidence in respect of  an  attack
           in 2010.  There has been ample time to obtain a report.  I  note
           that the letter dated 12.5.2015 from the Helen Bamber Foundation
           was stating that it was unable to offer a pre-assessment.  There
           is no satisfactory explanation as to why the earlier appointment
           for a report was some six months after this  letter.   There  is
           medical evidence from Bangladesh.  The Appellant will  have  the
           opportunity to give evidence in respect of his injuries and  any
           psychological damage.  Although he has been seeing a GP  in  the
           United Kingdom, I  note  his  GP  has  not  referred  him  to  a
           Psychiatrist  or  Psychologist.   I  was  satisfied   that   the
           Appellant could have a fair hearing"

    7. The grounds of challenge assert the appellant had an  expectation  he
       would be seen by the Helen Bamber  Foundation  having  had  his  case
       removed from the Fast Track process on the basis on the  strength  of
       that appointment. It is stated the reason the Foundation were  unable
       to  assist  was  due  to  'over  capacity  issues'.  An   alternative
       appointment was arranged for the 17 November 2015. It is claimed that
       in light of this the appellants case was being prepared on the  basis
       such a report was being prepared.

    8. Mr Azmi referred us  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  repeated  the
       argument relied upon therein.

    9. The Upper Tribunal in Naigwe held that a refusal to adjourn could, in
       principle, be erroneous in law in several respects: these  include  a
       failure to take into account all material considerations;  permitting
       immaterial considerations to intrude; denying the party  concerned  a
       fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the  correct  test;  and   acting
       irrationally. Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on  fairness
       grounds, it is important to recognise that the question for the Upper
       Tribunal is not whether the FTT acted reasonably.  Rather the test to
       be applied is that of fairness: was  there  any  deprivation  of  the
       affected party of his right to a fair hearing?  In this case  it  has
       not been shown this is the case.

   10. Cases in which  this  issue  has  been  considered  include  the  age
       assessment  case  of   SH  (Afghanistan)  by  Litigation  Friend  the
       Official Solicitor v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 in which an application for an  adjournment  was
       refused for an age assessment report under the Asylum and Immigration
       Tribunal (Fast-Track Procedure) Rules 2005.    The  Court  of  Appeal
       held that the essential point was that the  Secretary  of  State  had
       expert evidence re age, an important issue in the case, on which  she
       relied  and  the  Claimant  wished  to  produce  his  own.  In  those
       circumstances, it seemed beyond argument that the  Immigration  Judge
       ought, in fairness, to have given  the  Claimant  an  opportunity  to
       provide countervailing expert evidence. It was unfair and unlawful to
       refuse an adjournment at that stage.

   11. Although the Respondent in the refusal letter denied the assertion of
       torture, hence putting the appellant to proof of the  same,  this  is
       not a case in which there was an inequality of arms before the First-
       tier Tribunal as occurred in SH.

   12. In relation to the need to obtain medical report, in R (Djdije  Fana)
       v Special Adjudicator (2002) Imm  AR  407,  Silber  J  said  that  an
       Adjudicator's refusal to grant an adjournment sought on  the  day  of
       the  hearing  to  obtain  a   psychiatric   report   was   Wednesbury
       unreasonable when the issue in the case concerned Article  3  of  the
       ECHR and the outcome of the case depended largely on the contents  of
       any such report.

   13. The decision in R(Fana) contrasts with the later Tribunal decision of
       A (Afghanistan) (2003) UKIAT 00165, where an Adjudicator  refused  to
       adjourn part heard to allow a medical  report  to  be  produced,  the
       Tribunal said that the Adjudicator was entitled to refuse the request
       and was required to do so as the appeal could  be  justly  determined
       without an adjournment - there had been ample opportunity before  the
       hearing to obtain a medical report and the representatives were aware
       of circumstances that suggested medical evidence might be relevant.

   14. In WT (2004) UKIAT 00176 (Ouseley) the Tribunal said that it was  not
       an error of law to refuse an adjournment requested on  the  basis  of
       fresh evidence, which had yet to be obtained, when it was  not  clear
       how such evidence would make a material difference  to  the  evidence
       already before  an  Adjudicator.   In  that  case,  while  the  fresh
       evidence, in the form of a report by the  Medical  Foundation,  could
       not  have  been  obtained  with  reasonable  diligence   before   the
       Adjudicator's hearing, the substance of that evidence could have been
       obtained from a GP and  could  have  been  raised  by  the  appellant
       himself in time for the hearing.  The Tribunal  said  that,  although
       the Medical Foundation had a particular expertise, it was not unique.
        A report  by  them  would  consist  of  a  description  of  physical
       symptoms, which could be provided by others, and an assessment of the
       consistency of those  signs  or  symptoms  with  what  the  appellant
       described.  However, consistency was not the same as proof.

   15. The application suggests the appellant wanted the report to prove the
       credibility of his claim. It is accepted a report may  be  considered
       as part of the process of assessing credibility but in HH  (Ethiopia)
       v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 306 the Court said that it was not a  function
       of the medical expert to comment on the claimant's credibility.   The
       remit of the medical expert was limited to making  findings  relating
       to a claimant's physical or psychological condition and  establishing
       whether it was consistent with the claimant's account of events.   It
       was for the Immigration Judge to assess the claimant's credibility in
       the light of all the evidence including the medical report.

   16.  In  HE  (2004)  UKIAT  00321  (Ouseley)  the  Tribunal   said   that
       practitioners should take care in putting forward medical reports  as
       probative of their client's  credibility.   A  doctor  will  normally
       accept what his patient tells him; indeed  it  is  not  his  role  to
       assess whether what his patient tells him is  true.   When  a  doctor
       says that physical features such as scarring are  consistent  with  a
       patient's account of how he came by them, this has the effect only of
       not negating the claim, since they may  be  equally  consistent  with
       other causes.  A psychiatric report is even more dependant on what  a
       patient says.  Even if a diagnosis of  PTSD  or  depression  actually
       reflects symptoms which the patient is genuinely suffering, there may
       well be other causes for them.  Where the report  simply  recounts  a
       history which the  Adjudicator  is  minded  to  reject  and  contains
       nothing which does not depend on the truthfulness of  the  appellant,
       the part which it can  play  in  the  assessment  of  credibility  is
       negligible.

   17. It has not been made out that this is a case  in  which  the  outcome
       depended largely on the report. The judge had before her the evidence
       referred to at paragraph 9 of the determination although it is  noted
       at paragraph 51 of the determination that no GP records, which  could
       easily be obtained, had been submitted. The judge also  found  "There
       is no evidence that he has been unable to function  normally  due  to
       any mental health or psychological". The appellant has  been  in  the
       United Kingdom since 19 February 2011 as a student and did not  claim
       asylum until after his arrest on 6 March 2015 when encountered during
       an enforcement visit to a residential address where he was identified
       as an overstayer. Removal directions were set for 18 March  2015  for
       Bangladesh resulting in the asylum claim made on the 17  March  2015.
       There has  been  ample  time  to  consult  a  GP  or  obtain  medical
       assistance, but none was provided before  the  judge  notwithstanding
       the production of various other documents including medical  evidence
       from Bangladesh, dated 2010.

   18. The judge heard the appellant give oral evidence in which he set  out
       the details of his claim. At paragraph 50 the judge records the claim
       the appellant had been tortured and ill-treated in Bangladesh  in  an
       inhumane and degrading manner as a result of his political  activism,
       but that the  appellant  had  not  indicated  that  he  received  any
       injuries at any other time and that the appellant had provided a true
       medical report of the injuries in January 2010 when the only  visible
       injury reported by the appellant is said to  be  a  small  scar  from
       three stitches. The judge noted the reference to  a  broken  arm,  an
       injury to the appellant's nose and facial lacerations, which  it  was
       said could arise from a number of other causes such  as  a  fight  or
       cycle accident. It is also  noted  that  the  appellant  provided  no
       evidence that he had sought help for PTSD  or  any  psychological  or
       mental health issues. In the screening interview  the  appellant  was
       asked about his health and stated he only had some pain in his  right
       eye at times and did not take medication.

   19. It has not been made out before us today that the  appeal  could  not
       have been justly  determined  without  an  adjournment.  As  such  no
       arguable legal error has been made out on the basis  of  the  alleged
       procedural impropriety.

   The credibility findings

   20. The judge found the appellants claim  to  lack  credibility  for  the
       reasons set out in the  determination.  We  find  the  judge  clearly
       considered the evidence made available with the  required  degree  of
       anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons for concluding as she
       did. As such the weight to be given to the evidence was a matter  for
       the judge.

   21. Within this challenge is reference to the judge's  treatment  of  the
       failure of the appellant to attend  an  interview.  It  is  said  the
       adverse inference drawn from the  same  is  factually  erroneous.  In
       paragraph 51 of the determination the judge noted:

           "51.   The Appellant refused to be interviewed on April  2  2015
           he said that he had a headache and asked for the interview to be
           rescheduled.  He also said that  he  could  not  think  properly
           because of the headache. Healthcare did not  know  what  he  was
           going through mentally because he had  not  been  to  sleep  for
           days. On 3.4.2015 Health Care stated that there was  no  current
           indication that he was  unfit  for  interview.   The  Appellants
           interview was rescheduled for 22.4.2015 and the Appellant stated
           that he was unable to go ahead. Although he gave an  account  of
           having migraine, nosebleeds and tonsillitis,  he  said  that  he
           would be ok  the  next  day  or  the  day  after.  There  is  no
           supporting evidence of treatment  for  migraine,  nosebleeds  or
           tonsillitis.  There was no report from Heath  Care  stating  the
           Appellant was unfit for interview.  It was  submitted  that  the
           Appellant was to pay privately for Professor Katona, however  no
           GP records which could easily have been obtained were submitted.
            The Appellant has worked and studied  in  the  United  Kingdom.
           There is no  evidence  that  he  has  been  unable  to  function
           normally due to  any  mental  health  or  psychological.  Having
           considered the evidence in respect of his  Asylum  interview,  I
           draw an adverse inference form his failure to attend.  I find it
           reasonable to expect a person in genuine fear of persecution  on
           return to his country, to take every  available  opportunity  to
           give his own account. In the event that he  was  feeling  unwell
           during an interview, the interview could  restart  when  he  was
           feeling much better."

   22. The grounds refer to the fact the appellant was seen by  Health  Care
       and the conclusion there was no indication the  appellant  was  unfit
       for interview but that, if requested, he could be seen  by  a  health
       care professional. There was no evidence the appellant  made  such  a
       request or that a health care professional  certified  him  as  being
       unfit for interview.

   23. The chronology shows the appellant was  offered  a  second  interview
       date on 22 April 2015 which did not go ahead as the  appellant  again
       claimed  to  be  unwell.  It  is  stated  he  was  advised   of   the
       ramifications of non-compliance. As a result the claim was treated as
       non-compliant  in  accordance  with   the   respondents   established
       procedures and no further interview date provided.

   24. On the basis of the evidence before the judge it has  not  been  made
       out that the adverse inference is unfair or unjustified. Even if  the
       appellant had a headache  and  nose  bleed,  as  claimed,  there  was
       insufficient material available to show this provided a  satisfactory
       explanation for his failure to attend  the  interviews.  As  such  no
       legal error is made out in the finding which is one open to the judge
       on the available evidence. It is also the case that this is only  one
       of the reasons for the adverse credibility findings and has not  been
       shown to be a determinative factor.

   25. The grounds also challenge the judge's  treatment  of  the  screening
       interview claiming the judge placed undue emphasis of  the  screening
       interview and failed to have regard to the actual  answers  given  by
       the appellant.

   26. In YL (2004) UKIAT 00145 the Tribunal noted that, whilst the  answers
       given at a screening interview are expected to be true and may fairly
       be compared to answers given later, it is  not  appropriate  at  this
       stage to expect a detailed account of the  applicant's  asylum  claim
       and account should be taken of the fact that the interviewee may well
       be tired after a long journey. These matters have to be borne in mind
       when considering inconsistencies between the screening interview  and
       the later evidence. Mr Tuhin's screening interview is dated 20  March
       2015 some four years after entry to the UK meaning there is no  issue
       of the impact of a recent long journey having to be considered.

   27. The judge was entitled to  consider  the  content  of  the  interview
       against other evidence relied upon by the  appellant.   Two  relevant
       Court of Appeal cases on this point are Karimi v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ
       263 in which the Court said that, where an "airport  interview"  that
       took place an hour post arrival was properly conducted in  accordance
       with the procedural requirements considered appropriate at  the  time
       and the Appellant, who was  intelligent  and  well  qualified,  spoke
       proficient English so  reducing  the  possibility  of  any  operative
       fairness in the Farsi translation, the Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
       find that a discrepancy between the interview  account  and  evidence
       was not satisfactorily explained and deeply damaged  the  appellant's
       credibility.

   28. In AM (Iran) v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1813  the  Court  of  Appeal
       considered whether it was appropriate to take account of a "notebook"
       interview, the interview carried  out  shortly  after  arrival.   The
       Court said that there was no application to exclude it; there was  no
       evidence that formalities had not been complied with; an  interpreter
       had been used; and the appellant had  given  a  detailed  account  of
       himself.  The Immigration Judge was entitled to admit it.  The weight
       to be attached to it was, within the limits of rationality, a  matter
       for the Immigration Judge.

   29. The judge did not have the benefit of an  asylum  interview  for  the
       reasons stated above. At paragraph 38 of the determination the  judge
       records:

           "38.   I do not find that the Appellant has provided a  credible
           basis for challenging the assertions, analysis  and  conclusions
           of the Respondent's refusal letter. The basis of  his  claim  is
           that he fears the Awami League. In his  screening  interview  he
           stated that his reason for coming to the United Kingdom  was  to
           study.  When asked for the reason why he  could  not  return  to
           Bangladesh, he said that "when I travelled to the UK the problem
           was not that bad.  I had a few  fights  with  the  Awami  League
           because I was a member of the Awami League and had  court  cases
           for the fights." He stated that his problems started in 2006. He
           describes injuries received to his right eye,  elbow  and  waist
           and said that after that the Awami League started  making  false
           claims against him."

   30. At paragraph 39 the judge noted that  in  his  asylum  statement  the
       appellant claimed to have joined the student wing of  the  BNP  after
       finishing secondary school in November 2006, referring to  the  first
       incident by the Awami League being in October 2007.  The  judge  also
       noted that the appellant had stated in his screening  interview  that
       cases had been brought against him after he was injured although  the
       injuries described in the screening interview are  given  a  date  of
       2010 in his statement which is inconsistent with a false claim  being
       brought in 2007. No arguable legal error is made out in  relation  to
       these findings.

   31. The observation by the judge in paragraph 40 that  if  the  appellant
       had been made the subject of arrest warrants in 2008, 2010  and  2014
       for serious charges such as illegal arms, arson and political murder,
       it is reasonable to expect there would be mention of the same in  the
       screening interview has not been shown to be  a  stance  infected  by
       arguable legal error. The judge noted what was said in the  screening
       interview  in  reply  to  a  specific  question  asking  whether  the
       appellant had been made the subject of  arrest  warrants  where  such
       matters were not mentioned by him  other  than  in  the  vague  terms
       identified by the judge.

   32. The assertion the judge failed to consider the evidence in the  round
       is not made out and we find in the alternative, as stated above.

   33. The assertion in relation to paragraph 46  of  the  determination  is
       without arguable merit. Here the Judge finds:

           "46.   There are documents purporting to relate to a  murder  in
           2014. The appellant was not in Bangladesh at that time.  In  the
           event that he was charged he would have proof of  being  out  of
           the country at  the  time.  In  the  event  he  was  accused  of
           providing finance, this would not be difficult to refute."

   34. The assertion the judge failed to have regard to the murder charge is
       therefore incorrect.  It  is  accepted  fabricated  charges  are  not
       unknown in Bangladesh. The claim the appellant is able to refute  the
       charges not being supported by objective evidence fails to  recognise
       the fact that in 2014 the appellant was in the UK and could not  have
       murdered anyone in Bangladesh. It is for the appellant to  prove  his
       assertions not for the judge to disprove them.  On  the  evidence  no
       arguable legal error is made out in relation to this aspect.

   35. No arguable legal error material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal is made out.

Decision

   36. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   37. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       We make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5 May 2016

