
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/07508/2014
                                                               AA/07505/2014
                                                               AA/07502/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 25 February 2016                  |On 28th April 2016                   |
|Prepared on 1 March 2016             |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. B.
                                    M. B.
                                    A. A.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Brar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The First Appellant [A1] entered the United Kingdom using  her  own
         Pakistani passport, and with the benefit of entry  clearance  as  a
         Tier 4 student on 4 April 2011. Her leave expired  on  28  February
         2013.

      2. On 24 December 2011 A1 gave birth to her son, A2.

      3. On 29 December 2011 A1 claimed asylum, with A2  as  her  dependent.
         The Respondent refused that claim, cancelled her leave so that  she
         had none, and  made  a  decision  to  remove  her  to  Pakistan  by
         reference to s47.

      4. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal  against  these  immigration
         decisions. Although her appeal was heard and  allowed  on  15  June
         2012 by decision of Judge Manchester, that decision  was  then  set
         aside by the Upper Tribunal. The appeals were remitted to the First
         Tier Tribunal for re-hearing, with no findings of fact preserved.

      5. On 11 January 2013 A1 gave birth to her daughter, A3.

      6. Upon rehearing A1s appeal was dismissed on all grounds by  decision
         of Judge Duff promulgated on 28 October 2013. Permission to  appeal
         that decision was refused by Designated Judge Baird on 26  November
         2013, and A1s appeal rights were duly exhausted.

      7. As an overstayer the A1 applied on 14 July 2014 for a grant of  ILR
         alleging  that  she  was  the  victim  of  domestic  violence.  The
         application was refused  on  12  September  2014,  when  a  further
         removal decision was made, this time by reference to  s10.  All  of
         the Appellants lodged a  notice  of  appeal,  and  these  were  all
         accepted as valid appeals, although each was then dismissed by  way
         of  an  individual  decision  of  Judge  Lea,  all  of  which  were
         promulgated on 25 November 2014.

      8. The Appellants' handwritten application to the First Tier  Tribunal
         for permission to appeal, was refused  by  Judge  PJG  White  on  5
         January 2015. The Appellants duly renewed their application to  the
         Upper Tribunal on the same grounds. Permission was granted by Judge
         McWilliam on 5 May 2015, without sight of  the  decision  of  Judge
         Duff,  on  all  of  the  grounds  raised,  noting   that   A1   was
         unrepresented and had been  unrepresented  at  the  hearing  before
         Judge Lea. The basis for the grant was that it could  be  that  the
         circumstances of A1 ought to have been considered by Judge Lea as a
         lone single woman with young children to support, and that they may
         not have been.

      9. The Respondent filed no Rule 24 Notice.

     10. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Grounds of appeal

     11. Mr Selway accepted that handwritten grounds  of  appeal  should  be
         read as raising four grounds of complaint. He  declined  to  pursue
         either the complaint that A1 had been bullied by  the  HOPO  and/or
         Judge Lea, or, the complaint that the hearing proceeded without  A1
         having legal representation, or, the complaint that Judge Lea  gave
         no consideration to A1s medical records.

     12. Mr Selway was plainly correct to take that  course.  There  was  no
         evidence produced to  substantiate  the  claim  that  A1  had  been
         bullied to any degree, in any respect,  at  any  stage  during  the
         process. Nor was there any evidence to suggest that the  Appellants
         had not been afforded a fair hearing in any respect.  Nor  did  the
         decision itself offer any support  for  such  complaints.  The  key
         adverse findings of fact had been made by Judge Duff,  following  a
         hearing at which A1 had been represented  by  experienced  Counsel,
         who could be expected both to protect her interests and to  present
         her case to its best advantage.

     13. Moreover A1 had told Judge Lea that she was content for the hearing
         to proceed without representation, and Mr Selway accepted that  she
         was in that  position  because  none  of  the  solicitors  she  had
         approached had been prepared to extend their services to her.  This
         was not a case of an individual being  abandoned  by  their  lawyer
         shortly before a hearing, and she had been given ample time to find
         representation, which she was unable  to  secure  because  none  of
         those she  had  approached  had  assessed  the  appeals  as  having
         arguable merit.

     14. Finally Judge Lea had recorded in her decision [27]  that  she  had
         considered A1s medical records. She had relied upon  their  content
         to make a finding of fact in A1s favour to the effect that she  had
         been the victim of domestic violence. She had also considered their
         content when assessing the finding of fact made by  Judge  Duff  in
         relation to the date of conception of A2.

     15. Although the grounds of appeal before the First Tier  Tribunal  had
         relied upon both a claim to asylum, and humanitarian protection, Mr
         Selway accepted that neither of those grounds were  viable  on  the
         evidence. Mr Selway also accepted on reflection that  none  of  the
         findings of fact made by Judge Manchester had been  preserved  when
         his decision had been set aside by the Upper Tribunal.  Thus  Judge
         Lea had made no error in failing to take as her starting point  any
         of the findings of  fact  made  by  Judge  Manchester,  as  he  had
         initially sought to argue. She  had  instead  correctly  taken  the
         findings of fact made by Judge Duff as her starting point, and  she
         had properly applied the principles set out  in  Devaseelan  [2002]
         UKIAT 702.

     16. Equally, it was accepted by Mr Selway  in  the  light  of  A1s  own
         evidence to  the  Tribunal  that  the  removal  of  the  Appellants
         together would not engage their Article 8 rights. A1 did not  claim
         that Mr H, the father of her children, had any ongoing  contact  or
         relationship with any  of  the  Appellants.  As  infants  the  best
         interests of her children lay in remaining with her, and all of the
         Appellants would be removed together as a family unit. She did  not
         claim to Judge Lea to have formed a new relationship,  and  neither
         did  the  evidence  establish  that  any  of  the  Appellants   had
         established a private life in the  UK  of  sufficient  strength  to
         render their removals disproportionate.

     17. Thus the only complaint advanced before me was that Judge  Lea  had
         failed to consider adequately what the position of  the  Appellants
         would be in the event of their return to Pakistan, and in doing  so
         had failed to  give  adequate  consideration  to  their  Article  3
         appeals. Mr Selway argued that once Judge Lea had accepted that  A1
         had suffered domestic violence at the hands of Mr H, she  ought  to
         have gone on to evaluate the risk the Appellants faced in  Pakistan
         either from the members of her own family, or, from Mr  H  and  the
         members of Mr H's family.

    Error of Law?

     18. Ultimately Mr Selway accepted however that A1 had never claimed  in
         her evidence to Judge Lea to face any risk of harm from any  member
         of Mr H's family.  One  might  have  thought  that  this  would  be
         sufficient to dispose of that limb of the complaint, but Mr  Selway
         argued that as an unrepresented litigant she would not  have  known
         the relevant caselaw, and thus would not have known of the need  to
         do so. There is in my judgement simply no merit in  this  approach.
         A1 was an educated woman. She would know  perfectly  well  who  she
         feared as a source of harm in the event of return to Pakistan,  and
         she was given every opportunity  by  both  the  Respondent  in  the
         course of the initial investigation of her asylum claim, and in the
         course of her appeal hearing, to identify those who she claimed  to
         fear. Her failure to ever identify in her evidence  any  member  of
         the extended family of Mr H as a source of fear of harm speaks  for
         itself.

     19. It is plain that Judge Lea was concerned by A1s failure  to  report
         any incident of domestic violence at the hands of Mr H  during  the
         course of her evidence to Judge Duff, even though her  case  before
         Judge Lea was that such violence had commenced prior to the hearing
         before Judge Duff, and she had told her solicitor about  it  [17  &
         27]. A1s case before Judge Lea was that her relationship with Mr  H
         had broken down in August 2013,  and  that  she  had  not  had  any
         contact with him since he had finally left the matrimonial home  on
         21 January  2014  [ApB  p66-8].  She  claimed  to  believe  he  was
         currently detained somewhere in the UK [16-17]. A Prohibited  Steps
         Order had been made against Mr H on 4  February  2014,  and  served
         upon Mr H, and then subsequently been continued by the Family Court
         [ApB p48].

     20. Mr Selway accepted that  since  the  promulgation  of  Judge  Lea's
         decision the Upper Tribunal had provided guidance upon the position
         of  single  women  returning  to  Pakistan  in  SM  (lone  women  -
         ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 67, and, that  the  position  of
         the Appellants should now  be  considered  in  the  light  of  that
         guidance. Nevertheless he argued that the decision of Judge Lea was
         unsafe, and that the appeals should be remitted to the  First  Tier
         Tribunal for rehearing with no findings of fact preserved.

     21. In response Mr Mangion argued that the complaints advanced  ignored
         the adverse findings of fact that had  been  made  by  Judge  Duff.
         Judge Lea had adopted them, and then taken them as  the  basis  for
         her own assessment of both  the  risk  the  Appellants  faced  upon
         return, and the proportionality of the decision to remove them.

     22. Had the  decision  of  Judge  Duff,  and  the  decision  to  refuse
         permission to appeal it, been available to Judge McWilliam  then  I
         am satisfied that she would not have granted permission  to  appeal
         in the terms in which she did. The decision of Judge Duff  contains
         a series of adverse findings of fact that were made in relation  to
         the evidence of A1. The attempt by A1 to appeal that  decision  was
         rejected on the basis that all of those adverse findings were  well
         open to Judge Duff to make on the  evidence,  and  were  adequately
         reasoned, so that no arguable error of law had been demonstrated in
         relation to them. When A1 came to give evidence to Judge  Lea,  her
         assessment of the evidence was that there was no proper basis  upon
         which she could revisit those findings  so  as  to  make  different
         findings [28]. Mr Selway did not attempt  to  establish  before  me
         that this aspect of the assessment of the evidence  was  flawed  in
         any way.

     23. Accordingly the following findings of primary fact were  made,  and
         must stand;
          i) A1 had fabricated the claim to asylum that she advanced before
             Judge Duff, and which she had repeated before Judge Lea,
         ii) A1 was well educated in Pakistan at the expense of her family,
        iii) A1 had been employed as a teacher  of  English  and  Maths  in
             Pakistan, something  she  could  not  have  done  without  the
             approval of her family,
         iv) A1  travelled  to  the  UK  at  the  expense  of  her  family,
             ostensibly to begin a course of higher education,
          v) A1 had lied  about  when  she  arrived  in  the  UK,  and  the
             circumstances she had found herself in upon arrival,
         vi) A1 had not met Mr H by chance encounter upon  arrival  in  the
             UK, but by pre-arrangement,
        vii) A1 had married Mr H, although it was unclear whether  she  had
             done so in Pakistan, or in the UK,
       viii) A1's family had arranged for her to travel to the UK  to  live
             with Mr H as his wife, and,
         ix) A1 had conceived A2 with Mr H when she was in Pakistan.

     24. It was a necessary consequence of these findings of  fact  that  A1
         had travelled to the UK, and had entered into her  relationship  of
         marriage with Mr H, with the full knowledge  and  approval  of  her
         family.

     25. A1 had simply reiterated to Judge Lea the same evidence  about  the
         formation of her relationship with Mr H that she  had  advanced  to
         Judge Duff, and  which  he  had  rejected.  On  the  basis  of  the
         unchallenged findings of fact that had been  made  by  Judge  Duff,
         Judge Lea was bound to adopt them as her own starting point.

     26. What then were the consequences for the claim by A1 that she  faced
         a real risk of harm from either Mr H, or, from members of  her  own
         extended family?

     27.  First.  These  were  claims  made  by  a  witness  whose   general
         credibility was very significantly damaged by her  own  history  of
         telling lies to the Tribunal.

     28. Second. The claim to face a risk of harm from members  of  her  own
         family was not based upon the view they were said to  hold  of  the
         breakdown of the relationship  with  Mr  H,  but  rather  upon  A1s
         repeated claim to have entered into that relationship without their
         approval or consent. Thus the  basis  of  that  claim  was  untrue,
         because Judge Duff and Judge Lea had each concluded  that  she  did
         have the approval and consent of her family to  her  entry  into  a
         marital relationship with Mr H. She had never suggested that  there
         was an additional or freestanding risk because of the breakdown  in
         the relationship with Mr H.

     29. Third. A1 did not claim to face any risk of harm from  the  members
         of Mr H's extended family, and thus even if the  Tribunal  were  to
         pose the question whether A1 did indeed face such a risk, it  would
         be bound to conclude that she did not.

     30. Fourth. Even if the Tribunal were to conclude in  A1s  favour  that
         she was now telling the truth when she claimed to face  an  ongoing
         risk of harm from Mr H, it would be bound to  conclude  that  there
         was no immediate risk from Mr H to the Appellants upon  removal  to
         Pakistan, because it was A1s  case  that  Mr  H  was  currently  in
         detention in the UK.

     31. Fifth. Even if the Tribunal were to look ahead in order  to  assess
         the position upon the release of Mr H from detention in the UK,  or
         in the event of his removal from the UK to Pakistan as one  without
         immigration status in the UK, and  then  (despite  the  credibility
         issues) to conclude in her favour that there was a real  risk  that
         he would attempt to cause harm to the Appellants, it would be bound
         to conclude in the light of the guidance to be found  in  SM  (lone
         women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 67 that  this  was  a  risk
         that could either be avoided altogether by internal relocation, or,
         because the reality was that A1 could return to her family home and
         rely upon the support and protection of the male members of her own
         family either to deter Mr H entirely from further contact with  the
         Appellants, or, to guard against any risk that  he  might  pose  to
         them.

     32. A1 is exactly the sort of qualified, educated woman  who  would  be
         able to secure well  paid  employment  in  a  city  and  thus  earn
         sufficient to be able to support from her own resources herself and
         her children. If she had the support of male members of her  family
         it would not be unduly harsh for her to relocate within Pakistan to
         a city, if she wished to avoid any possibility of contact  with  Mr
         H. Even if her family would not support her in doing so, she  would
         have the opportunity of using either state  run  domestic  violence
         shelters, or privately run shelters, whilst she established herself
         in a new city, and again it would not be unduly harsh to expect her
         to do so.

     33. Moreover, the Tribunal would be obliged  to  take  account  of  the
         existence of the financial and  practical  support  that  would  be
         available to A1 through any current voluntary returns scheme; AN  &
         SS (Tamils - Colombo - risk) Sri Lanka CG [2008]  UKAIT  00063.  In
         that decision the Tribunal held that it  was  appropriate  to  take
         into  account  the  availability  of  financial  support  from  the
         Respondent to a returnee, through the Voluntary Returns Programme;
          1. Much has been made of the undue harshness which AN  will  face
             as a single mother without  accommodation  or  employment  and
             without friends or family to turn to in Colombo, but  this  is
             to leave out of account what even Dr Smith acknowledges to  be
             the very generous  support  package  offered  by  the  IOM  to
             voluntary returnees. After "smoothing  the  re-entry  process"
             the IOM provides "a comprehensive package of support for  five
             years after  arrival",  which  includes  "five  years  shelter
             guaranteed." We do not think it is open to  the  appellant  to
             say that, if she loses her appeal, she will not take advantage
             of this package, and to argue from that refusal that she  will
             face destitution in Colombo which, accordingly, is not a place
             to which she can reasonably be expected to relocate.

    Conclusion

     34. It follows in my judgement that there is no realistic  prospect  of
         the Tribunal reaching a different conclusion  upon  the  Article  3
         appeal. There is therefore  no  error  of  law  that  requires  the
         decision to be set aside and remade.

    DECISION

    The decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  25
    November 2014 contains no error of law in the decision to  dismiss  the
    Appellants' appeals which requires that decision to be  set  aside  and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.




    Signed


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
    Dated 1 March 2016






Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellants  are
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them. This  direction
    applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent. Failure to comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.




    Signed


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
    Dated 1 March 2016


