
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/07972/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2017                           |On 8th February 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                  Musa [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Gambia born on 3rd March  1977.   The
    Appellant left the Gambia on 29th March 2013 arriving in the UK on  the
    same date.  The Appellant travelled to the UK using an Italian passport
    belonging to another Gambian national and claimed asylum having made an
    appointment with the ASU in Croydon on 24th July 2013.

 2. The Appellant's claim for asylum was based on a fear that  if  returned
    to Gambia he would  face  mistreatment  due  to  his  membership  of  a
    particular  social  group,  namely   his   sexual   orientation.    The
    Appellant's claim for asylum was refused by Notice of Refusal from  the
    Home Office dated 1st May 2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Evans sitting at Manchester on 26th  April  2016.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  10th  May  2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  and  the
    Appellant was found not to  be  in  need  of  humanitarian  protection.
    Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 16th  May  2016.
    Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
    26th May 2016.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 13th June 2016.  Those renewed grounds mirror the  original
    grounds.   On  20th  June  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  granted
    permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Bruce  noted  that  the  grounds  were
    unnecessarily long  and  over  emotive  and  that  paragraphs  3  to  7
    reiterated criticisms made of the Respondent's failure to apply her own
    policy.  Judge Bruce concluded that she considered it was difficult  to
    understand why these criticisms of the Respondent demonstrated there to
    be  an  arguable  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  Tribunal,
    particularly where the Tribunal appears to have taken those  criticisms
    on board, particularly at paragraph 32.  Nevertheless Judge  Bruce  was
    satisfied that the grounds do identify arguable errors of  law  in  the
    determination.   She  considered  that  it  was   arguable   that   the
    determination did not contain clear findings on the  live  evidence  of
    the additional witness: the "inconsistency" of paragraph 36 is arguably
    not an inconsistency at  all.   She  further  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that the Tribunal had failed to take  relevant  evidence  into
    account and had erred in placing undue weight  on  arguably  irrelevant
    matters such as the Appellant's claim that he wore bright clothing.

 4. On that basis  permission  was  granted  in  respect  of  all  grounds.
    However Judge Bruce commented that the Appellant's representatives were
    reminded that if this appeal is brought - in part - on the ground that
    there was not  a  fair  hearing  and/or  that  the  judge  had  behaved
    inappropriately  in  engaging  in  cross-examination  than   any   such
    allegation should be clearly articulated in a sworn  witness  statement
    by Counsel.  Counsel would then become a witness and new Counsel  would
    need to be instructed.

 5. On 1st July 2016 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.   The  Secretary  of  State  sets  out  her  case
    therein, particularly at paragraphs 2 to 5 inclusive.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant  is  represented  by  his
    instructed Counsel Mr Nicholson.  Mr Nicholson is also  the  author  of
    the Grounds of Appeal and appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    note that there is no witness statement filed by Mr  Nicholson  nor  is
    alternative Counsel instructed and consequently this  hearing  proceeds
    on the basis that there is no suggestion put by the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives that the Appellant did not have a fair  hearing  and/or
    that the judge behaved inappropriately engaging  in  cross-examination.
    The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Ms
    Isherwood.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Nicholson asked me to find that there is a material error of law  in
    the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   He  emphasises  that
    there are two main strands to his submissions.  Firstly, that the judge
    did not properly address the process through which the Respondent's own
    policy guidance  requires  them  to  assess  someone's  sexuality,  and
    wrongly characterised the Appellant's working life in Gambia as well as
    artificially and detrimentally comparing  this  to  his  private  life.
    Secondly, Mr Nicholson submits that the judge also wrongly reported the
    Appellant's witness's evidence and ignored the witness evidence  as  to
    the Appellant's partner and did not give due and  proper  consideration
    as to why the Appellant's partner might not have felt  able  to  attend
    the hearing.  He consequently submits that the judge did  not  consider
    the development  of  the  Appellant's  feelings  and  consequently  his
    sexuality for himself, not  only  arising  from  the  Respondent's  own
    policy but also as submitted at the hearing.  He notes that  the  judge
    did not set out, and then did not address, the actual submissions  made
    to him and that this constitutes an error of process in itself.

 8. He takes me to the evidence that was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, in particular the Appellant's interview statement at  paragraphs
    17 to 22.  He submits  that  even  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    rejects that evidence he must set it out and consider it and  that  the
    judge has failed to do this.  He states all the judge has  done  is  to
    make a brief response at paragraph 32.  He reminds me that paragraph 32
    is worth considering due to its brevity and its failure to address  the
    issues.  I have considered it.  It states

         "There is some force in the points that Mr Nicholson made about the
         conduct of the asylum interview.  However, the Appellant had  every
         opportunity to put forward a full account of  his  journey  towards
         sexual awakening in his witness statement and in the extensive oral
         evidence that he gave at the hearing".

 9. He submits that all we have in this case  is  that  paragraph  and  the
    further short paragraph which I have considered at  paragraph  33.   He
    submits there is absolutely nothing within the decision relating to the
    development of the Appellant's feelings.  He points out  that  this  is
    material because all the evidence must be looked at in  the  round  and
    that  his  actual  development  has   not   been   given   proper   due
    consideration.  He takes me to numerous paragraphs within the interview
    which have not been dealt with by the Immigration  Judge.   He  recites
    within his decision merely a few but they  are  not  extensive  but  Mr
    Nicholson contends they are representative, i.e. paragraphs 22  to  27,
    35 to 39, 42 to 50, 51 to 56, 60, 62 to 65 and 74 to 78.  In failing to
    address the  evidence  herein  Mr  Nicholson  submits  that  the  judge
    materially errs in law.

10. As a second submission Mr Nicholson contends that the judge has ignored
    the witness evidence as to the Appellant's partner altogether  and  had
    not considered properly why the Appellant's partner might not have felt
    able to attend the hearing.   He  points  out  that  the  evidence  was
    accepted by the Home Office Presenting Officer as being convincing  and
    that there was no inconsistency with regard to the evidence as set  out
    in paragraph 16 of the Grounds of Appeal.  He submits there was nothing
    inconsistent about an Appellant stating that he normally  went  to  one
    place, the LGBT Centre and his witness saying  that  they  had  met  in
    another place or even in more than one other place on just two or three
    occasions and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge exaggerated  in  order
    to suit his own conclusions.  He submits that there is  nothing  to  be
    found within  paragraph  36(a)  that  would  conclude  that  there  was
    inconsistent evidence provided.  He asks me  to  find  that  there  are
    material errors of law and to remit the matter back to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

11. Ms Isherwood considers that the submissions are over emotive  and  that
    following paragraph 28 of the decision, which sets out the evidence, it
    is thereafter not necessary for the judge to go through  every  bit  of
    evidence and that there has already been an acceptance at  paragraph  3
    by the Secretary of State that  the  Appellant  would  succeed  in  his
    appeal if he could prove to the lower standard of proof that he  was  a
    gay man.  Thereafter she considers that paragraph 10  of  the  decision
    recalls the evidence of the partner and paragraph 16 reflects the  fact
    that the partner had not attended the hearing.  Ms  Isherwood  contends
    that at paragraph 30 the judge has taken into account all the  evidence
    in  the  round  and  submits  that  it  is  mere  disagreement  by  the
    Appellant's representatives to suggest that he did not do so.   As  for
    the findings at paragraphs 32 and 33 the judge  breaks  them  down  and
    refers to the background evidence.  Finally Ms Isherwood  submits  that
    paragraph 8 of the Grounds of Appeal are emotive  and  that  ultimately
    they amount to little more than mere  disagreement.   She  asks  me  to
    dismiss the appeal  and  to  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. The starting point is quite properly set out  in  paragraph  3  of  the
    decision whereby the legal representatives in attendance had  indicated
    that it was agreed that the Appellant would succeed in his appeal if he
    proved to the lower standard of proof that he was  a  gay  man  because
    there was no dispute that, if he were a gay man, he would be at risk of
    persecution on the grounds of his sexuality if he were returned to  the
    Gambia.

15. The findings of the judge endorse the view that the Respondent did  not
    accept that the Appellant was gay.  In the detailed reasons of  refusal
    the Secretary of State had relied on

      1) that the Appellant was unable to provide a clear and cogent account
         of his sexuality; and

      2) that the Secretary of State did not believe he would have discussed
         his sexuality or engage in same sex relations with foreign tourists
         on a public beach.

    In the judge's findings he found that the Appellant's  account  of  his
    life as a gay man in the UK was not consistent, coherent nor  plausible
    and he did not accept as truthful the  Appellant's  account,  therefore
    failing to prove to the lower standard that he was a gay man or that he
    would be treated as such if returned to Gambia.

16. The question therefore arises as to whether or not the submissions made
    by Mr  Nicholson  are  mere  disagreement  or  whether  the  judge  has
    materially erred in law in reaching his conclusions.   I  am  satisfied
    there are material errors of law and that the submissions  made  by  Mr
    Nicholson amount to more than mere disagreement.   It  is  insufficient
    for the Secretary of State to merely rely on paragraph  28.   All  that
    states is

         "The Respondent's bundle included, among other documents, copies of
         the Appellant's screening and asylum  interviews,  and  the  police
         report."

17. Thereafter the judge goes on in his response to state at paragraph 30

         "I am bound to be selective in my references to the  evidence  when
         explaining  the  reasons  for  my  decision.   However  I  wish  to
         emphasise that I considered all the  evidence  in  the  round  when
         reaching my conclusions."

18. Mere recitement  of  that  paragraph  is  insufficient.   Mr  Nicholson
    emphasises that the judge has not addressed the process  through  which
    the Respondent's own policy guidance requires them to assess  someone's
    sexuality and wrongly characterised the  Appellant's  working  life  in
    Gambia, as well as artificially and detrimentally comparing this to his
    private life.  Further I agree with the submission of Mr Nicholson that
    there  are  extensive  paragraphs,  particularly  within   the   asylum
    interview that the judge has not dealt with.  It is  relevant  for  the
    judge to consider the  development  of  the  Appellant's  feelings  and
    consequently his sexuality for himself.  It is all very  well  for  the
    judge to turn round and say, I have  considered  the  evidence  in  the
    round, but there is merit in the submission made by Mr  Nicholson  that
    had the judge considered the  other  paragraphs  which  have  not  been
    recited (albeit that the judge states he considered them in the  round)
    and considered them fully that  he  would  have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion.

19. Secondly, it clearly was not in the best interests of the Appellant for
    his partner not to attend the hearing.  However there is merit  in  the
    submission made by Mr Nicholson that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
    actually misstated the witness evidence albeit that the witness Mr Jobe
    had not attended the hearing.  There  are  factual  inconsistencies  in
    that evidence and whilst support was provided by Mr Darboe  effectively
    it seems in place of Mr Jobe it is pertinent to note it does  not  seem
    to  be  challenged  that  Mr  Darboe's  evidence  was  convincing   and
    straightforward, a compliment accorded by the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.  It would however appear that evidence  was  neither  recorded
    nor addressed.

20. In all the circumstances I am satisfied  that  there  are  consequently
    material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    and that there are issues that were not addressed by the judge which on
    reflection he should have done.  That is not  to  say  that  ultimately
    another judge would come to a different conclusion, but I am  satisfied
    that the omissions and conclusions reflect material errors of  law  and
    amount to more than mere disagreement, particularly bearing in mind the
    acceptance that if the Appellant is found to be gay then the  Secretary
    of State acknowledges that he would be unable to return to Gambia.



Notice of Decision and Directions

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and is set aside.  Directions  are  given  hereinafter  for  the
    rehearing of this matter

      1) On the finding that  there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal is remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal for rehearing.

      2) None of the findings of fact are to stand.

      3) The appeal is to be heard at Manchester on the first available date
         28 days hence with an ELH of  three  hours  before  any  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge other than Immigration Judge Evans.

      4) That there be leave to either party to file and serve an up-to-date
         bundle of objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they seek
         to rely  at  least  seven  days  prior  to  the  restored  hearing.



      5) That if the Appellant  requires  an  interpreter  at  the  restored
         hearing either for himself or for any witnesses he intends to call,
         then the language of that  interpreter  must  be  notified  to  the
         Tribunal service within seven days of receipt of these  directions.



22. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

