
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08319/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 March 2016                     |On 19 April 2016                     |
|Prepared on 24 March 2016            |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    [F F]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Cole, Solicitor of Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  illegally  and  claimed
         asylum on 8 December 2014. That application was refused on 27 April
         2015, and a decision to remove him was made in consequence.

      2. The Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal  against  those  immigration
         decisions was heard on 22 October 2015, and  it  was  dismissed  on
         asylum grounds, but allowed on both human rights  and  humanitarian
         protection grounds by decision of Judge Gribble, promulgated  on  9
         November 2015.

      3. The  Respondent's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal argued that the Judge had failed to  correctly
         apply the guidance contained in the country guidance decision of AA
         (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  544.  That  application  was
         granted by Judge Adio on 25 November 2015.

      4. The Appellant has filed no Rule 24 Notice.

      5. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Error of Law?

      6. It is plain, and Mr Cole does not seek to suggest  otherwise,  that
         the Judge made a material error of law in her decision to allow the
         appeal on both humanitarian protection and human rights grounds. He
         accepts that he read paragraph 30 of the decision as dismissing the
         Article 3 claim, and invites  me  to  set  the  decision  upon  the
         Article 3 claim aside and remake it so that this ground  of  appeal
         is dismissed because no Article 8 appeal  was  advanced  below.  Mr
         Kingham consented to that course.

      7. The focus of the hearing then fell upon whether, in  the  light  of
         the findings of fact that she had made,  the  Judge  had  correctly
         applied the guidance to be found in AA when considering the Article
         15c claim.

      8. The relevant findings were that;

          i) the Appellant originated from Jalawla in Iraq,  and  not  from
             the KRG

         ii) The Appellant is ethnically Kurdish

        iii) The Appellant speaks only a very little Arabic,  his  language
             is Kurdish Sorani

         iv) The Appellant has  been  issued  with  a  CSID  by  the  Iraqi
             authorities, but he left that document in Iraq when he fled

          v) The Appellant does not have an INC or a birth  certificate  in
             his possession

         vi) The Appellant has never been issued with  a  passport  by  the
             Iraqi authorities

        vii) The Appellant left his mother and sister behind in the  family
             home when he fled Iraq, but he does not now  know  where  they
             are

       viii) The Appellant's elder brother lives in  the  UK,  having  left
             Iraq in 2002

         ix) The Appellant would as a  result  face  a  return  to  Baghdad
             airport, rather than any attempted return to the KRG

          x) The Appellant could not travel from Baghdad airport to Jalawla
             in safety

         xi) The Appellant does not have a family member or a proxy who can
             go to Jalawla  and  obtain  the  issue  of  a  CSID  from  the
             authorities in that town

        xii) The Appellant will not be returned to Iraq without  possession
             of a current, or an expired passport - which he does not  have
             and has never had

       xiii) Dr Fatah's  evidence  (which  the  Judge  accepted)  was  that
             without a birth certificate, a CSID or an  INC  to  prove  his
             identity and nationality, and without the  support  of  family
             members in Iraq able to access such documentation from  within
             Iraq, the Appellant would not be able to obtain either  travel
             documents or identification documents from the  Iraqi  Embassy
             in the UK.

      9. In the light of those findings of fact the Judge concluded that the
         Appellant's removal to Iraq was not feasible [35]. She went  on  to
         consider in the alternative, what the Appellant's position would be
         if his return was feasible, and concluded that if he were unable to
         obtain a CSID within a reasonable period of time, and had no family
         member capable of supporting him, that he  faced  a  real  risk  of
         destitution. She concluded that he had  no  realistic  prospect  of
         obtaining a CSID, that he was not a fluent Arabic speaker, and that
         since neither he nor family members originated from Baghdad he  was
         at the vulnerable end of the scale despite the fact that he  was  a
         healthy male.

     10. Mr Kingham advanced two arguments. First, having found that  return
         was not feasible the Judge  ought  to  have  simply  dismissed  the
         appeal on humanitarian protection grounds, because she  could  only
         go on to consider that ground if return was  feasible.  Second,  if
         the Judge was considering the position in the  alternative  on  the
         assumption that the  Appellant's  return  was  feasible,  and  thus
         considering the risk of harm in the event of that return,  she  was
         then obliged to consider the ability of the Appellant  to  relocate
         in safety to the KRG, by way of flight from Baghdad airport,  which
         she had not done.

     11. Mr Cole pointed to the fact that even if a laissez passer  were  to
         be issued to the Appellant (which would not of course happen on the
         Judge's findings) then he would not be able to  use  it  to  travel
         internally within Iraq. Such a document would not for example allow
         an individual to board a flight to the KRG upon arrival at  Baghdad
         airport, even if they managed to  retain  that  document  in  their
         possession upon arrival and did not have to surrender it  to  Iraqi
         immigration officers. Thus the guidance in AA  was  clear;  on  the
         facts as the Judge had found them to be, the Appellant would not in
         practice be able to travel from Baghdad to the KRG since  he  would
         have no means of boarding a flight there.

    Conclusion

     12. It is in my  judgement  perfectly  clear  from  the  terms  of  her
         decision that the Judge was satisfied that the  Appellant's  return
         to Iraq was not feasible. The Respondent does not seek  to  suggest
         that there was any error of law in the reasoning that led  to  that
         finding.

     13. Equally it is perfectly clear from the guidance to be found  in  AA
         that Jalawla lay in the contested areas, where  as  the  Respondent
         conceded, the situation  was  such  as  a  result  of  the  tactics
         deployed by ISIS  that  a  civilian,  simply  by  virtue  of  their
         presence in that area, would be at a real risk of harm of the  type
         identified in Article 15c. There is no suggestion  before  me  that
         the Judge should have reached any other conclusion.

     14. In line with the guidance to be found in  both  AA  and  HF  (Iraq)
         [2013] EWCA Civ 1276, the finding  that  return  to  Iraq  was  not
         feasible  meant  that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed   in   a
         humanitarian protection claim that was based upon a  risk  of  harm
         arising from an absence of identity documents. That was  the  basis
         upon which this humanitarian  protection  claim  was  advanced,  it
         being argued that the Appellant could not get to his home  area  of
         Jalawla in safety, or live there,  because  of  the  indiscriminate
         violence prevalent in  that  area,  and  could  not  reasonably  be
         expected to relocate either to Baghdad or elsewhere without a  CSID
         and family support, because he would be  unable  to  find  food  or
         shelter whilst he looked for employment to support  himself,  which
         he would not in any event be likely to find.

    The decisions remade

     15. In the circumstances I set aside both the decisions on  the  asylum
         and the humanitarian protection appeals and remake those  decisions
         in the light of the preserved adverse credibility findings.

    DECISION

    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  9
    November 2015 contains an error of law in the  decision  to  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds and human  rights
    grounds which require that decision to be set aside and remade so  that
    the appeal on those grounds is dismissed. There is no error of  law  in
    the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal on  asylum  grounds  and
    that decision is confirmed.

    I remake the decision so as to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.




    Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes



    Dated 24 March 2016








Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.




    Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes



    Dated 24 March 2016




