

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08138/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 5th March 2015                   |On: 19th May 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                          Mohammad Hamid Yassin Ali
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Madubuike, AJO Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant claims to be a national of Eritrea  date  of  birth  1st
      January 1973.  He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal (Judge  Davies)[2]  to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  a
      decision to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of  the
      Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.  That  decision  followed  from  the
      rejection of the Appellant's claim to international protection.

   2. The Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal was that he  faced
      a well-founded fear of persecution  in  Eritrea  for  reasons  of  his
      imputed political opinion.  He  does  not  wish  to  perform  military
      service in Eritrea and having left the country illegally he fears that
      he will face serious  harm  if  returned.   He  claimed  that  he  had
      returned to Eritrea in 2005 after attending university  in  Sudan  and
      that soon after his arrival he was  served  with  call-up  papers.  He
      avoided the draft by going to live in a village with his cousin, as  a
      result of which his father was detained and his brother  drafted.   He
      claims to have left Eritrea illegally.

   3. The Respondent had rejected the entire account, including the  claimed
      nationality, for want of  credibility.  The  Respondent  believed  the
      Appellant to be Sudanese.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant  is  Eritrean.  By
      the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal he had produced
      an Eritrean identity  card,  had  given  details  at  interview  about
      Eritrea and had been interviewed in  Belin,  a  language  only  spoken
      there.  The First-tier Tribunal was not  however  satisfied  that  the
      Appellant was at any risk  in  that  country.   It  was  found  to  be
      "reasonably likely" that given  the  time  he  had  already  spent  in
      Eritrea he had in fact completed his military service;  the  Appellant
      had also spent a long time in  Sudan,  a  country  where  on  his  own
      evidence the Eritrean authorities frequently kidnap draft avoiders and
      bring them back to Eritrea. He had encountered no problems when living
      there and had even approached the Eritrean embassy to have his ID card
      renewed in November 2003.   The  Tribunal  did  not  accept  that  the
      Appellant would be able to live with his cousin in the village for six
      years with no problems.  It  is  found  that  the  Appellant  has  not
      demonstrated that he left Eritrea illegally.

      Error of Law

   5. The ground of appeal are, in essence, that the Tribunal failed to have
      regard to the extant country guidance MO (illegal exit-risk on return)
      Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT (IAC) and the Respondent's Operational Guidance
      Note of February  2014  in  respect  of  military  service  and  which
      categories of Eritreans are allowed to leave the country lawfully.  In
      short, even if the Appellant had completed his initial call up (as the
      Tribunal appears to find) at his age of 43 he is still subject to  re-
      call: the  objective  material  shows  the  age  of  military  service
      liability to stretch to 54[3]. He would not in those circumstances  be
      permitted to leave the country lawfully.  It  is  submitted  that  the
      determination fails to give sustainable reasons for  it's  finding  to
      the contrary. At paragraph 45 the Tribunal notes that the  Appellant's
      credibility is damaged by the fact that he used a  false  passport  to
      travel from Sudan to France; there is  no  evidential  basis  for  the
      finding that he did not leave Eritrea illegally.

   6. For the Respondent  Mr  McVeety  agreed  that  the  Tribunal  had  not
      specifically had regard to the country guidance or background material
      in assessing whether it was reasonably likely that at 43 the Appellant
      would be allowed to  leave  Eritrea  legally.  Although  he  correctly
      submitted that the negative credibility findings made were relevant to
      the determination of that question[4], he conceded that the failure to
      have  regard  to  MO  and  the  OGN  meant  that  the  assessment  was
      incomplete.

   7. That must be so. Whilst Mr  Madubuike  was  overstating  his  case  in
      claiming MO to contain a presumption that any Eritrean under  the  age
      of 54 must succeed, the  findings  in  that  case  do  illuminate  two
      matters that the First-tier Tribunal did not have regard to. First  is
      that as a 43 year old the Appellant remains liable to military call up
      for the next 11 years (absent any special dispensation); second,  that
      this may have had some bearing on whether he  would  have  managed  to
      leave the country lawfully. If he remains liable to call up, and  left
      Eritrea without permission, the country guidance indicates that he has
      a currently well-founded fear of persecution.

   8. For those reasons the decision contains an error of law  and  must  be
      set aside.

      The Re-Made Decision

   9. The headnote of MO reads as follows:

          (i) The figures relating to UK entry clearance applications  since
          2006 - particularly since September 2008 - show a very significant
          change from those considered by the Tribunal in MA (Draft evaders-
          illegal departures-risk) Eritrea CG [2007]  UKAIT  00059  and  are
          among a number of indications that it has  become  more  difficult
          for Eritreans to obtain lawful exit from Eritrea.

          (ii) The Eritrean authorities continue to envisage lawful exit  as
          being possible for those who are above  national  service  age  or
          children of  7  or  younger.  Otherwise,  however,  the  potential
          categories of lawful  exit  are  limited  to  two  narrowly  drawn
          medical  categories  and  those  who  are  either  highly  trusted
          government officials or their  families  or  who  are  members  of
          ministerial staff recommended by the department to attend  studies
          abroad.

          (iii) The general position  concerning  illegal  exit  remains  as
          expressed in MA, namely that  illegal  exit  by  a  person  of  or
          approaching draft age and not medically unfit cannot be assumed if
          they had been found wholly incredible. However, if such  a  person
          is found to have left Eritrea on or after  August/September  2008,
          it may be, that inferences can be drawn from their health  history
          or level of education or their skills profile as to whether  legal
          exit on their part was feasible, provided that such inferences can
          be drawn in the light of the adverse credibility findings.

          (iv) The general position adopted in  MA,  that  a  person  of  or
          approaching draft age (i.e. aged 8 or over and still not above the
          upper age limits for military service, being under 54 for men  and
          under 47 for women) and not medically unfit  who  is  accepted  as
          having left Eritrea illegally is reasonably likely to be  regarded
          with serious hostility  on  return,  is  reconfirmed,  subject  to
          limited exceptions in respect of (1)  persons  whom  the  regime's
          military and political leadership perceives as having  given  them
          valuable service (either in Eritrea or abroad);  (2)  persons  who
          are trusted family members of, or are  themselves  part  of,   the
          regime's military or  political  leadership.  A  further  possible
          exception, requiring a more case-specific analysis, is (3) persons
          (and their children born afterwards) who fled (what  later  became
          the territory of) Eritrea during the war of independence.

          (v) Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum seekers
          as such are not generally at real risk of persecution  or  serious
          harm on return, on present evidence the  great  majority  of  such
          persons are likely to be perceived as having  left  illegally  and
          this fact, save for very limited exceptions,  will  mean  that  on
          return they face a real risk of persecution or serious harm.

  10. Paragraph (ii) of the headnote is a summary of the conclusions set out
      at paragraphs 106-108 of the decision itself:

          106.   It seems to us that in deciding on the continuing scope for
          lawful exit from Eritrea, the most significant piece  of  evidence
          remains Professor Kibreab's latest evidence on what  he  considers
          to be the remaining categories of lawful exit, together  with  his
          opinion on their likely ambit. We remind ourselves that  according
          to his revised formulation the remaining categories are:

              (i)      a male of 54 years or over;

              (ii)     a female of 47 years or over

              (iii)    children of 7 or younger;

              (iv)     a person declared by an  official  committee  to  be
              unfit on medical grounds to perform any military or  national
              service;

              (v)      a person certificated by an official committee to be
              unable to receive appropriate medical treatment in Eritrea;

              (vi)      highly  trusted  government  officials  and   their
              families;

              (vii)    members of  ministerial  staff  recommended  by  the
              department to attend studies abroad.

          107.   His current reformulated list can be  seen  to  delete  one
          category from his MA  list  (see  above  para  27)  entirely  (ex-
          Ministers), and view others as more narrowly applied.

          108.   Three initial observations are in  order  about  this  list
          even as now slimmed down. The first is that it demonstrates to our
          satisfaction that the Eritrean authorities  continue  to  envisage
          lawful exit as being possible for those who are  7  or  under  and
          those who are over national service age.  Putting matters in  this
          way also serves as a useful way of clarifying the purport  of  the
          reference in MA to persons being "of or  approaching  draft  age".
          Odd as it may seem at first sight, that must now be understood  to
          mean (and it seems to us to have  been  implicit  in  MA  already)
          persons  being  seven  or  over  and  still  of  draft  age.  This
          clarification must be borne in mind when applying this part of the
          MA guidance presently. The second  observation,  which  is  partly
          related, is that in terms of gauging whether  an  Eritrean  asylum
          claimant might have had a basis for lawful  exit,  the  categories
          are relatively straightforward except for the last two. In respect
          of the first three categories, being based on sex and/or  age,  it
          should be readily ascertainable whether a person has a  qualifying
          basis for obtaining exit legally or not.  In respect of the fourth
          and fifth categories (on the  basis  that  medical  evidence  from
          medical experts in the UK should in  principle  be  obtainable  to
          corroborate   them),   it   should    likewise    be    relatively
          straightforward to establish whether legal exit was possible.  The
          last two categories raise  greater  problems  since,  applying  GM
          principles,  the  evidence  still  does   not   appear   to   show
          conclusively that appellants cannot fall within them (but see para
          115 below).  Furthermore, it  may  be,  in  relation  to  category
          (vii), that the regime's interest in maintaining close  ties  with
          its few international  friends  (the  Human  Rights  Watch  report
          specifies Qatar, China, Iran and Libya) means it is more confident
          that those students granted exit visas to study in those countries
          will not defect. [We are aware, of course, that recent  events  in
          Libya might require some reconsideration of whether it  remains  a
          friend of Eritrea]. In  other  words  it  may  be  that  Professor
          Kibreab's evidence focuses too much on persons who wish to exit to
          study in Western countries. A final initial observation is that it
          is implicit in Professor Kibread's  description  and  analysis  of
          category (vi) that  it  must  include  those  who  are  themselves
          members of the military or political leadership.

  11. It is accepted that the Appellant is not over 54 and that he is  male.
      He is not a child of seven or under. There is no medical  evidence  to
      suggest that he would be likely declared  unfit  to  perform  military
      service. His only declared  medical  problem  is  constipation,  which
      presumably can be treated in Eritrea as effectively as it can here; in
      the absence of any evidence to the contrary I accept it unlikely  that
      this Appellant has  been  given  dispensation  to  travel  abroad  for
      medical treatment.  That leaves the final two categories identified by
      Professor Kibreab as persons who might possibly be permitted  to  exit
      Eritrea lawfully. As the Tribunal  note  in  MO,  whether  or  not  an
      individual falls into one of these groups is a matter to be considered
      in the round, drawing inferences where appropriate from their personal
      background. For instance a person from an uneducated rural  background
      is unlikely to be ministerial staff; conversely  it  might  be  argued
      that a person with a university education,  such  as  this  Appellant,
      might be more likely to hold such a position.

  12. On final part of the guidance in MO is relevant  to  this  assessment.
      The Tribunal heard and accepted evidence that in  August  /  September
      2008 the government of Eritrea, angered by the number of nationals who
      had been granted exit permits who did not come back, clamped down  and
      further restricted the ability of people to leave the  country.   This
      leads to the following conclusion:

          116.   The  general  position  concerning  illegal  exit  remains,
          therefore, as expressed in MA,  namely  that  illegal  exit  by  a
          person of or approaching draft age and not medically unfit  cannot
          be assumed if they had been found wholly incredible.  However,  if
          such  a  person  is  found  to  have  left  Eritrea  on  or  after
          August/September 2008, it may be that inferences can be drawn from
          uncontentious personal data recorded on an appellant as  to  their
          level of education or their skills profile  as  to  whether  legal
          exit was feasible.

  13.  Having  had  regard  to  that  guidance  I  remind  myself  that  the
      appropriate  standard  of  proof  is  a  relatively  low  one.  Is  it
      reasonably likely that the  Appellant  left  Eritrea  unlawfully?   In
      considering that matter I have had regard to the following factors:

            . Although his  evidence  was  rejected  by  the  Respondent  a
              substantial part of his evidence, namely that relating to his
              nationality, has been accepted by the First-tier Tribunal  as
              credible. It cannot be said that he is a "wholly  incredible"
              witness;

            . Material parts of his account, such as his  personal  history
              of avoiding the draft, were nevertheless rejected. It  cannot
              therefore be said that he is a wholly credible witness;

            . He arrived in the UK in 2014, claiming to  have  started  his
              journey by walking out of Eritrea into Sudan in August  2012.
              On all of the evidence before me I see no  reason  to  reject
              his claimed date of departure from Eritrea;

            . The Appellant states that he is  educated  to  degree  level,
              completing his degree in Science and Technology in  Sudan  in
              2005. He states that this was paid for by  UNHCR.  I  see  no
              reason to reject that evidence.

            . The Appellant claims to have only ever worked as a "tea  boy"
              in a restaurant and herding goats.

            . He has spent considerable periods of time  as  a  refugee  in
              Sudan, having completed his education and married there.

            . He was discovered by UKBA staff hiding in a lorry at Dover.

  14. Having considered all of these factors in the round I find  it  to  be
      very unlikely that  the  Appellant  is  a  highly  trusted  government
      official, a member of  such  an  official's  family  or  a  member  of
      ministerial staff. I say that because it seems unlikely  that  such  a
      person would have spent long periods as a refugee in  Sudan.    It  is
      further unlikely that the travel arrangements of such a  person  would
      include being concealed  in  a  lorry.  The  Appellant  does  have  an
      education, and has been found to have lied about certain  elements  of
      his claim, but having regard to the country guidance  I  am  satisfied
      that it is reasonably likely that he left Eritrea  unlawfully  in  the
      manner he describes, i.e. walking into Sudan. He does not fall  within
      any of the categories of person entitled to lawful exit and I bear  in
      mind that since September 2008 it has become even  more  difficult  to
      leave Eritrea with permission.

  15. On the lower standard I am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  left
      Eritrea unlawfully. He remains liable for  the  draft  and  for  those
      reasons his appeal must be allowed.

      Decisions

  16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law
      and it is set aside.

  17. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:

      "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

      The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he is
      a refugee.

      The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

  18. I make no direction for anonymity. There was no application  for  such
      an order and on the facts I see no reason to make one.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                9th May 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 13th February 2015 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge VA Osbourne
[2] Determination promulgated on the 21st November 2014
[3] See paragraph 95 MO where the findings in MA (Draft Evaders - Illegal
Departures - Risk) Eritrea v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department, CG [2007] UKAIT 00059 are upheld. See also paragraph 3.16.8 of
the OGN v14.

[4] See paragraph 109 MO; 444-448 of MA

