
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
AA/08394/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |                  Decision         |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On  5th August 2015                |                  On 13th August   |
|                                   |2015                               |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     S A
                        (ANONYMITY   DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms M Sirikanda, Duncan Lewis, solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify  the  appellant,  reserving  the  anonymity  order  made  at  first
instance.

2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the  decision  of  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Bennett promulgated on 10 February 2015 which  dismissed  the
appellant's appeal on all grounds.


Background

3     The appellant is a Turkish  national,  born  on  12  May  1972.  On  1
October  2014,  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application  for
asylum, made on the basis of her race and her political opinion.


The Judge's Decision

4     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Bennett  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision.  The  judge  considered  background  information  and
decided that the circumstances had changed since the country  guidance  case
of IK (Turkey) CG 2004 UK IAC 00312 and the Court of Appeal  decision  in  Y
(Turkey) 2008 EWCA Civ 511.


5     Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  11  March  2015,  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Baker gave permission to appeal stating inter alia that:


   "3 It is arguable that the judge  materially  erred  in  concluding  that
   extant country guidance authority...required revision in the  absence  of
   evidence sighted by the judge to depart from the country guidance.
   "4 Furthermore, it is arguable that the judge's conclusions at  paragraph
   22(a) of the decision that the appellant would not have  been  abused  in
   detention, relying on cameras installed which undermined the claims  that
   she would  have  been  abused  due  to  the  risk  of  discovery  by  the
   authorities' activities, arguably failed  to  take  account  of  evidence
   before him cited in the permission grounds at paragraph 13.
   "5 It is arguable as submitted in paragraphs 19 and 20 that the  evidence
   relied on by the appellant was not addressed,  amounting  to  a  material
   error of law.
   "6 Ground 2 - it is arguable that the judge's  conclusions  at  Paragraph
   22(h) of the decision as to lack a plausibility of the claimed  treatment
   in detention of the appellant give weight to immaterial considerations."


   The Hearing


6     Ms Sirikanda, Solicitor  for  the  appellant,  adopted  the  terms  of
grounds of appeal and argued that the judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
reasons for departing from country guidance in IK (Turkey) CG  2004  UK  IAC
00312, and that the judge  had  applied  an  incorrect  standard  of  proof,
lending weight to one source of background materials and  ignoring  more  up
to date background materials placed before the judge.  Mr  Sirikanda  argued
that the judge had made a flawed assessment of plausibility  and  overlooked
material background evidence and provided inadequate  reasoning  to  support
his findings of "inherent implausibility" and "inherent unlikelihood".


7     Mr Avery, for the respondent, argued that there is no  material  error
of law contained in a carefully worded, carefully  structured  and  detailed
decision and that the weight to be given to a particular piece  of  evidence
(including the background materials) is something for  the  judge  at  first
instance. He said that the judge had set out detailed findings in  fact  and
explained how he  had  drawn  those  findings  in  fact  from  the  evidence
presented. He drew my  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  judge  had  made
alternative findings on the hypothesis of taking  the  appellant's  case  at
its highest.


8     In SG (Iraq) v SSHD; OR (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  940  the  Court
of Appeal said that the Country Guidance procedure was aimed at arriving  at
a reliable and accurate determination and it was for those reasons, as  well
as the  desirability  of  consistency,  that  decision-makers  and  tribunal
judges were required to take country guidance determinations  into  account,
and to follow them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,
were adduced justifying their not doing so (paras 43 - 50).


9     In TM, KM and LZ (Zimbabwe) (2010) EWCA Civ 916 the  Court  of  Appeal
said  that  the  Tribunal  "must  treat  as  binding  any  country  guidance
authority relevant to the issues in dispute unless there is good reason  for
not  doing  so,  such  as  fresh  evidence  which  casts  doubt   upon   its
conclusions, and a failure to  follow  the  country  guidance  without  good
reason is likely to involve  an  error  of  law.  This  is  made  plain  by"
paragraphs 12.2 and 12.4 "of the Practice Direction: Immigration and  Asylum
Chambers  of  the  First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal  2010   (which   replace
materially identical provisions in the earlier PD issued in 2007)".


10    In OM (AA(1)  wrong  in  law)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00077  the
Tribunal said that country guidance stands until it is replaced or found  to
be wrong in law. Where a  country  guidance  case  is  replaced  because  of
changed country conditions or because further  evidence  has  emerged,  that
will not mean that it was an error of law for an immigration judge  to  have
followed it up to that point. Where, however, a  country  guidance  case  is
found to be legally flawed the reasons for  so  finding  will  have  existed
both before and after its notification. It is a  determination  inconsistent
with  other  authority  that  is  binding  on  the   Tribunal.    In   those
circumstances, which will be encountered only rarely, any  determination  of
an appeal decided substantially on the basis of that country  guidance  will
be legally flawed also and cannot stand.

11    Between [12] and  [17],  the  judge  discussed  the  country  guidance
cases, demonstrating that he was clearly aware  of  them  but  at  [16],  he
states "I am not satisfied that the circumstances obtaining in  Turkey  when
in March 2014 as they were in 2003 at the time when  A  was  decided  or  in
2004 when IK  was  decided...".  In  reaching  that  conclusion,  he  places
reliance on extracts from only two of the  items  of  background  materials,
placing particular reliance on a US State Department report, which  did  not
form part of the evidence relied on by either party, and on  a  report  from
the Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board report of 8 June 2012. The  judge
did not have expert evidence and had  conflicting  accounts  from  different
sources of background materials.


12    Failing to follow country guidance is an error of law. In  this  case,
I find that it is a material error of law which tainted all of the  findings
made by the judge and requires the decision to be set aside.


13    The failure of the First Tier  Tribunal  to  follow  country  guidance
simply because of the passage of time constitutes a clear error  of  law.  I
consider this error to be material  since  had  the  tribunal  taken  proper
account of country guidance cases, the outcome could have been different.

Remittal to First Tier

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:



    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
none of the findings of fact are to stand and the matter will be a  complete
re hearing.

16. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
heard  before  any  First-tier  Immigration  judge  other  than  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Bennett.

Decision

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal is  tainted  by  a
material error of law.

18. I set aside the decision.

19. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard of new.





   Signed                                                              Date
   7th August 2015




   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

