










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA083642015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on      |
|on 18 April 2016                  |19 May 2016                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                                  A H A B M
                           anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, counsel (instructed by Bindmans LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Wilcocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I continue the anonymity direction made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      This direction is to remain in place unless and until this Tribunal or
      any other appropriate Court, directs otherwise. As such, no report  of
      these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant
      or any member of her family. Failure to  comply  with  this  direction
      could amount to a contempt of court.


   2. The appellant is a national of Sudan, born on [ ]  1986.  She  appeals
      with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Goodrich, who, in a decision promulgated on 13 January 2016, dismissed
      her appeal against the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  her
      application for asylum and to remove her to  Sudan.   The  appeal  was
      dismissed on all grounds.


   3. Ms Chapman,  who  represented  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, relied on her grounds of appeal dated 26 January 2016.


   4. The appellant applied for asylum contending that she feared  returning
      to Sudan as a young, single woman: it would not be possible for her to
      live alone and she would be treated as  an  outcast  and  forced  into
      marriage. She would be unable to live with her mother's second cousin,
      SA, who is a widow with three  teenage  sons,  as  she  would  not  be
      accepted back as her sons are now adults. There  is  thus  no-one  she
      could live with and she would be subject to  constant  harassment  and
      abuse as a single woman.


   5. The appellant had as at the date of the hearing of her appeal,  become
      estranged from her mother.


   6. It had also been contended before Judge Goodrich that if  forced  into
      marriage, the appellant would be subjected to FGM.


   7. The Judge summarised the reasons for refusal at [10].  The  respondent
      accepted that the appellant was a member of a particular social  group
      and that the Convention was engaged. It was  also  accepted  that  her
      claim that she had been discriminated against at  Khartoum  University
      constituted an imputed political opinion which also engages  the  1951
      Convention.


   8. It was accepted that she had given a consistent and  detailed  account
      of  the  events  at  the   university   and   had   experienced   such
      discrimination. It was  not  however  accepted  that  the  events  she
      described amounted to persecution.


   9. The respondent considered the claim  that  she  could  not  return  to
      Khartoum as she would have nobody to live  with.  Her  case  that  she
      cannot live with her aunts because their husbands are not  related  to
      her by blood was not accepted as there was no  objective  evidence  to
      support that aspect of her claim.


  10. The appellant contended that the only way that she could  safely  live
      in Khartoum was by living with a male  family  member  or  by  getting
      married. If she marries there is a strong chance  that  she  would  be
      "circumcised". The FGM aspect of her claim was rejected as it was  not
      considered that the fact she was not  circumcised  would  prevent  her
      finding a husband. Her mother and aunts had not been circumcised.


  11. Judge Goodrich considered  an  expert  report  from  Mr  Peter  Verney
      prepared on 20 April 2015 as well as a second (supplemental) report.


  12. At [35] the Judge stated that it  was  a  significant  feature  of  Mr
      Verney's supplemental report that he does not seek to  deal  in  terms
      with the central point made in the refusal letter about the absence of
      any source material to  support  this  subjective  evidence  that  the
      appellant could not live with her aunts because their husbands are not
      her blood relatives. That was the  key  point  taken  in  the  refusal
      letter. No explanation was given as to the absence of objective source
      material to support this aspect of her case.


  13. The Judge stated at [17] that she was guided  by  FM  (FGM)  Sudan  CG
      [2007] 00060.  Although this was a case concerning FGM, she considered
      that the evidence of Dr Gruenbaum as  to  the  general  background  of
      women in Sudan plainly suggests that protection can  be  conferred  by
      living in the vicinity of the household of a male family member [35].


  14. Ms Chapman submitted that the Judge's  approach  revealed  a  material
      error of law. She referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in K
      v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1627. There the Court of Appeal set  aside  the
      decision of the IAT which rejected the evidence of an  expert  on  the
      basis that he expressed opinions, for the most part, without reference
      to sources and without explaining the reasons for his views.


  15. At paragraph [19] of K, Sir Paul Kennedy, with whom Lord Justice  Wall
      and the President of the Family Division agreed, stated  that  on  the
      face of it, the expert in K did clearly qualify as  an  expert  to  be
      listened to. When his reports were read, it should have  been  obvious
      to  the  Tribunal  that  he  had  raised  issues  that  needed  to  be
      individually addressed and could not simply be swept aside  by  saying
      that the passages that were critical were not sufficiently reasoned.


  16. Ms Chapman submitted that Mr Verney had given expert evidence in  such
      cases for a considerable period of time and has been  accepted  as  an
      expert all along.


  17. She submitted it is evident from Mr Verney's  report  dated  20  April
      2015, that he considered the question as to whether  single  unmarried
      Muslim women  with  no  male  protection  in  Sudan  share  an  innate
      characteristic of common background that cannot be changed, or share a
      characteristic or  belief  that  is  so  fundamental  to  identity  or
      conscience that a person should not be forced to renounce it.  He  set
      out from paragraphs 25  onwards  the  nature  of  family  or  extended
      families in Sudan.


  18. He also considered the question  whether  a  single  unmarried  Muslim
      woman with no male protection has a distinct identity in Sudan because
      they are perceived as being different by the surrounding society.


  19. Ms Chapman referred to Mr Verney's "note on sources" at paragraph 134,
      page  21  of  his  report.  There  he  stated  that  his  observations
      represented a distillation of his monitoring of thousands of  relevant
      documents, which also included some academic papers, human rights  and
      specialist news  reports,  as  well  as  hundreds  of  interviews  and
      personal communications with a network of  respected  resources.  They
      are based on three decades of personal  experience,  including  living
      and travelling in Darfur and elsewhere in Sudan for 12 years.


  20. He has had personal communications with other Sudan specialists as set
      out at paragraph 136. He also  referred  to  reports  of  the  African
      Centre for Peace and Justice Study and to the UN panel of experts 2009
      report on the Sudanese national intelligence and security service.  He
      appended some of the related objective evidence  for  reference  in  a
      separate section, from pages 24-39 of the report.


  21. He also pointed out that as a contributor of materials  to  the  Sudan
      archive, he  is  aware  of  the  inevitably  patchy  nature  and  poor
      accessibility of these materials. The information  gathered  by  human
      rights organisations  concerning  the  fate  of  individuals  is  also
      incomplete. A small proportion of cases recorded as testimony serve as
      an indicator of  the  situation.  He  set  out  his  conclusions  from
      paragraphs 143 onwards.


  22. He acknowledged that he  had  no  statistics  for  the  occurrence  of
      forceful marriage in Sudanese society. There is persistent  widespread
      pressure on unmarried Muslim women  to  regularise  the  situation  by
      marrying, bolstered by the risks to unmarried women of  having  little
      or no access to independent accommodation, and discrimination  in  the
      field of employment. If there is no male protection within the woman's
      family, a husband offers the prospect of protection as well as  easier
      access to employment and accommodation. So few Muslim women  in  Sudan
      are uncircumcised, that there are no figures for their marital status.
      Whilst he is aware that in a few liberal, educated  families,  FGM  is
      being ignored or done only ceremonially, the vast majority of Sudanese
      Muslim women are cut.


  23. A woman free  of  FGM  would  have  to  exercise  extreme  caution  in
      revealing this, especially to any potential husband, for  fear  of  it
      leading to people labelling her as immoral or unclean. A  tiny  number
      of uncut Sudanese Muslim women manage to discreetly find suitably open
      minded husbands, but the matter is fraught with  uncertainty  and  the
      risk of condemnation or humiliation.


  24. He emphasised the near  impossibility  of  trying  to  survive  as  an
      unaccompanied single woman in Sudan with no supporting family network.
      She would be unable to find accommodation, let alone earn a living  in
      any part of Sudan.


  25. That might provide a risk of her  becoming  homeless  and  unemployed,
      treated as a prostitute and forced into intolerable conditions.


  26. The appellant had contended that it was not possible to live with  her
      aunt because her uncle, who lives there, was not a blood relative.


  27. The appellant also produced a statement  dated  27  February  2015  in
      which she stated that SA, her mother's second  cousin,  was  the  only
      family member that she could live with because she  is  a  widow.  The
      convention in Sudan is that grown up women cannot live with  relatives
      who are married because that would mean living with a man who  is  not
      related to her by blood. SA was the only  option  as  her  two  uncles
      lived in the USA.  She stated that SA would never accept her  back  as
      she has not spoken to her since. Her sons are now both adults and  she
      would not be accepted into the household for that reason.


  28. There is also a report from a maternal  aunt  of  the  appellant,  RA,
      which was produced to the Tribunal. This was  dated  9  November  2015
      (pages 7-16). She stated that they cannot take the appellant  to  live
      with them unfortunately as it is unacceptable for her to live with her
      or her sister because they are both married and  the  appellant  is  a
      woman now. Their husbands are strangers to  her.  The  fact  that  her
      husband is  a  third  uncle  to  the  appellant  would  not  make  any
      difference because his family will not accept this as it will cause  a
      rift. It would also potentially be very damaging  to  the  appellant's
      reputation.


  29. Her brothers both live in the US with their family and  the  appellant
      cannot live with them.  They  would  have  been  the  only  acceptable
      option. Their father is 79 years old and divides his time between  the
      two brothers who are looking after him. He is only in Sudan for one or
      two months of the year.


  30. Ms Chapman submitted that the Judge did not consider the supplementary
      statement at all which contains 'highly corroborative evidence'.   The
      Judge needed to address this evidence and if she were  to  reject  it,
      proper reasons would have to be given. However, no  consideration  was
      given at all. If she had factored in  the  evidence  relating  to  the
      aunts, she would have been in the position  properly  to  address  the
      appellant's assertion that she would be unable to live in Khartoum.


  31. Ms Chapman also referred to the supplementary statement of  Mr  Verney
      dated 20 November 2015, at page 8, paragraphs 10-14.


  32. When asked to comment and clarify the points made in paragraphs  33-36
      of the refusal letter, with regard to the assertion that the appellant
      cannot live with men who are not  blood  relatives,  as  well  as  the
      evidence of that, he stated that it would be "haram  -  forbidden"  if
      she were to live as an unmarried woman with men  who  were  not  blood
      relatives. It is alien  to  Sudanese  culture  for  a  woman  to  live
      independently of her family and women are simply not independent.  Nor
      was it considered  morally  acceptable  in  Sudanese  society  for  an
      unmarried woman to stay with her married sister, her sister's  husband
      and sons. The matter is one of risk  of  sexual  impropriety,  whether
      real or suspected, between her and males of the household.


  33. Ms Chapman accordingly submitted that the Judge's finding at  [35]  is
      'perverse'. The Judge did not deal with the issue at all. It was  also
      clear that the Judge did not have proper regard to the source material
      that Mr Verney had referred to in detail.


  34. Moreover, the Judge's reference at [35] to the decision in FM,  supra,
      (and the evidence of Dr  Gruenbaum),  in  preference  to  Mr  Verney's
      evidence, had nothing to do with this  case:  FM  dealt  with  a  case
      concerning FGM.  Dr  Gruenbaum's  evidence  was  specifically  in  the
      context of FGM.


  35. FM was moreover outdated when compared to Mr Verney's reports,  albeit
      not inconsistent with his views. Nowhere did  the  Judge  address  the
      specific issue concerning the protection  that  can  be  conferred  by
      living in the vicinity of the household of a male  family  member.  It
      was therefore not possible to extrapolate from FM that the findings of
      an expert in a case relating to 2007 were equally applicable  to  this
      appeal.  Ms Chapman submitted that the Judge "tried to find a  way  of
      not finding the appellant would suffer very significant  obstacles  on
      her return."


  36. She submitted that there was a further  material  error  of  fact:  at
      paragraph [40] she stated that the appellant could have entered the UK
      as soon as she was granted entry clearance on  13  December  2010  but
      only did so 13 months later. That did not suggest that  the  appellant
      was subject to any societal discrimination in this period even  though
      to the  outside  world  she  had  finished  her  studies  and  was  of
      marriageable age. However,  the  appellant  in  fact  left  Sudan  and
      arrived in  the  UK  about  three  weeks  after  being  granted  entry
      clearance, having arrived here on 4 January 2011.


  37. Ms Chapman also relied on other alleged errors, including the  finding
      that there was no real risk to the lower standard that  the  appellant
      would be subjected to FGM if she were to decide to marry. In fact  the
      appellant's clear position had been that she does not wish  to  marry.
      The Judge failed to recognise, that in the absence  of  a  male  blood
      relative with whom she could live if returned to Sudan, she  would  be
      forcibly married in order to preserve her reputation and that  of  her
      family and that given that FGM is seen as a religious  duty  according
      to Mr Verney's report, there is a risk even in families which  include
      educated individuals opposed to FGM, that it will be carried out.


  38. The finding at [56] that there would not be very significant obstacles
      to her integration in Sudan were unsustainable for the same reasons.


  39. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Wilcocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the
      Judge had given adequate reasons  for  her  findings  relating  to  Mr
      Verney. The sources relied on did not disclose whether this  had  been
      based upon his experience.


  40. The Judge did consider Mr Verney's report dated 20  April  2015  [32].
      She was troubled not only by the fact that  his  views  were  "largely
      unsourced" but also by other features which she sets out at [32](a) to
      (e).


  41. This included his wholesale  agreement  with  the  mother's  statement
      suggesting to the Judge that he did not bring an independent  mind  to
      bear on the various issues. Further,  Mr  Verney  did  not  take  into
      account the fact that the appellant's mother and  her  aunts  did  not
      undergo FGM or that there was any evidence that they had  been  forced
      to marry. Nor were her family's views taken into account  with  regard
      to whether the appellant would be coerced to marry and undergo FGM. He
      further maintained his view that women who had not undergone FGM  'are
      unmarriageable'. In that respect he  did  not  refer  to  the  country
      guidance case of FM, even though he gave evidence in the Upper Tier  -
      [32(a)-(e)].


  42.  Ms  Wilcocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the   Judge   considered   the
      appellant's account alongside the mother's account. The aunt was not a
      witness. The mother's statement was given little weight as it had  not
      been tested in cross-examination. That would similarly have applied to
      the aunt's evidence.


  43. Although the Judge did not expressly refer to  the  aunt's  statement,
      the issues raised were considered as part of the evidence as a  whole.
      In any event, the finding was not in any way irrational or perverse.


  44. With regard to the "incorrect dates" at [40] the Judge did set out the
      actual dates of the appellant's  grant  of  entry  clearance  and  her
      arrival in the UK. It was the calculation that was incorrect.  In  any
      event, the Judge did not only look at the period  before  leaving  but
      also had regard to the fact that she had remained in Sudan undertaking
      studies from 2009. She had not experienced discrimination. Her  mother
      came to the UK in 2010. The appellant had lived with  her  mother  and
      her cousin, SA.


  45. With regard to the submissions regarding the  appellant's  uncle,  the
      issue as to whether he was  or  was  not  a  blood  relative  was  not
      addressed by Mr Verney. It seems that he was a blood relative. He is a
      third uncle. She had two uncles who were blood relatives, but a  third
      uncle was not.


  46. The Judge also expressed concern regarding the family circumstances in
      Sudan. Nobody  has  had  the  opportunity  to  ask  questions  of  the
      appellant's mother about those circumstances  and  in  particular  the
      family protection that could be provided for the appellant were she to
      live with or in the vicinity of her aunts or other relatives [37]. The
      appellant had stated that she had stopped speaking to her  mother  and
      had been cut off by family members in Sudan.


  47. Ms Wilcocks-Briscoe referred to the appellant's own evidence in cross-
      examination where  she  accepted  that  when  she  applied  for  entry
      clearance as a student she intended to return to Sudan [46].


  48. Ms Wilcox-Briscoe also relied on the Upper Tribunal's decision in  AAW
      (expert evidence - weight)  Somalia  [2015]  UKUT  00673  (IAC).   The
      failure to comply with the Senior President's Practice  Direction  may
      affect the weight to be given to expert evidence. An  opinion  offered
      that  is  unsupported  by  a  demonstration  of  the  objectivity  and
      comprehensive review of material facts required of an expert  witness,
      is likely to be afforded little weight by the Tribunal.


  49. She relied on the decision of the Deputy President of the  Asylum  and
      Immigration Tribunal in FS  (Treatment  of  expert  evidence)  Somalia
      [2009] UKAIT 00004: Immigration Judges have a duty to consider all  of
      the evidence before them in reaching a decision in an even handed  and
      impartial manner. In assessing the evidence  before  them,  they  must
      attach such weight as they consider appropriate to that  evidence.  It
      may on occasion be appropriate to reject the conclusions reached by an
      expert. What is crucial is that a reasoned explanation is given for so
      doing.


  50.  In  reply,  Ms  Chapman  submitted  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Robertson in  granting  permission  misunderstood  the  basis  of  the
      grounds. At paragraph 3 of that decision it is stated that  the  Judge
      had preferred the evidence before the Tribunal in FM, supra.  However,
      Ms Chapman contended that it would be perverse  to  fail  to  consider
      that eight years had passed since that decision and  that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal was considering a wholly different set of circumstances.




  51. Ms Chapman referred to the reasons given by  the  Judge  at  paragraph
      [32] for being "troubled" by Mr Verney's  "wholesale  agreement"  with
      the mother's statement.  It  appeared  to  suggest  that  he  had  not
      brought an independent mind to bear on various issues.  The  Judge  at
      [34] acknowledged that the report does provide sources on a wide range
      of matters but repeated her concerns as to whether he has  brought  an
      independent mind to bear in the issues in the appeal.


  52. Ms Chapman submitted that the Judge omitted to  consider  Mr  Verney's
      "introduction" to his report where he expressly stated at paragraph  5
      that he was aware that there  are  Sudanese  people  who  are  gaining
      asylum by rehearsing false cover stories which have been tailored  for
      this purpose. He is concerned to distinguish the  authentic  from  the
      merely "well prepared".


  53. The appellant's account is individual, distinctive and true to life in
      Sudan with no sense of contrivance or "generic" elements.  It  is  not
      possible to concoct an account based solely on  journalistic  material
      as it would be an incomplete and distorted picture of daily realities.
      Mr Verney again reminded himself at paragraph 22 that he is  concerned
      to filter out opportunists and remains alert  to  the  possibility  of
      stock elements being rehearsed.


  54. He further stated that it is "emphatically" not his  role  to  act  as
      advocate for the applicant as he is particularly concerned  to  assist
      the Court as a dispassionate and neutral observer in the light of  the
      situation described.


  55. The witness moreover had been provided with  the  appellant's  witness
      statement; a screening interview  and  documents  submitted  with  the
      screening interview.  He also stated in his supplementary report  that
      he consulted with two Sudanese medical doctors living in the UK,  both
      of whom had had experience of FGM in their clinical work and in  their
      family lives. They confirmed that it is unsafe to assume that  because
      the individual's nuclear family opposes FGM,  her  aunts,  uncles  and
      grandparents will think the same  way.  Not  all  family  members  are
      educated to the same level or have the same outlook and opposition  to
      FGM which is still the exception rather than the rule in the  majority
      of families.


  56. Ms Chapman referred to paragraph 70 of the supplementary report, where
      he notes that young girls in Sudan continue to face a high risk of FGM
      even when they come from educated families.  He  referred  to  a  case
      where the father who was resistant to FGM because it is not an Islamic
      requirement, was overridden by family pressure.


  57. He also commented at  paragraph  81  and  82  of  the  impact  on  the
      appellant's life of having a grandfather  who  is  publicly  outspoken
      about his opposition to FGM. The long standing  public  opposition  to
      FGM by a  leading  figure  in  progressive  health  education  and  an
      opponent of FGM inevitably makes her own status and her views and  her
      body in this regard, a matter of intrusive public speculation.


  58. Ms Chapman accordingly submitted that Mr Verney did  deal  with  these
      issues properly. He was aware of the context.


  59. Finally, she submitted that  Mr  Verney  had  "sourced"  his  evidence
      relating to the difficulties that the appellant would encounter  as  a
      single person. This is  evident  from  paragraph  74  onwards  of  his
      report.


  60. With regard to the "third male" being a  blood  relative,  Ms  Chapman
      referred to the asylum interview, question 75, where she  stated  that
      the reason why she did not stay  with  them  in  the  first  place  is
      because her aunts were  married  and  since  their  husbands  are  not
      related to her by blood, she cannot be sure with them. That is why she
      lived with her mother's relative. She was a widow and  her  sons  were
      young at the time. That was expressly considered by Mr Verney  in  his
      supplementary report at paragraph 14. It  is  not  considered  morally
      acceptable in Sudanese society for an unmarried woman to stay  with  a
      married sister and that sister's husband and sons.


      Assessment


  61. The appellant's case was that she would be unable to  return  to  live
      with her aunt as she would not accept  her  back.  Her  sons  are  now
      adults. There was thus nobody  she  could  live  with.  She  would  be
      subject to constant harassment and abuse as a single woman.  She  also
      had concerns about being forced into marriage and being  subjected  to
      FGM.


  62. The Judge stated that no explanation was given for the absence of  any
      source material to support the appellant's  subjective  evidence  that
      she could not live with her aunts as their husbands are not her  blood
      relatives [35].


  63. However, Mr Verney had given a substantial body of reference  material
      from pages 24 to 39 of his  report.  That  includes  excerpts  from  a
      liberal Sudanese newspaper as well as background sources on  women  in
      Sudan, referred to at page 34-35.


  64. He has also worked in Sudan for 12 years and on current affairs  there
      for a further 20 years. He has continuously monitored events.  He  has
      travelled extensively in Sudan during the course of his work.  He  has
      developed a sense of  connection  with  Sudanese  at  various  levels.
      Since 1999, he has been requested to assist in more than 1,000  asylum
      cases as an expert witness and has given evidence before  the  AIC  in
      country guidance cases as well as more than 30 other asylum hearings.


  65. Mr Verney has written reports for more than 80 women coming from Sudan
      to claim asylum in the UK. He stated that he  is  aware  of  rehearsed
      false cover stories tailored for the purpose of obtaining  asylum.  He
      is concerned to distinguish between the authentic and the merely  well
      prepared account.


  66. He regarded the appellant as lacking in any contrivance  or  "generic"
      elements. She had given an individual, distinctive and  true  to  life
      account in Sudan. It is not  possible  to  concoct  an  account  based
      solely on material which is  either  of  a  journalistic  or  academic
      nature.


  67. I have had regard to the decisions of the Court of Appeal referred  to
      in respect of the treatment of expert evidence.


  68. I find that the  First-tier  Judge  has  not  given  any  satisfactory
      reasons for being "troubled" by the fact that the views  expressed  in
      Mr Verney's report dated April 2015 "were largely unsourced."  In  the
      reasons for refusal, the respondent did not rely  on  the  absence  of
      such material but rather on the absence of any evidence at all.


  69. On the face of his report, Mr Verney did clearly qualify as an  expert
      to be listened to. Having regard to his background and  qualifications
      and the fact that  he  has  been  to  Sudan,  and  has  assembled  and
      considered a great deal of information that he has disclosed,  he  was
      able to assist  the  Tribunal.  No  issue  was  raised  regarding  his
      qualifications to give evidence in the appeal. Once  it  was  accepted
      that he was an expert, he should have been "listened to" -  K  v  SSHD
      supra.


  70. In the circumstances the Judge has not given proper  reasons  for  not
      giving proper weight to Mr Verney's  conclusions.  The  appellant  had
      claimed in her interview that there would be no blood relatives and it
      would thus not be acceptable for her as an  unmarried  woman  to  stay
      with her married sister  and  with  her  sister's  husband  and  sons.
      Contrary to the Judge's findings, Mr  Verney  did  provide  supporting
      evidence in his supplementary statement from paragraphs 10-14 for  the
      appellant's assertion that she cannot live with men who are not  blood
      relatives.


  71. Moreover, the finding that Mr Verney did not bring an independent mind
      to bear on the issue is not sustainable. He emphasised in  his  report
      that he did not simply  accept  the  evidence  of  the  appellant.  He
      expressly stated that he has never sought to  be  an  advocate  of  an
      asylum seeker.


  72. I also find that the Judge erred in relying  on  the  evidence  of  Dr
      Gruenbaun (FM, supra), as to the general background of women in  Sudan
      which 'plainly suggests' that protection can be conferred by living in
      the vicinity of the household of a male family  member.  Her  evidence
      had been given in the context of FGM which was in any event  outdated.
      Moreover, she did not address the issues arising  in  the  appellant's
      case, concerning the protection conferred by living in the vicinity of
      a household of a male family member. In that regard the  Judge  failed
      to take account of the additional evidence provided by the appellant's
      maternal aunt, Ms A, contained in the supplementary bundle.


  73. She also erred in failing to have regard to the  appellant's  evidence
      that she did not ever wish to marry. Accordingly, the absence  of  any
      male blood relative with whom she could live, posed a  risk  that  she
      would be forcibly married to preserve her reputation and that  of  her
      family, with the further risk that she would be exposed to FGM,  which
      did not exclude educated individuals who are opposed to it.


  74. The evidence as a whole did not therefore sustain the Judge's  finding
      that the appellant could find protection by living in the vicinity  of
      the household of a male family member. That finding was based  on  the
      supposed failure of Mr Verney to supply objective source  material  in
      support of the appellant's claim that she  could  not  live  with  her
      aunts as there husband's are not blood relatives.


  75. Finally, the Judge also erred in  incorrectly  finding  at  [40]  that
      notwithstanding her concerns, the appellant only came to the  UK  some
      13 months after claiming an entry clearance visa.


  76. In the circumstances, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. Ms Chapman has submitted without  opposition  that  in  that
      event this is an appropriate case for the appeal to be remitted to the
      First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.


  77. Having regard to the amount of evidence and the  extent  of  the  fact
      finding required, I find that  this  is  an  appropriate  case  to  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


      Notice of Decision


      Having set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  direct
      that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor  House)
      for a fresh decision to be made before  another  Judge,  with  a  time
      estimate of 3 hours.


      Anonymity direction continued.










      Signed                             Dated:  16 May 2016














      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

