
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08395/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th July 2015                    |On 24th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                                     KI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nick Webb, NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a male citizen of Iran,  born  1  January  1995.   He
      claimed asylum in the United Kingdom on  19  September  2013  and  his
      application was refused in October 2014.  He appealed  that  decision.
      His appeal came before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Thomas sitting
      at Birmingham on 1 December 2014.  An oral hearing was held  and  both
      parties were represented.  In a determination dated 19 December  2014,
      Judge Thomas dismissed the appellant's appeal on all  grounds  finding
      (paragraph 16) that the appellants account of events  leading  to  his
      departure was not credible.

   2. The appellant sought leave to appeal.  The  grounds  allege  that  the
      judge's findings on credibility were not "full  and  cogent".   It  is
      further alleged that the judge did not adequately consider all country
      information that was before her and generally had  failed  to  provide
      adequate reasoning.  Finally it was alleged that  the  judge  had  not
      used the correct standard of proof.

   3. The application came before another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      who, on 26 January 2014, refused the application giving the  following
      as his reasons:

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
         decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Thomas,  promulgated  on  the
         29th December 2014, to dismiss his appeal against the  respondent's
         refusal of asylum and  decision  to  remove  him  from  the  United
         Kingdom.

         2.   The appellant's case appears to be that he  is  a  citizen  of
         Iran albeit, remarkably, he asserts in his Notice of Appeal that he
         is a citizen of Iraq.  Be that as it may, and  in  any  event,  the
         grounds upon which this application for  permission  to  appeal  is
         sought amount to nothing more than a series of  disagreements  with
         conclusions that were properly open to the Tribunal on the evidence
         and for which it provided detailed and cogent  reasons.   Moreover,
         some of the grounds appear to misrepresent and distort the tenor of
         the Tribunal's reasoning.  By way  of  example,  it  is  stated  at
         paragraph 3 of the application that -  based  upon  the  Tribunal's
         reasoning in paragraph 17 of the decision  -  "no  one  would  ever
         support the KDP because of the risks  involved".   However,  it  is
         clear that what the Tribunal  in  fact  found  incredible  was  the
         needless exposure by the appellant's father of his wife and  family
         to an avoidable risk of harm from the authorities.  Contrary to the
         assertion made at paragraph 4 of  the  application,  that  line  of
         reasoning  was  entirely   compatible   with   background   country
         information  concerning  the  activities  of  the  KDP   in   Iran.
         Furthermore, the final sentence of paragraph 8 of  the  application
         confuse discrete concepts of the burden of proof on  the  one  hand
         and the standard of proof on the  other,  and  thus  arrives  at  a
         proposition that is devoid of meaning.  The  application  therefore
         fails to identify any error of law, whether material to the outcome
         of the appeal or otherwise, and permission to appeal to  the  Upper
         Tribunal is accordingly refused".

   4. The appellant then sought leave from the  Upper  Tribunal.   That  was
      granted on 11 May 2015.  The Upper Tribunal Judge believed that "it is
      properly arguable that (the judge's findings) may  not  be  adequately
      reasoned".  Leave  to  appeal  on  the  allegation  that  the  correct
      standard  of  proof  had  not  been  applied  was  without  merit  and
      permission on that ground was refused.

   5. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   6. In his submission Mr Webb referred to  paragraphs  17  to  20  in  the
      determination of Judge Thomas.  For the reasons set out in the grounds
      seeking leave he  considered  the  reasoning  to  be  inadequate.   At
      paragraph 17 he said the findings were contrary to objective evidence.
       The claim was specific  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  appellant's
      father, and not enough reasons were put forward by  the  judge.   This
      also applied to paragraph 18.  At paragraph  19  no  reason  had  been
      given and again at paragraph 20 the  findings  were  contrary  to  the
      evidence with regard to the appellant's uncle.  Mr Webb submitted that
      this amounted to a material error of law and the  decision  should  be
      set aside, and the case remitted.

   7. Mr Richards in his submission said that  the  findings  were  entirely
      sustainable.  The comments with regard to  paragraph  17  did  not  do
      justice to what had been found by the judge.  Simply the appellant was
      not at risk.  The judge's findings were  perfectly  sustainable.   The
      judge had found the evidence not to be plausible.  This  was  fine  as
      long as reasons are given.  The judge had given reasons.  The  grounds
      were merely disagreements with the finding  that  had  been  perfectly
      open to the judge.  No material error of law existed.

   8. Mr Webb chose to make  no  response  other  than  to  repeat  that  no
      sufficient  reasons  had  been  given  and   the   determination   was
      inadequate.

   9. At the conclusion of the hearing I announced for  the  reasons  I  now
      give I found no material error of law and the appellant's  appeal  was
      accordingly dismissed.

  10. The parties have had the benefit of the views of  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge Kelly when he refused the original  application  for  leave.   I
      endorse those views.  In addition I note that at paragraph 3 of  Judge
      Thomas's determination he indicates that he has considered the bundles
      submitted and the case of IA (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  450.
      There is nothing to indicate that the judge failed  to  consider  that
      information.

  11. The main thrust of the challenge to the determination is  that  having
      made an adverse credibility finding the  judge  failed  to  adequately
      explain how he arrived at that conclusion.  Paragraphs 17 to  20  give
      an explanation.  The judge is refreshingly concise as to his  findings
      and the reasoning behind those findings.  In each case  a  reading  of
      the explanation leaves nobody in any doubt as to why the judge reached
      the conclusions that he did.

  12. Paragraph 17 finds it incredible that  the  appellant's  father  would
      have KDP members at his home and explains the reason  because  of  the
      exposure of wife and family to danger.

  13. Similarly paragraph 18 gives a more than adequate  explanation  as  to
      the appellants awareness (or otherwise) of his parents alleged support
      for the KDP.

  14.  Similarly  paragraph  19  makes  a  finding  and  gives  an  adequate
      explanation.  A reader would be in no doubt as to why that part of the
      claim was rejected.  The same applies to paragraph 20.

  15. Mr Webb suggests that paragraph 17 findings are contrary to  objective
      evidence.  I assume  he  means  objective  information.   However  the
      appellant's claim must be considered primarily upon the discrete facts
      of his case and how the judge assesses that  evidence.   As  indicated
      above the judge indicates  at  paragraph  3  a  consideration  of  the
      objective information as contained in the bundles and  the  judge  was
      entitled to reach the conclusions that he did.

  16. I accept the submissions of Mr Richards that the  grounds  are  merely
      indications of disagreement with  the  findings  of  the  judge.   All
      findings were adequately reasoned and perfectly open to the judge.

  17. The allegation regarding incorrect  standard  of  proof  was  not  the
      subject of the appeal before me.

  18. No application was made with regard to the anonymity direction already
      made and accordingly that is to continue.

Decision

  19. There is  no  material  error  of  law.   The  appellant's  appeal  is
      dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  must
      stand.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
