
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08447/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10th July 2017 and 6th February 2018      |On 2nd March 2018              |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     L A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Jagadesham of Counsel, instructed by Ison
Harrison Ltd
For the Respondent:        Mr M Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer -
10th July 2017
                    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer - 6th
                    February 2018


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Kelly made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 8th December 2016.

 2. There is a tortuous history to this matter.  The  appellant  originally
    succeeded in her asylum appeal, Judge Saffer being satisfied  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return from the Taliban as a lone  woman,
    a widow of a former interpreter for the Americans.  That  decision  was
    set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane and when the matter was  reheard
    before Judge Kelly, he  dismissed  the  asylum  appeal.   There  is  no
    challenge to that aspect of his decision.

 3. Following the grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan,  the
    respondent served a reply on 30th May 2017 defending the  determination
    and put the Tribunal on notice that she intended to adduce a conviction
    of the appellant for assault for which  she  was  sentenced  to  twelve
    months' imprisonment suspended for 24 months.  Mr Diwncyz could provide
    no details of that conviction but Mr Jagadesham said that  the  assault
    was upon the father of the children, with whom the  appellant  remained
    in contact albeit that he has another wife living in the UK.

 4. Nevertheless, at the hearing, Mr Diwncyz accepted,  for  the  following
    reasons, that the judge had  erred  and  that  the  assessment  of  the
    question of the reasonableness of the appellant's return to Afghanistan
    with her two British children would have to be remade.

 5. The judge was required to assess, in accordance with  Section  117B(6),
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave  the  UK
    in circumstances where, as here, it is not disputed that the  appellant
    has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  qualifying
    children.

 6. He considered the question of reasonableness at  paragraph  41  of  the
    determination and concluded that the appellant's unlawful entry and her
    subsequent asylum claim which were  made  solely  for  the  purpose  of
    circumventing the Immigration Rules governing  applications  by  family
    members seeking leave to enter the UK required that the public interest
    should prevail.   In  reaching  that  decision  he  did  not  make  any
    reference to  the  best  interests  of  the  British  citizen  children
    including  both  the  benefits  which  they  would  forego  of  British
    citizenship and the potential breach of EU rights as a  consequence  of
    in  practice  having  to  leave  the  European  Community   area.    In
    particular, there is no reference to the  serious  security  issues  in
    Afghanistan.

 7. In EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Christopher Clarke  LJ  referred
    to the need to consider inter alia:

         "35. ... (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere
             with their family life or their rights (if they have  any)  as
             British citizens"

    and

         "36. ... the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance."

 8. Given that the FCO guidance advises British citizens against all or all
    but essential travel to Afghanistan the judge ought to have  considered
    the consequences for the British citizen child of moving there.

 9. It is also right to say that there is no engagement by the  judge  with
    the issue raised at paragraph 7 of the grounds, namely that  the  child
    will in practice be forced to leave the EU. It is clear that the  judge
    accepted that the appellant was the children's primary carer and  would
    in practice be compelled to leave the EU.  Mr  Jagadesham  informed  me
    that it was Social Services' view that the children, if  they  remained
    in the UK would be taken into care and would not  be  looked  after  by
    their father.

10. Accordingly, as conceded by the respondent, the judge did not  consider
    all relevant matters in assessing the reasonableness of relocation,  in
    particular the best interests of the children, as well  as  the  public
    interest in removal. His decision is set aside.

11. Mr Jagadesham told me that Social Services were producing a  report  in
    this matter which should be filed with the Tribunal at least seven days
    before the resumed hearing which was listed to be heard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 25th September 2017. The appellant's  representatives  were
    directed to serve a consolidated bundle including the  Social  Services
    report at least seven days before the hearing.

12. Unfortunately, there  was  a  considerable  delay  in  Social  Services
    producing the report.

13. Following the adjournment of the  hearing  listed  on  25th  September,
    there was a further CMR on  13th  November  2017.  At  that  point  the
    appellant had  received  a  positive  reasonable  grounds  decision  in
    relation to her claim that she  had  been  trafficked.   Mr  Jagadesham
    invited me to exercise my discretion and hear the new protection  claim
    within this challenge to Judge Kelly's decision.

14. There was a further CMR on 19th December 2017.

15. Following receipt of the report from Social Services, on  6th  February
    2018, Mrs Pettersen confirmed that the respondent was no longer arguing
    that it would be reasonable for the children to leave the UK  and  live
    with their mother in Afghanistan.

16. Mr Jagadesham confirmed that the asylum decision made  by  Judge  Kelly
    was not under challenge but said that the appellant may pursue a  claim
    on the basis of being trafficked and indeed was awaiting  a  conclusive
    grounds decision by the relevant authority.

17. In view of the concession by the respondent that the appeal ought to be
    allowed on Article 8 grounds the proper course is for the appellant  to
    make a fresh asylum claim if she is so advised.

18. However, so far as this  Tribunal  is  concerned  the  decision  is  as
    follows.










    Decision

19. The appellant's asylum appeal is dismissed  and  in  that  respect  the
    original judge's decision stands.  So far as the decision on Article  8
    is concerned, his decision is set aside and re-made  as  follows.   The
    appellant's appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 24 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor





