
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08072/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 10 November 2016                  |On 1 December 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MOHAMMED LAHWANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Brennan, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly promulgated on 24 February  2016  in
    which he allowed the appeal of Mr Mohammed Lahwani against the decision
    of the Secretary of State made on 26 June 2014 to remove him  from  the
    United Kingdom consequent upon the refusal of his claim for asylum.

 2. The respondent's case is that he is a Palestinian from  Jerusalem,  and
    that he is at risk of persecution  on  return  on  account  of  imputed
    political opinion, given that he has come to the adverse  attention  of
    the Israeli military.

 3. The Secretary of State did not  accept  that  the  respondent  is  from
    Jerusalem, given the opinion to the contrary expressed in a report from
    Sprakab upon which she relied. She did not accept that he was from  the
    Occupied Territories or that he had, as he claimed, struck  an  Israeli
    soldier.  Inferences adverse to his credibility, pursuant to section  8
    (3) (b) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)
    2004 were drawn from the respondent's use of a false passport.

 4. At his appeal in the First-tier Tribunal, the respondent gave  evidence
    and was cross-examined. He also produced a birth certificate and relied
    upon an expert report from DE taal STUDIO to counter  the  evidence  of
    the Sprakab report.

 5. The judge found that:

      i) the Sprakab conclusion that the respondent  is  Jordanian  was  not
         adequately explained, but the DE  taal  STUDIO  report  reached  no
         conclusion, but indicated he might be from  Jerusalem,  the  effect
         therefore being that the latter report  "neutralised"  the  Sprakab
         conclusion [37];

     ii) while it was possible that the birth certificate  was  not  genuine
         [40], looking at  all  of  the  evidence,  absent  reliable  contra
         indicators, he was satisfied that the respondent is from  Jerusalem
         [41];

    iii) the respondent had previously been kept in detention for two months
         and abused [44]; that it was possible  that  he  had  assaulted  an
         Israeli soldier as claimed, and that  he  would  be  of  continuing
         interest to the Israeli military [46];

     iv) the respondent has a raised profile, and would be at real  risk  of
         persecution if returned, the risk to him being  heightened  by  his
         previous detention and striking a soldier [48];

 6. The Secretary of State's sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds
    that the judge had erred:

      i) In failing properly to apply case law and  weight  to  the  Sprakab
         report, his approach to the DE taal STUDIO report being flawed;

     ii) In his approach to the birth certificate, it having been  submitted
         that it was unreliable for a number of reasons, and  as  section  8
         was in issue; and, because there were  contra-indicators,  contrary
         to what the judge had stated;

    iii) In falling properly to give reasons why the appellant would have  a
         raised profile, and why, if  it  were  not  particularly  high,  MA
         (Palestinian Arabs  -  occupied  territories  -  risk)  Palestinian
         Territories CG [2007] UKAIT 00017, did not apply

     iv) In failing to give reasons why, given the use of a false  document,
         and given section 8 of the 2004 Act, that did  not  impact  on  the
         respondent's credibility, this having particular resonance with the
         birth certificate.

 7. In his submissions, Mr Matthews indicated that he would not be pursuing
    ground (i). I consider that he was correct so to do.  The  grounds  are
    defective in that the rely on a decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  which
    was to a significant extent amended by SSHD v MN & KY  [2014]  UKSC  40
    which the judge at [28]  considered  There  is  no  indication  in  the
    decision that he did not properly apply it, or that  he  did  not  give
    proper weight to the Sprakab report. He gave adequate  and  sustainable
    reasons for not attaching much weigh to it, and for attaching weight to
    the report from DE taal. The reference to the latter "neutralising" the
    Sprakab report is perhaps an infelicitous  use  of  the  word;  it  is,
    however clear from reading the decision as a whole that the judge meant
    that weighing the reports, they balanced each other  on  the  issue  of
    whether the  appellant  was  from  Jerusalem  or  not.  They  were  not
    conclusive and thus the judge, properly, went on to consider the  other
    evidence.

 8. In assessing ground (ii), I  note  that  the  judge  properly  directed
    himself  [38]  in  line  with  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  gave  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons [40] for attaching weight to  it.   The  objections
    raised by the Secretary of State are of little  substance.   The  judge
    had, for good reasons, attached little weight to the report  indicating
    that the respondent was not from Jerusalem.  Further,  as  Mr  Matthews
    accepted, while the certificate had been obtained  in  2014,  there  is
    little or no evidence to suggest that the birth had not been registered
    much earlier. It is evident from the document that it  is  a  certified
    extract of a record maintained by the relevant authorities.

 9. The issue of the lack of an ID card was, it is  submitted,  improbable,
    but that appears to flow from comments made in the Sprakab  report  the
    reliability of which  the  judge  had  legitimate  doubts;  the  author
    appears never to have visited Jerusalem or Israel.

10. The fact  that  section  8  of  the  2004  Act  was  in  issue  is  not
    determinative.  It is established law  that  those  considerations  are
    simply one facet of the assessment of credibility - see  JT  (Cameroon)
    [2008] EWCA Civ 878 per Laws LJ.  While the judge does appear at  first
    glance [19] appear to conclude it was not in issue, it is evident  that
    looking at the relevant paragraph as a whole, that what the judge meant
    was that the Secretary of State had not drawn  inferences  pursuant  to
    section 8 in respect of the  untruth  that  the  respondent  had  flown
    directly to Belfast.

11. It is not arguable that the judge erred  when  stating  there  were  no
    contra-indicators [40]. The averment that the judge said there were  no
    contra-indicators is misleading in that it  omits  the  word  reliable.
    Further, the submission that what was recorded at [22]  and  [23]  were
    not taken into account is misplaced. It  is  evident,  looking  at  the
    decision as a whole,  that  the  judge  did  take  these  factors  into
    account, as can be seen from his conclusion at [41], and concluded that
    the contra-indicators were not reliable. It was open to  him  to  reach
    that conclusion and  his  reasons  for  so  finding  are  adequate  and
    sustainable; the re

12. Mr Matthews in effect, conceded that ground (iii)  was  not  made  out.
    What the judge stated at [42], properly construed, is that the  refusal
    letter did not address the issue of whether or not the respondent would
    be at risk if what he had said were  true;  paragraphs  [17]  and  [18]
    cited in the grounds record reasons for disbelieving the  account,  not
    any assessment of what would follow were the account true.  Further,  I
    am satisfied that the judge gave adequate and  sustainable  reasons  in
    the context of the case why the respondent would be at risk.  That  the
    respondent was released does not advance the Secretary of State's  case
    as the more serious incident occurred after the release.

13. While the judge could have dealt  explicitly  with  section  8  in  his
    decision, as noted above, the judge did not conclude it  had  not  been
    raised.  In JT (Cameroon) Pill LJ held [21]:

         Section  8  can  thus  be  construed  as  not   offending   against
         constitutional principles. It is no more than a reminder  to  fact-
         finding tribunals that conduct coming within the categories  stated
         in section 8 shall be taken into account in assessing  credibility.
         If there was a  tendency  for  tribunals  simply  to  ignore  these
         matters when assessing credibility,  they  were  in  error.  It  is
         necessary to take account of them.  However,  at  one  end  of  the
         spectrum, there may, unusually, be cases in which  conduct  of  the
         kind identified in section 8 is held to carry no weight at  all  in
         the overall assessment of credibility on the particular facts. I do
         not consider the section prevents that finding  in  an  appropriate
         case.  Subject  to  that,  I  respectfully  agree   with   Baroness
         Scotland's assessment, when introducing the Bill, of the effect  of
         section 8. Where section 8 matters are held to be entitled to  some
         weight, the weight to be given to them is entirely a matter for the
         fact-finder.

14. I am satisfied that in the context of this case, where  an  experienced
    judge has otherwise properly directed himself on the law, it cannot  be
    argued that he had not borne section 8 in  mind  having  said  that  he
    considered all the evidence in the round [18], [41] and  where  he  had
    turned his mind to section 8, albeit in a different context  [19].   In
    essence the issue was what weight to be attached to  the  used  of  the
    false document. It was open to the judge to conclude little weight  was
    attached, and to conclude that, taking all  matters  into  account,  he
    nonetheless accepted the respondent's claim. There is  nothing  in  the
    decision to indicate that the judge attached, in the  context  of  this
    case, much weight to the section 8 matters or that it could  have  made
    any material difference.

15. Accordingly, for these reasons, I am not satisfied that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of  law  and  I
    uphold it.

Summary of conclusions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold it.

Signed                                  Date:  29 November 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
