
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08411/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Phoenix House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20 April 2016                           |On 27 April 2016               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     OK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hachemi a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 15 April 2015. His appeal against  this  was
       dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  ("the   Judge")
       following a hearing on 28 October 2015.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order preserving that already
       in force as the Appellant was a child recruit to the Taliban. Unless
       the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.  This  direction  applies  to,
       amongst others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
       direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

The grant of permission


    3. Upper Tribunal Judge  Cavanagh  granted  permission  to  appeal  (23
       December 2015) on the grounds that;



          1) It is arguable that the Judge may  have  erred  in  failing  to
             consider the likelihood of the attack on the family home  being
             perpetrated by the authorities and how  this  impacted  on  the
             Appellant's risk on return.

          2) It is also arguable that, in light of  the  fact  that  he  had
             already been recruited to carry out activities for the Taliban,
             the Judge failed to consider whether there was a continued risk
             of forced recruitment on return.

          3) HN (Afghanistan) and Others (C2/2015/2582) will be heard on  13
             and 14 January 2016. The Appellant is from Baghlan. It may well
             be that any findings made by the Court  of  Appeal  might  also
             need to be considered.


The Judge's findings


    4. The Judge found that the Appellant's account was  reasonably  likely
       to be true [36]. He is 22 [11] and from Baghlan province  [37].  His
       paternal uncle interfered with  the  family  after  the  Appellant's
       father left for Norway, and forced the Appellant to be taken out  of
       school [11]. The Appellant was forced to carry and deliver explosive
       devices to use against government soldiers and  policemen  [12].  On
       one occasion it was strapped to his chest when he to the home of his
       uncle's arch enemy  (Mullah  Allam  who  allegedly  worked  for  the
       government) [13]. His father returned from Norway  to  an  extortion
       bid by the Taliban following which he died when the  paternal  uncle
       came to the house [14]. The Appellant was prevented from  moving  to
       his maternal uncle's with the rest of his family [15]. About 1  year
       later the paternal uncle died from injuries received in  battle  and
       the Appellant went to live with his family at his  maternal  uncle's
       [16]. He was subsequently injured in  a  bomb  blast  in  which  his
       cousin died [17]. He was not taught how to assemble  bombs  as  they
       were always delivered in a container and covered and  he  was  under
       orders not to meddle with them [28].


    5.  The  Judge  considered  PM  and  Others  (Kabul  -   Hizb-i-Islami)
       Afghanistan  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00089  and  AK  (Article   15   (c))
       Afghanistan UKUT 00163 (IAC). He found that  after  the  passage  of
       time the Appellant's low profile was such that the government  would
       not have any particular interest in him [40]. Kabul  is  a  city  of
       more than 8 million people and it is not reasonably likely he  would
       come to the adverse attention of the government [41]. He  is  a  fit
       and healthy young man and it would not be unduly harsh to expect him
       to relocate to Kabul [42].

Respondent's position

    6. It states in the Rule 24 notice (19 January  2016)  that  the  Judge
       directed  himself  appropriately  and  was  entitled  to  find   the
       appellant was not at risk on return to Kabul given he was now 22. No
       Additional oral submissions were made.

Appellant's position


    7. In summary it was submitted in the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
       appeal and orally that the Judge did not fully take into account the
       length of time he had worked for the Taliban or the  nature  of  the
       work. Mullah  Allam  was  from  his  village  and  therefore  it  is
       reasonably likely it was he who attacked the Appellant's  home.  The
       fact that the Appellant is from Baghlan province  is  an  additional
       factor. His lengthy involvement  means  it  is  likely  he  will  be
       recruited again.

Discussion regarding ground 1

    8. There is no merit in ground 1. The Appellant's case was  that  there
       had been fighting  as  the  authorities  had  been  alerted  to  his
       paternal uncle's return (statement 16 June 2014 [14]),  he  being  a
       known Taliban commander, and that it was Mullah Allam  who  was  the
       arch enemy and  who  worked  with  the  government.  The  Judge  did
       therefore consider and accept the likelihood of the  attack  on  the
       family  home  being  perpetrated  by   those   who   supported   the
       authorities. Against that factual  background,  the  Judge  assessed
       that there was no real risk to the Appellant on his return given the
       passage of time and his low profile. He was entitled to do so on the
       evidence and given PM and AK.


Discussion regarding ground 2

    9. There is no merit in ground 2. The Appellant's case was not that  he
       was at real risk of being re-recruited by the Taliban in  Kabul.  He
       said it was the government he feared in Kabul [39]. He did  not  say
       it was the Taliban. The fact he may  fall  within  the  category  of
       those who are particularly vulnerable to recruitment (AA (unattended
       children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT (00016 (IAC) does not  mean  he
       personally is at real risk, he now being 22.

Discussion regarding ground 3

   10. Mr Hachemi accepted that as his  claim  is  that,  at  best,  he  is
       perceived to be Taliban, there is no merit in ground 3 which, in any
       event, was not one of the grounds upon which he sought permission to
       appeal. All the Court of Appeal decided in HN  was  that  the  Upper
       Tribunal had not erred in dismissing claims for Judicial  Review  of
       decisions of the Respondent not to admit fresh claims based  on  the
       worsening security position in Afghanistan.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
26 April 2016
