

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08577/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House, Bradford     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 3rd March 2015                    |10th March 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          KIBRUM MOGES TESFEMARIAM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, senior home office presenting officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Singh, counsel, instructed by Bravo & Co
solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
        which allowed an appeal by the respondent (hereafter the  claimant),
        on asylum and human rights grounds, against a decision of  the  SSHD
        to remove him from the UK as an illegal entrant.


     2. Permission to appeal had been sought and granted  on  the  following
        grounds:


         a) The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  made  perverse  or  irrational
            findings on a matter or  matters  that  were  material  to  the
            outcome: there was overwhelming evidence that the claimant  was
            Ethiopian including his visa application, his genuine Ethiopian
            passport,  fingerprints  provided  at  the   UK   Embassy   and
            production of a forged Eritrean ID card; the  approach  by  the
            judge to the two reports  was  both  irrational  and  perverse,
            ignoring the deficiencies in Dr Schroder's expertise  and  that
            he only examined a photocopy.
         b) The First-tier Tribunal judge failed to take into  account  and
            resolve conflicts of fact or opinion on material  matters:  the
            acknowledgement by Mr  Schroder  that  he  is  not  a  forensic
            expert; he had only received copies of  the  document  and  the
            judge's comment that it is "difficult to fathom how Mr Schroder
            can comment as to wear and tear of the  lamination  or  whether
            the inks are the same if he has only seen photocopies";  failed
            to take account of the fact that the claimant was granted entry
            clearance as an  Ethiopian  national  on  a  genuine  Ethiopian
            passport.
         c) The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to  give  reasons  or
            adequate reasons on material matters: failed to  refer  to  any
            part of Dr Schroder's report that outlines why the document  is
            genuine and why his unqualified opinion is preferred to that of
            a qualified forensic document examiner.
         d) The First-tier Tribunal judge made a material  misdirection  of
            law on a material matter: incorrectly applied the  findings  of
            MA (Ethiopia) CG [2009] EWCA Civ 289 and ST  (Ethnic  Eritrean-
            Nationality-return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT.


     3. The report by Mr Schroder set out  in  detail  the  reasons  why  he
        considered the Eritrean ID card presented by the claimant  could  be
        genuine. He gave reasonable explanations for the differences in ink,
        lamination and  handwriting  and  offered  an  explanation  for  the
        scrubbing out of one name and insertion of another. The report by Mr
        Stiles did not address reasons for those issues but identified  them
        as existing. The judge identified that  he  found  it  difficult  to
        understand how  Mr  Schroder  could  identify  such  issues  but  Mr
        Schroder was commenting on the report by Mr Stiles  in  addition  to
        the photocopies so that is not inexplicable. Mr Schroder  identified
        matters that could lead to a conclusion the  Eritrean  ID  card  was
        genuine, and it was open for the judge to prefer the evidence  given
        by Mr Schroder to that of Mr Stiles.


     4. There was no evidence of who had run in the Aviemore  half  marathon
        in 2013 or whether the organisers had invited Ethiopian team members
        to participate. The judge's comment that it was open to the SSHD  to
        establish this ([38]) could be seen as requiring the  respondent  to
        disprove the claimant's claim rather that the claimant to prove  his
        claim to the lower standard, even though phrased as  possibly  being
        of assistance to the Tribunal. It would have been relatively  simple
        for the claimant to establish firstly  whether  there  had  been  an
        invitation to participate in the half marathon and secondly  whether
        a person of the name in  the  Ethiopian  passport  did  or  did  not
        participate. However, although this turn of phrase used by the judge
        could indicate a reverse burden of proof, when considered  alongside
        all of the evidence upon which the claimant and the respondent  were
        relying it is of little consequence. The  judge  himself  says  that
        suitable enquiries "may or may not have assisted the Tribunal".


     5. The First-tier Tribunal judge referred to MA (Eritrea) but concluded
        that on the basis that the facts were different, he did not consider
        that the claimant  or  his  representatives  could  be  expected  to
        contact the Ethiopian Embassy to obtain proof that the passport  was
        not genuine. The facts  in  MA  (Eritrea)  and  ST  (Ethiopia)  were
        different and it was not the case that  the  claimant  was  claiming
        that he was an Ethiopian national or of mixed  heritage  but  rather
        that the passport he had travelled on was not the  genuine  passport
        it purported to be. The claimant did  not  have  the  passport;  his
        claim was that it was, in so far as he knew, a genuine passport  but
        one to which he was not entitled because he was not  Ethiopian.  The
        judge has not incorrectly identified the ratio in  MA  and  ST  but,
        rather, has legitimately reached a  conclusion  that  attending  the
        Embassy would be of little assistance.


     6. The judge refers in his conclusions to  the  witness  evidence,  the
        numerous documents produced as to schooling, the photos and  to  the
        claimant's knowledge of Eritrea ([39])  which  he  has  set  out  in
        detail in the determination in [21(b)], [28], [29]. His findings  as
        to the claimant's nationality are not  merely  based  upon  the  two
        reports on the Eritrean ID card but upon the evidence  as  a  whole.
        The report by Mr Schroder was preferred to that  of  Mr  Stiles  and
        that is a conclusion he was entitled to reach  on  the  two  reports
        before him. He  gave  adequate,  albeit  not  fulsome,  reasons  for
        preferring Mr Schroder's report and concluded, to the lower standard
        that the ID card was genuine


     7. Although many judges would have considered the evidence and  reached
        a different conclusion,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  conclusion
        reached by the First-tier Tribunal judge was perverse  or  that  the
        judge had failed to take relevant and material matters into account.




    Conclusions:
    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


    I do not set aside the decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


    Anonymity
    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005;  I  was
    not asked to make one and I see no need for one.



         Date 9th March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
