
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08697/2012
                                                               AA/08700/2012
                                                               AA/08701/2012
                                                               AA/08702/2012
                                                               AA/08703/2012
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th September 2013                          |On 26th September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     SHR
                                     Bm
                                    Sahr
                                    Sabr
                                    Ahsr
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms G Patel, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Wardle, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  first  and  second
    Appellants are husband and wife and they are the parents of the  third,
    fourth and fifth Appellants.  The first  Appellant  was  born  on  24th
    April 1974, the second born on 17th July 1977.  The third Appellant was
    born on 13th February 2002, the fourth Appellant on 5th March 1999  and
    the fifth Appellant was born on 6th September 2007 whilst  his  parents
    were in the United Kingdom.  The first  Appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in April 2007 and the remaining Appellants joined  him  in  the
    United Kingdom in May 2007.

 2. This appeal is subject to an anonymity  direction  that  no  report  or
    other publication of these proceedings or any part  or  parts  of  them
    shall name or directly or indirectly identify the claimant.   Reference
    to the claimant may be by use of his initials but not by name.  Failure
    by any person, body or institution  whether  corporate  or  incorporate
    (for the avoidance of doubt to include either party to this appeal)  to
    comply with this direction may lead  to  a  contempt  of  Court.   This
    direction shall continue in force until the Upper Tribunal (IAC) or  an
    appropriate Court lifts or varies it.

 3. This appeal was brought under the One-Stop Regulations made  under  the
    1999 Act, and involves claims under both the Refugee Convention and the
    European Human Rights Convention.

The Procedural History

 4. The first Appellant had obtained a visit visa to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom in February 2007 whilst living  in  Saudi  Arabia.   The  first
    Appellant claimed asylum on 14th May 2007.  That  was  refused  on  8th
    June 2007 by the Respondent and  an  appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse was dismissed by Immigration Judge Vellins  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 27th  July  2007.   Following  that  decision  of  Judge
    Vellins, the Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision.
    However Senior Immigration Judge Taylor was not  satisfied  that  there
    was a material error of law in that  determination  and  thus  did  not
    grant permission  to  appeal.   The  reasons  given  were  set  out  at
    paragraph 38 of the First-tier Tribunal determination.  Thus the appeal
    rights were exhausted on 15th April 2008.

 5. The Appellants were not removed from the  United  Kingdom  and  further
    submissions were submitted on  their  behalf  on  20th  February,  16th
    September and 29th  January  2010.   Those  submissions  were  refused,
    however a further submission for a fresh claim was sought on 23rd March
    2010 and whilst was initially refused, was later withdrawn by the UKBA.

 6. In respect of that fresh claim, the Respondent considered the new facts
    asserted on behalf of the Appellants.  The Respondent in  a  notice  of
    immigration decision dated 7th  September  2012  considered  the  fresh
    claim but refused to grant the first Appellant asylum  under  paragraph
    336 of HC 395 (as amended) and gave directions to remove the Appellants
    from the United Kingdom by way of directions.  It is right to note that
    the second, third, fourth and fifth Appellants are  dependants  of  the
    first Appellant's fresh claim application.   They  are  now  Appellants
    having appealed in their own right, however their case is based on  the
    factual account submitted on behalf of the first Appellant.

 7. The Appellants sought to appeal the  decision  of  the  Respondent  and
    their appeals  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Birkby)
    sitting at Bradford on 24th October 2012.  At  that  hearing  he  heard
    oral evidence from the first Appellant and considered  the  documentary
    evidence that had been placed before him.  In making an  assessment  of
    their claim, he took into account their  factual  basis  of  the  claim
    which was that the first Appellant and the family members were  of  the
    Ahmadi faith.  When the Appellant first arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    and made his first application for asylum, it had  been  determined  by
    Immigration Judge Vellins after a hearing on 17th July 2007.

 8.   The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Birkby)  pursuant  to  the  case  of
    Devaseelan, took the findings  of  Immigration  Judge  Vellins  as  his
    starting point when considering the Appellant's  current  appeal.   The
    findings of Immigration Judge Vellins as to credibility and  fact  were
    set out in his  determination  at  paragraphs  41  to  58.   They  were
    recorded by Judge Birkby at paragraph  34  of  the  determination.   In
    essence, Judge Vellins concluded "I did not find the Appellant to be  a
    credible witness and I did not believe the core version  of  events  he
    claimed to  have  occurred  in  Saudi  Arabia  and  in  Pakistan".   At
    paragraph 43 Immigration Judge Vellins considered how the Appellant had
    left Saudi Arabia and concluded that the Appellant had plans  to  leave
    Saudi Arabia voluntarily and not due to any fears in Saudi  Arabia  and
    that he had plans to enter the United Kingdom which were not  based  on
    any fears.  He went on at paragraph 44 to say that he did  not  believe
    the Appellant's claims that in Karachi whilst staying at  his  parents'
    home on 27th March 2007 the home was besieged by a group from  KN  with
    eight people shouting abuse.  He further did not believe the claim that
    on 7th May 2007 whilst in the United Kingdom  members  of  the  KN  had
    entered his parents' home  and  attacked  the  Appellant's  father  and
    brother.  Immigration Judge Vellins found that  if  the  Appellant  had
    genuine fears of persecution from KN because of his Ahmadi faith it  is
    not credible that he would have gone to live at his  parents'  home  in
    Karachi after he had left Saudi Arabia.  He had  furthermore  left  his
    parents' house in Karachi and returned there on two occasions which was
    not the action of someone in genuine fear.  The judge also pointed  out
    that the Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom on 27th April 2007
    but did not claim asylum  until  14th  May  2007  and  thus  the  delay
    adversely affected his credibility.  The judge also stated that even if
    he believed the Appellant's claims the core of his events (which he did
    not) the appeal still  had  to  be  dismissed  as  he  found  that  the
    Appellants could internally relocate to Rabwah.  At paragraph 50 of the
    decision of Judge Vellins he stated:

         "I find in this appeal that the Appellant is a  practising  Ahmadi,
         who believes in the Ahmadi faith.  The Appellant in  his  interview
         made no claim that  he  preached  either  when  he  was  living  in
         Pakistan or in Saudi Arabia.  I did not believe his claims  in  his
         witness statement after the decision that he had preached.  I  find
         that if he had in fact been an Ahmadi who preached, he  would  have
         mentioned this at his interview.  If I am wrong about that and  the
         Appellant did in fact preach, on his own version of events  he  was
         not a prominent preacher and not a person of high profile."

 9. The Appellant had provided further evidence since the decision of Judge
    Vellins relating to what was asserted to be the worsening situation for
    Ahmadis in Pakistan and that it was asserted that his  application  had
    not received fair scrutiny previously and that  he  had  been  credible
    when giving an account of the past events in Pakistan and Saudi Arabia.
     In the evidence placed before the First-tier Tribunal, it was asserted
    that he was a well-known Ahmadi because of  the  prominent  and  active
    positions he has held and that his  family  have  held  in  the  Ahmadi
    community in the United Kingdom and that it was not possible  therefore
    to relocate anywhere in Pakistan.  It was asserted that even in Rabwah,
    it had been unsafe to live.  He claims  to  have  followed  his  Ahmadi
    faith by preaching and propagating the Ahmadi  faith  in  Pakistan  and
    that he states that he had  occupied  the  Ahmadi  community  roles  of
    organiser, Assistant to Local Head of Youth Organisation and  the  Head
    of the Youth Organisation and because of that he had come to the notice
    of the KN as someone who had committed blasphemy.  He also claimed that
    since being in the United Kingdom he had  followed  his  faith  in  the
    United Kingdom being an active member of the Ahmadi community  involved
    in preaching and propagating his  faith.   Despite  the  constitutional
    position in Pakistan, the Appellant considered himself to be a Muslim.

10. It is clear from the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Secretary of State in the refusal letter of 7th September 2012 accepted
    that the first Appellant was a follower of the Ahmadi faith as were his
    family members.  The Secretary of State had considered the  Appellant's
    recent supporting documents including a statement from Dr  Asim  Salim,
    President of the Leeds branch of the Ahmadyya  Association  dated  22nd
    July 2012, and also a letter from the Ahmadyya Muslim  Association  UK.
    It was further acknowledged that the Appellant was known to  the  local
    Ahmadyya Associations in Spen Valley and in Leeds and  it  was  further
    accepted that he had followed his faith in the United Kingdom.  It  was
    shown that the Appellant had been an organiser for children  from  2007
    until 2010 in Spen Valley and that he had been  the  General  Secretary
    and Nazim Itfil in the Ahmadyya Association's Leeds branch from 2010 to
    2011.  However, the Secretary of State considered  that  the  Appellant
    had a history of acting with discretion prior to arriving in the United
    Kingdom relying on  the  account  that  he  had  given  in  his  asylum
    interview in  2007.   Therefore  whilst  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    accepted that he had followed his faith in the UK as he had done in the
    past both in Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, and whilst it was accepted that
    he had held positions within the local  branches  of  the  Ahmadyya  UK
    community, it was considered by the Appellant that he had  demonstrated
    a discreet history of choosing when to  disclose  his  faith  and  thus
    would not be at risk of return.

11. The Secretary of State considered the country guidance decision  of  MJ
    and ZM (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 0003 and the  decision
    of HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010].   In  doing  so,  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered that the Appellant's  case  did  not  demonstrate  any  past
    preaching or attempts to publish documents to  recruit  people  to  the
    Ahmadi faith in either  Pakistan  or  Saudi  Arabia  in  the  past  and
    therefore he did not have such a profile with history to indicate  that
    the practise of  his  faith  on  return  to  Pakistan  would  lead  the
    Appellant to be subjected to ill-treatment or persecution.  In  respect
    of the decision of HJ (Iran) the Secretary of State considered that  he
    had  not  demonstrated  a  previous  history  of  either  preaching  or
    proselytising his faith in Pakistan and therefore he could practise his
    religion on return as he had previously practised it therefore avoiding
    the need to alter the way he currently behaved.

12. The judge considered the evidence in the case and set out his  findings
    at paragraphs 53 to 57.  He was not satisfied that the  new  background
    documentation undermined  the  existing  case  law  of  IA  and  Others
    (Ahmadis: Rabwah) Pakistan CG [2007] and the other case law  concerning
    Ahmadis.  He was satisfied that the targeting of Ahmadis had  continued
    and  in  some  respects  it  intensified  but  the  conclusion  of  the
    Respondent in general terms with regard to risk  for  Ahmadis,  without
    more, were at risk of discrimination and not persecution.  It was noted
    by the Judge that Mr Diwnycz at the hearing made a concession  that  it
    was not argued that Rabwah would be a safe internal relocation  option.
    However the judge noted at paragraph 55, the family could return safely
    to their home area in Karachi.

13. As to the Appellant's activities in the UK and the  new  evidence  upon
    which the Appellant relied, the judge at paragraph 55  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had accepted that he  had  been  involved  in  those
    activities.  The judge set  out  his  principal  findings  of  fact  at
    paragraph 56.  His starting point, pursuant to the case of  Devaseelan,
    were the findings of Immigration Judge  Vellins.   He  considered  that
    none of the new evidence put forward in particular with regard  to  the
    practise of the Appellant's Ahmadi faith in the United Kingdom had  not
    undermined the findings of Immigration Judge  Vellins.   He  found  the
    account of past persecution in both Pakistan and Saudi Arabia not to be
    credible.  He found that he had not preached his faith previously or as
    the judge said "certainly he had not preached his faith openly".   Thus
    the judge found that:

         "Any assertion which might be made that  the  Appellant  would  now
         preach his Ahmadi faith openly and put himself at risk, I find  not
         to be credible.  The Appellant has not been credible  in  the  past
         with regard to such assertions and I do not believe that  he  would
         do anything other now on return to Pakistan than  to  practise  his
         faith as he has always done previously."

    Thus the judge adopted the adverse credibility findings of  Immigration
    Judge Vellins regarding the Appellant's stated history.

14. Consequently, he did not find the Appellant would be at risk of harm if
    returned to Karachi.  He noted that he adopted the  assertions  of  the
    Respondent save for the concession made that Rabwah  would  not  be  an
    appropriate relocation option.  He did not find however that  he  would
    require a relocation option as he could return back to his  home  area.
    The judge then stated "I do  not  accept  that  his  family  have  been
    persecuted in Karachi.  In all the circumstances the case  of  HJ  does
    not apply to this particular Appellant".  The  judge  also  dealt  with
    Article 8 at paragraphs 62 to 64 of the determination.

15. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision on a number  of
    grounds and permission, whilst originally  refused,  upon  renewal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic.  The reasons given by the  Upper
    Tribunal are as follows:-

         "The grounds argue that there was a failure  to  consider  material
         matters, a failure to properly apply Devaseelan and  a  failure  to
         apply HJ (Iran) and MT (Ahmadi - HJ Iran).  Although the  Secretary
         of State relied on HJ, MT, MJ and ZN and IA  in  her  refusal  (see
         paragraphs 44, 45 and 49 of the determination), it is arguable that
         the judge erred in only applying IA [2007] when making his findings
         (paragraph 53) and in  giving  inadequate  reasons  in  finding  at
         paragraph 57 that HJ did not apply.  There is no  consideration  of
         the other country guidance cases relied on and that is arguably  an
         error of law.  The grounds may all be argued."

The Error of Law Hearing:

16. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Ms Patel who  had  appeared
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  had  settled  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal, appeared before the Upper Tribunal.   Mr  Diwnycz
    appeared on behalf of the Respondent who had also appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

17. In a decision promulgated on the 11th July 2013, the Upper Tribunal was
    satisfied that the FtT erred in law only in  respect  of  the  decision
    made in respect of the Refugee Convention.  I found no error of law  in
    the  judge's  approach  of  adopting  the  findings  of  fact  made  by
    Immigration Judge Vellins made in 2007 in accordance with the  decision
    of Devaseelan.  He was entitled to rely upon  those  findings  of  fact
    which had been subsequently upheld by the Tribunal.  I also found  that
    there was no error of law based on the assertion that Immigration Judge
    Vellins had not given anxious scrutiny to the events in 2007 in respect
    of events in Pakistan  and  Saudi  Arabia.   The  judge  gave  entirely
    sustainable reasons that were open to him and were subsequently  upheld
    by the Upper Tribunal (decision of SIJ Taylor).  There  was  no  cogent
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal concerning the events  in  2007
    to demonstrate that the findings of fact should be  revisited  or  that
    there was evidence to demonstrate those  findings  of  fact  that  were
    sustainably made should be displaced in any  way.   The  only  evidence
    that was produced was from the Appellant relating  to  his  conduct  in
    Pakistan and Saudi Arabia which had previously  not  been  believed  by
    Immigration Judge Vellins.  Thus I found no error of law in respect  of
    that.  However I found that the FtT erred in law by failing to consider
    the claim in the light of the decision in HJ (Iran) for the reasons set
    out in the  error  of  law  determination  and  annexed  hereto  marked
    "Appendix 1").

18. In respect of Article 8, I was satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal did not disclose any error of  law  in  considering  that
    issue for the reasons given.

19. In  those  circumstances,  the  decision  in  respect  of  the  Refugee
    Convention disclosed the making of an error of law  and  thus  was  set
    aside.



The Re-making of the Decision:

20. The re-making of the decision  relates  solely  to  the  issue  of  the
    Refugee Convention and will be remade in the light of the evidence  and
    the new country guidance decision of MM and Others  (Ahmadi  -  country
    conditions - risks) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT.

The Evidence

21. The Appellants' bundles consist of the original bundle under cover of a
    letter dated 17th October 2012 which included witness  statements  from
    the Appellant, Dr Salim, documents from the AMA  UK  and  a  number  of
    documents and background materials.  The other bundle contained further
    evidence submitted under  Rule  15(2A)  which  included  an  additional
    statement from the Appellant and Dr Salim, a further  letter  from  the
    AMA UK, copy photographs and copy leaflets and skeleton argument.

22.   At the hearing  the  Presenting  Officer  relied  upon  the  original
    Respondent's bundle before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  a  skeleton
    argument prepared for the hearing.  Both advocates  made  reference  to
    the CG decision of MM and Others (Ahmadi - country conditions -  risks)
    Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT.

23. The first Appellant gave evidence with  the  assistance  of  the  court
    interpreter and gave evidence in the Urdu language.  I carried  out  an
    introduction of the proceedings so that the Appellant was familiar with
    the procedure that would be adopted during the  court  hearing  and  in
    particular I ensured that  the  Appellant  and  the  interpreter  could
    understand each other.  There were no difficulties identified.  I  note
    that during the hearing there were no difficulties with  the  Appellant
    being able to give evidence or with the interpretation and no  concerns
    were raised at any time during the hearing in relation to that.

24. There is a full record of  oral  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    witnesses which appears in the Record of Proceedings.  I shall refer to
    the relevant parts of the evidence during my analysis of the  case.   I
    have heard both advocates by way of summary at the  conclusion  of  the
    case which I have recorded in my Record of Proceedings.  I confirm that
    I have considered those submissions during my analysis of the  evidence
    and in the conclusions that I have reached, even  if  not  specifically
    referred to.

25. I note that I was guided to certain passages in the objective material.
     I confirm that I have read those passages with care, but I  read  them
    in the context of the entire document.  I further confirm that  I  have
    read the whole of the documentation set  out  before  me  in  order  to
    assist me in reaching my conclusions.

26. The Appellant adopted his two witness  statements  dated  17th  October
    2012 and 20th September 2013 as his evidence-in-chief.   The  Appellant
    was asked about his faith.  In particular, he was asked about  what  he
    understood to mean by the word "tabligh".  The  Appellant  stated  that
    the meaning of the word to him was that he should spread the message of
    the Ahmadi faith to those who lived nearby him and wherever possible to
    spread the message to these people.  He said it was the true meaning of
    Islam.  As to the importance of this, he stated that  it  was  for  his
    devotion that it is most important and that if he did  not  spread  the
    message then his faith would be incomplete.  He made reference  to  the
    activities that he had been carrying out in the  United  Kingdom  since
    2007 and was asked whether upon return he would carry out and  continue
    the same activities.  The Appellant said that he would have to be extra
    careful because of the laws of the land stop him from carrying out  the
    activities and it would be very difficult for him but he would have  to
    be very very careful in those  circumstances.   He  confirmed  that  in
    Pakistan he was not allowed to call himself a Muslim  because  the  law
    forbade it.  He  said  that  it  was  most  important  for  him  to  be
    considered a Muslim as it  was  his  faith  and  of  the  most  central
    importance to him.

27. As to his background in the United Kingdom he  confirmed  that  he  had
    been living in Leeds for the last three years having lived in Normanton
    prior to that.  He said that since his arrival he has been involved  in
    the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK.  He originally landed at  Heathrow
    Airport and lived in London for seven to eight days.  He and the family
    were then provided with accommodation out of London to Normanton and he
    joined the Spen Valley AMA UK.  They had no mosque in the area but they
    had a hall where he and his family were able to perform Friday  prayers
    and their activities.  He moved to Leeds in 2010 but between  2007  and
    2010 he was practising his faith in  Normanton  as  part  of  the  Spen
    Valley Association.  He was  asked  about  photographs  that  had  been
    produced and he  confirmed  that  they  were  photographs  showing  him
    preaching in Leeds city centre and in particular at the "tabligh" stall
    in Leeds city centre.  He identified himself from the photographs.   He
    also made reference to a document entitled  "local  jama'ats  elections
    2013" which is for the North East region.  He  confirmed  that  he  had
    been voted the General Secretary, the Secretary of Sami Basri  and  the
    Secretary Talimul Quran  and  Waq  fardi.   He  also  referred  to  the
    leaflets that he had been  distributing  which  were  set  out  in  the
    bundle.

28. In cross-examination, he was asked about the short time that he was  in
    London.  He said that he had been staying with a friend for a few  days
    before he moved to the Wakefield (Normanton) area.  He said he only had
    a short time in London and therefore he did not preach  at  that  time.
    He said he had just arrived from Pakistan and that the first  thing  he
    needed to do was to settle he and his family.  He said  that  he  first
    started preaching in Normanton when he first arrived  there.   He  said
    that he was individually involved in preaching and was involved in  the
    investigation including other activities.  He said that he got to  know
    a lot of people in the area and that he had preached to non-Ahmadis who
    had lived in the surrounding area where he  lived  including  the  taxi
    drivers and people at takeaways because they were Pakistanis.  He  said
    that when he got to know them that he would preach his faith  to  them.
    In respect of the leaflets, he said that he did not distribute leaflets
    in Normanton because those leaflets had not been printed at  the  time.
    He said that he had handed out some Ahmadi literature but that  he  had
    really taken part in verbal preaching.  In respect of literature he had
    handed out he confirmed that the organisation  had  booklets  of  about
    fourteen to fifteen pages and there was another book in regard  to  the
    prophet.  He said that the organisation said they should only be  given
    if people showed interest in the faith.  He was asked how many booklets
    he had handed out and he said there were four  to  five  booklets.   He
    said that the organisation had a policy that you  would  not  hand  out
    leaflets until you have got to know the people and once they had  shown
    some interest you would then give them the  leaflets.   It  was  simply
    based on whether they had shown interest.  He said that the AMA UK were
    aware of his activities in Normanton and that he was an  active  member
    of the Association.  He said the Normanton branch had a  President  who
    was Mr Arif.  He confirmed that during the time he lived  in  Normanton
    he invited people to the mosque/hall and did preach during that  period
    but that no-one had taken up the offer of attending  prayers.   He  was
    asked if he wanted people to attend his prayers?  The Appellant  stated
    that it did not work that way.  He said that if  he  was  preaching  to
    Christian then he would have to understand the faith and  once  he  had
    understood the faith he would convert and it would only be once he  had
    converted that he would pray.  He was asked if he converted  anyone  in
    Normanton.   The  Appellant  said  that  the  Presenting  Officer   had
    misunderstood the meaning of tabligh.  He stated that it was not  aimed
    to convert people, it was to inform people and give them knowledge  and
    that it was up to the individual to make the decision as to whether  or
    not they wish to do so.  He said that once he had spoken to someone and
    they had showed interest he would give them  the  literature  and  then
    they would be able to  do  so.   He  said  no-one  had  taken  up  that
    interest.

29. He was then cross-examined about his activities in Leeds.  He confirmed
    that he had carried out the same activities in Leeds.  He  referred  to
    handing out leaflets.  The leaflets  had  the  address  of  the  London
    mosque on it and also a contact number.  He confirmed that the  address
    on the leaflet was not Leeds but Bradford but the headquarters were  in
    London and that was where the telephone number was.

30.   The Appellant refuted the suggestion that the letter from the AMA  UK
    dated 3rd July 2011 did not mention his preaching.  He stated  that  it
    confirmed that he was involved in activities for  the  AMA  UK  between
    2007 and 2010 and that also included the preaching activities  that  he
    had carried out at that time.  He confirmed that he began  taking  part
    in door to door leaflets when he arrived in Leeds  in  2010.   He  said
    that the leafleting tended to be carried out once or twice  per  month.
    He said this is an activity organised by the  organisation  itself  and
    they were given particular times and areas in  which  to  leaflet.   He
    said the organisation kept a record  and  in  particular  they  kept  a
    record of the streets that had been leafleted.  The organisation had  a
    map of the entire Leeds area and marked off areas that had already been
    leafleted and ones that were remaining.  He confirmed that he delivered
    leaflets door to door and gave an explanation as to what he would carry
    out.  He said that he was told by the organisation as  to  the  process
    that they should adopt, namely they should knock on the door but  knock
    on it more than three times.  If someone answered  the  door  then  you
    would give an introduction about the organisation but if no-one  opened
    the door they would put the leaflet through the letterbox.  As to those
    who open the door and take the leaflet, he was asked  if  he  had  been
    invited back.  The Appellant said that certain people had asked him  to
    come back but it did not happen very often.  He said the whole  aim  of
    leafleting was to spread the message and  information  to  10%  of  the
    population and to give them the contact details  on  the  back  of  the
    form.  The important thing was that they had the message  and  had  the
    contact details for them to follow it up.

31. As regards the stall in Leeds city centre known as the "tabligh"  stall
    he confirmed that the stall was used twice per year as they had a  free
    space given to them by the council.   He  said  that  he  has  attended
    twice, once last year and once this year.

32. He was asked about his mother if she was still a practising Ahmadi,  he
    said that she was.  He said that his father had passed away  last  year
    but whenever he would have the opportunity he would preach but  getting
    out of the house is difficult.

33.   In re-examination he was asked about the leaflets.  He  confirmed  he
    produced two leaflets, one that gave the mosque details in  London  and
    that it had the head office and the phone number for the  head  office.
    He said that they would ring that number and if anybody wanted to write
    a letter they could write to the mosque with the addresses but if  they
    wanted to phone it would be the London telephone  number  because  they
    had more staff there.  He confirmed there  was  no  formal  centre  for
    Leeds for people to call.  When asked about  meetings  and  prayers  he
    said they had a meeting in the hall in Leeds for Friday prayers.

34. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, he confirmed that he attended
    the 2012 annual convention known as the Jalsa Salana.  He said that the
    spiritual head had attended that year but he had not been able to  talk
    to him.

35. The Tribunal then heard from  Dr  Asim  Salim  who  confirmed  the  two
    statements in the 2012 bundle and an up-to-date  statement  dated  20th
    September 2013.  He confirmed that he had known the Appellant for three
    years.  As to his own role in the AMA UK he confirmed that he  was  the
    President of the Leeds chapter.  He said that they had elections  every
    three years and elections from the headquarters and the appointment  is
    then considered by the spiritual leader in London.   This  takes  place
    three years in summer and the last time was in  2010  and  recently  in
    2013 where he was re-elected as the President of the Leeds jama'at.  He
    referred to the letter in the bundle dated 23rd August 2013  confirming
    that appointment.  He was asked about the election that took  place  in
    2013 with reference to the Appellant.  He confirmed that the  Appellant
    is now the General Secretary of the Leeds jama'at and that also he  was
    the Secretary of "Sami Basri" which meant that he was  responsible  for
    organising the tactical paraphernalia required for meetings.   He  also
    confirmed that he was the Secretary known as  "Talimul  Quran  and  Waq
    Fardi" which was for the education of the Koran.   Dr  Salim  described
    this as that when members of the organisation  and  the  community  had
    some temporary leave from their occupations they were able to undertake
    religious work during that time.  He said that the Appellant's role  in
    this would be to organise and oversee people who  wanted  to  undertake
    voluntary work during their holidays and this would be  religious  work
    for the Association purposes.  He confirmed that he had known  him  for
    three years and he was asked if  he  doubted  his  Ahmadi  faith.   The
    witness stated "absolutely not".  He confirmed that in his opinion that
    his faith was very important to him.  He also confirmed that he  was  a
    witness in the country guidance case of MN (as cited).

36. In cross-examination Mr Wardle asked Dr Salim about the evidence in the
    country  guidance  case  at  paragraph  138.   The  Appellant  at  that
    paragraph had held offices in Pakistan and Dubai.  He was asked how  he
    had found this out.  The witness said that the Appellant had  told  him
    previously and there had been a statement given by the headquarters  in
    Rabwah.  He was asked if he was aware if the Appellant had any roles in
    Pakistan.  He said that the Appellant used to live in Rawalpindi but he
    was in Lahore so he would not know.  He was then asked again if he  was
    aware of any role the Appellant had in Pakistan and  the  witness  said
    that he had not gone to the local jama'at in Pakistan for any firsthand
    knowledge.  He was asked  about  his  work  at  the  Leeds  branch  and
    distributing leaflets.  He said that for the least two  or  two  and  a
    half years the Leeds branch had been distributing leaflets.  They began
    approximately two or two or two and a half years ago where  they  began
    to comply with directions from the spiritual leader and preparing a way
    in which to distribute the literatures to the  population  which  would
    involve going door to door, greeting the person and then if they wanted
    to proceed with the conversation then a contact number  was  given  and
    that they could spread the message of Ahmadi Islam and peace.  He  said
    that on the back of the leaflet there was a contact number which is for
    the headquarters in London and that if anyone was interested they could
    call the headquarters and that they would be directed to either him  or
    someone in the Leeds branch.  He said  that  nobody  had  joined  as  a
    result of the Appellant's  leafleting.   He  said  that  preaching  the
    message is one thing but someone accepting the message is quite another
    thing and it is their job to carry out  the  orders  of  the  spiritual
    leader to preach the faith.  He confirmed that he did  have  advice  to
    give to people as to who to give the leaflets to and confirmed what the
    Appellant had been asked  in  cross-examination.   He  said  that  days
    before the leafleting took place they would  identify  areas  and  they
    would go to the start of the street and every household and every door.
     They would also keep a record that  the  street  had  been  leafleted.
    When asked if they had ever been met with hostility  the  witness  said
    that it had happened.  He said not with him personally but a  few  time
    he said that there had been some incidents in Bradford where  they  had
    called on some individuals from Pakistan/Bangladesh and they  had  been
    incidents where people had not been very keen and had been  very  rude.
    The advice given to members is that they  live  in  the  country  where
    there is total religious freedom but they  knew  that  there  would  be
    hostility.  They said their advice was to be polite and  to  give  them
    the leaflet but if they did not want it  to  apologise  and  leave  the
    house.  He said that if the person came after them, their advice was to
    stay calm and call colleagues or call the police.  He said  that  there
    were no areas in Leeds that they did not leaflet but in  Bradford  they
    had identified  some  areas  where  the  people  were  originally  from
    Pakistan and they had avoided them but that that had  not  happened  in
    Leeds.

37. The witness was asked about his own knowledge of this Appellant and  in
    particular the elections in 2013.  The  witness  said  that  since  the
    Appellant had arrived in Leeds he considered him to be  a  very  active
    member of the Ahmadi Association and that he had always participated in
    all activities, especially the ones set out in the statement; preaching
    and propagation of his faith and  that  he  had  been  very  active  in
    leafleting including holding stalls in  the  city  centre  and  holding
    meetings.  He said the elections of people who are voting for a  person
    who was active in all parts  of  the  local  activities  and  preaching
    tabligh.  In addition to the day-to-day activities he is a good  Ahmadi
    and a good example that showed strong connections to the  headquarters.
    He said that he had always found him to be a very strong Ahmadi in  his
    faith, a strong colleague and a strong active preacher  and  member  of
    the Association in Leeds.  When asked what a good Ahmadi was,  he  said
    he is someone who listens and has strong beliefs in the religion.   The
    Appellant had a  strong  belief  that  tabligh  was  important  and  an
    integral part of his religion  and  that  he  had  shown  this  by  his
    behaviour from preaching tabligh and this was very important  for  this
    particular Appellant's religious identity.  He referred to  his  active
    involvement in the faith and that he "strongly believed" that  wherever
    he had the freedom to do activities it would be an  integral  part  and
    requirement of his life.  He said that for the last three years he  had
    shown this by example.   When  asked  why  the  Appellant's  faith  was
    important to him the witness said that the Appellant was a good  Ahmadi
    and that it  was  shown  by  his  relationship  and  contact  with  the
    Association and headquarters; his keenness to participate in the  local
    headquarters to donate money and to preach " tabligh".   The  spiritual
    leader had stressed that this was important to be actively involved  in
    spreading the message and this was what he had seen of the Appellant in
    the last three years.

Submissions

38. Mr Wardle had helpfully produced a skeleton argument on which he placed
    reliance.  In addition he made the following oral submissions.  He made
    reference to the credibility findings made by IJ Vellins.  He submitted
    the appeal must be looked at in the context of activities  carried  out
    in  Normanton  and  London  and  whether  the  Leeds  activities   were
    "opportunistic".   There  was  little  evidence  concerning  activities
    contravening  Pakistani  law  and  there  was  no  supporting  evidence
    concerning Normanton except for vague information in 2011.  In  respect
    of the letter from the Association in 2013 it  gave  an  indication  of
    further activities and is a summary of those that were carried  out  in
    Leeds.  As to the situation in Normanton, the Appellant  gave  evidence
    as to work he had done on an individual basis  but  there  was  nothing
    from the President in Spen Valley to confirm that he  was  engaging  in
    preaching activities or not.  It is clear from the Appellant's evidence
    that there was an amount of discretion even carried out in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Dr Salim said there was an area  in  Bradford  as  identified
    where others should not preach.  It was significant  that  the  witness
    had not been in contact with Rabwah or to an Ahmadi mosque in  Pakistan
    to find out the activities.

39.  The issue was whether or not he had preached in the United Kingdom and
    his faith had manifested itself in the UK.  Mr  Wardle  submitted  that
    his mother remained in Pakistan.  The past  findings  showed  that  the
    Appellant had not preached openly and that this was  not  an  important
    part of his faith.  Therefore the Appellant would not be at  risk  upon
    return.

40. Ms Patel relied upon the skeleton argument that she had  also  produced
    for the hearing.  She accepted that the previous  credibility  findings
    of IJ Vellins were important.  However she invited the Tribunal to note
    the length of time that had elapsed since that  determination  in  2007
    and that there had  been  a  great  body  of  evidence  concerning  the
    Appellant's faith in the United Kingdom.  The  important  evidence  was
    that evidence  relating  to  the  period  2007  to  2013.   As  to  the
    activities in the United Kingdom there was a  great  deal  of  evidence
    showing that he was active throughout his time.  Whilst the  Presenting
    Officer had  said  there  was  nothing  to  demonstrate  his  faith  in
    Normanton  there  was  a  letter  from  the  AMA  UK  setting  out  his
    activities.  The Appellant is an Ahmadi by  birth  and  served  as  the
    Nazim Itfil between 2007 and 2010.  The  letter  dated  3rd  July  2011
    confirmed his activities and his arrival in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    letter came from a reputable source of the AMA UK which is referred  to
    in the country guidance  decision.   She  submitted  that  it  was  not
    necessary for the  Appellant  to  go  back  to  2007  to  consider  his
    activities given the evidence from Dr Salim confirming his activity for
    the past three years.

41. Ms Patel also submitted that this case began  as  a  fresh  claim  that
    started some time ago.  At that time  the  country  guidance  was  that
    Rabwah was a safe place and Immigration Judge Vellins made a finding in
    the alternative that if he had preached his faith in Pakistan he  could
    return safely to Rabwah.  As it was  a  fresh  claim  there  was  fresh
    evidence of his activities and put before  the  country  guidance  came
    out, therefore it is not a case that the Appellant tried to tailor  his
    activities to the country guidance case.

42. So far as his activities are concerned, he had shown the importance  of
    his faith by  answering  a  number  of  questions  credibly  in  cross-
    examination and in evidence-in-chief.  Furthermore the evidence  of  Dr
    Salim was also credible and weight should be attached to it.  In  terms
    of his preaching, he was following his religion as far as he  could  by
    "tabligh".  In MN (as  cited)  the  Tribunal  mentioned  the  fact  all
    Ahmadis are required to propagate their faith but that is not an aim to
    convert.  They do so by way of encouragement and it is  not  compulsory
    to convert people which is different from the Christian religion.   The
    evidence of Dr Salim is that the aim of tabligh is to  interest  people
    to make them aware so that they can make up their own minds  about  the
    religion.  The length of time that the Appellant has been  involved  in
    activities in the UK is significant for the past  six  years.   He  has
    proved his standing via his activities in the Association.

43. Whilst his mother remains in Pakistan she is a widow and  just  because
    she remains there does not indicate that it is safe for  the  Appellant
    to return.  The Appellant has demonstrated that he wishes to carry  out
    the activities in Pakistan as he does here but  because  of  the  anti-
    Ahmadi laws he would be prevented from doing so.  If he returned, if he
    had to be discreet and the reason for this would be fear of persecution
    and in those circumstances the decision of HJ (Iran) would  demonstrate
    that he should be entitled to refugee status.

44. Ms Patel made reference to the individual Appellants in MN stating that
    the activities of the Appellant far outweighed those of the  Appellants
    in MN and that applying the lower standard  of  proof  he  demonstrated
    that his faith was an important one to him and his religious  identity.
    Thus he has demonstrated that he would be at risk on return.

The Law and the Burden and Standard of Proof

45. In reaching my decision I have borne fully in mind the relevant law and
    Immigration Rules, including the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
    of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, and the Handbook on  Procedures  and
    Criteria for  Determining  Refugee  Status  ('The  Handbook')  (Geneva,
    January 2000). By Article 1(a)(2) of the Refugee  Convention  the  term
    "refugee" shall apply to any person who:-

         "Owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted  for  reasons  of
         race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  social
         group  or  political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of   his
         nationality, and is unable, or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to
         avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having
         a nationality and being outside the country of his former  habitual
         residence is unable, or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return
         to it."

46. The provisions of SI [2006] No. 2525 "The Refugee or Person in Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006"  now  bring
    into United Kingdom domestic law the  Council  of  the  European  Union
    Directive 2004/83/EC of 29th April 2004 on 'minimum standards' for  the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need protection and the
    content of the protection granted, normally referred to in  the  United
    Kingdom as the Qualification Directive.  Commensurate changes were made
    in the Immigration Rules by  means  of  Statement  of  Changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules also taking effect on 9th October 2006.

47. The determination I have made has approached the issues in this  appeal
    from the perspective of the 2006  Regulations  and  in  particular  has
    applied the  definitions  contained  there,  in  deciding  whether  the
    Appellant is a refugee under the 1951 Geneva Convention.  We have  also
    applied the amended Immigration Rules.   These  have  permitted  us  to
    consider whether the Appellant is in need of Humanitarian Protection as
    being at risk of serious harm, as defined  in  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Rules.  Finally, I have gone on to consider whether the Appellant is at
    risk of a violation of his human rights under  the  provisions  of  the
    ECHR.

48. The burden of proof is upon the Appellant.  The standard of  proof  has
    been  defined  as  a  'reasonable  degree  of  likelihood',   sometimes
    expressed as 'a reasonable chance' or  a  'serious  possibility'.   The
    question is answered by looking  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
    assessed at the time  of  hearing  the  appeal.   We  regard  the  same
    standard as applying  in  essence  in  human  rights  appeals  although
    sometimes expressed as 'substantial grounds for  believing'.   Although
    the 2006 Regulations make no express reference to the standard of proof
    in asylum appeals, there is no suggestion that the Regulations  or  the
    Directions were intended to introduce a change in either the burden  or
    standard of proof.  The amended Rules, however, deal expressly with the
    standard of proof in deciding whether  the  Appellant  is  in  need  of
    Humanitarian Protection.

49. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules defines a person  eligible  for
    Humanitarian Protection, as a person who does not qualify as a  refugee
    but in  respect  of  whom  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that the person concerned, if returned,  would  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm.  It seems to us  that  this  replicates
    the standard of proof familiar in  the  former  jurisprudence  and,  by
    implication, applies the same standard in asylum cases.

50. Accordingly, where below I refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' this is to be
    understood as an abbreviated way of identifying respectively:-

      i) whether on return there is a well-founded fear of being  persecuted
         under the Geneva Convention;

     ii) whether on return there are substantial grounds for  believing  the
         person would face a real risk of suffering serious harm within  the
         meaning of paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration Rules; and

    iii) whether on return there are substantial grounds for believing  that
         the person would face a real risk of being exposed to a  real  risk
         of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

51. The Appellant places specific reliance on Article 3 of the ECHR.  It is
    for an Appellant  to  show  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that he or she is at real risk of ill-treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 ECHR, which prohibits torture, inhuman or degrading treatment
    or punishment.  The  standard  of  proof  equates  to  that  in  asylum
    appeals.  Unlike Article 3,  Article  8  rights  are  qualified  rights
    protecting the right to respect for private and family life,  home  and
    correspondence.  It is for an Appellant to show that  one  or  more  of
    such qualified rights is engaged and that there is an interference with
    such a right or  rights.   The  Respondent  must  then  show  that  any
    interference pursues a legitimate aim, is in accordance  with  the  law
    and is proportionate.

52. In coming to my determination, following Section 85  (4)  of  the  2002
    Act, I may take into account evidence about any matter  which  I  think
    relevant to the substance of the  decision,  including  evidence  which
    concerns a matter arising after the date of decision.

The Country Guidance

53. The Tribunal have dealt with the decision of Ahmadis most  recently  in
    the decision of MN and Others (Ahmadis -  country  conditions  -  risk)
    Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC).

54. In MN and Others (Ahmadis - country  conditions  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00389  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that  (i)  this  country
    guidance replaces previous  guidance  in  MJ  &  ZM  (Ahmadis  -  risk)
    Pakistan CG  2008 UKAIT 00033 and IA & Others (Ahmadis Rabwah) Pakistan
    CG [2007] UKAIT 00088.  The guidance we give is based in  part  on  the
    developments in the law including the decisions of the Supreme Court in
    HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC  38  and  the  CJEU
    decision in Germany v. Y (C-71/11) & Z (C-99/11).  The guidance relates
    principally to Qadiani Ahmadis; but as the  legislation  which  is  the
    background to the issues raised in these appeals affects Lahori Ahmadis
    also, they too are included in the country guidance stated below.

55. The head note reads as follows:-

         "2.  (i)      The background  to  the  risk  faced  by  Ahmadis  is
                  legislation that restricts the way in which they are  able
                  openly to practise their faith.  The legislation not  only
                  prohibits preaching and other forms of  proselytising  but
                  also in practice restricts other elements  of  manifesting
                  one's religious beliefs, such as  holding  open  discourse
                  about religion with non-Ahmadis, although not amounting to
                  proselytising.  The prohibitions include openly  referring
                  to one's place  of  worship  as  a  mosque  and  to  one's
                  religious leader as an Imam.  In addition, Ahmadis are not
                  permitted to refer to the call to prayer as  azan  nor  to
                  call themselves Muslims or refer to their faith as  Islam.
                  Sanctions include a fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy
                  is found, there is a risk of the death  penalty  which  to
                  date has not been carried out although there is a risk  of
                  lengthy incarceration if the penalty is imposed.  There is
                  clear evidence that this legislation is used by  non-state
                  actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis.  This includes  the
                  filing of First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first step
                  in  any  criminal  proceedings)  which   can   result   in
                  detentions whilst prosecutions are being pursued.  Ahmadis
                  are also subject  to  attacks  by  non-state  actors  from
                  sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.

             (ii) It is, and has long been, possible in general for Ahmadis
                  to practise their faith on a restricted  basis  either  in
                  private  or  in  community  with  other  Ahmadis,  without
                  infringing domestic Pakistan law;

         3.   (i)      If an Ahmadi is able to demonstrate  that  it  is  of
                  particular  importance  to  his  religious   identity   to
                  practise and manifest his  faith  openly  in  Pakistan  in
                  defiance of the restrictions in the  Pakistan  Penal  Code
                  (PPC)  under  sections  298B  and  298C,  by  engaging  in
                  behaviour described in paragraph (ii)(a) above, he or  she
                  is likely to be in need of protection, in the light of the
                  serious nature of the sanctions that potentially apply  as
                  well as the risk of prosecution  under  section  295C  for
                  blasphemy;

             (ii)     It is no answer to expect  an  Ahmadi  who  fits  the
                  description just given  to  avoid  engaging  in  behaviour
                  described in paragraph (ii)(a) above  ("paragraph  (ii)(a)
                  behaviour") to avoid a risk of prosecution.


         4.   The need for protection applies  equally  to  men  and  women.
             There is no basis for considering that Ahmadi women as a whole
             are at a particular or additional risk; the decision that they
             should not attend mosques in Pakistan was made by  the  Ahmadi
             community following attacks on the mosques in Lahore in  2010.
             There is no evidence that women in particular were the  target
             of those attacks;


         5.   In light of the above, the first question  the  decision-maker
             must ask is (1) whether the claimant genuinely is  an  Ahmadi.
             As with all judicial fact-finding the judge will need to reach
             conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving such  weight
             to aspects of that evidence as appropriate in accordance  with
             Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.  This is  likely  to
             include an enquiry whether the claimant was registered with an
             Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged  there
             on a  regular  basis.   Post-arrival  activity  will  also  be
             relevant.    Evidence   likely   to   be   relevant   includes
             confirmation from the UK  Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  the
             activities relied on in Pakistan  and  confirmation  from  the
             local community in the UK where the claimant is worshipping.


         6.   The next step (2) involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
             intentions or wishes as to his or her faith,  if  returned  to
             Pakistan.  This is relevant because of the need  to  establish
             whether it  is  of  particular  importance  to  the  religious
             identity of  the  Ahmadi  concerned  to  engage  in  paragraph
             (ii)(a)  behaviour.   The  burden  is  on  the   claimant   to
             demonstrate  that  any  intention  or  wish  to  practise  and
             manifest aspects of the faith openly that are not permitted by
             the Pakistan  Penal  Code  (PPC)  is  genuinely  held  and  of
             particular importance to the claimant to preserve his  or  her
             religious identity.  The decision maker needs to evaluate  all
             the evidence.  Behaviour since arrival in the UK may  also  be
             relevant.  If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely
             to be in need of protection.


         7.   The option of internal relocation, previously considered to be
             available in Rabwah, is not in general reasonably  open  to  a
             claimant who genuinely wishes to engage in  paragraph  (ii)(a)
             behaviour, in the light of the nationwide effect  in  Pakistan
             of the anti-Ahmadi legislation.


         8.   Ahmadis who are not able to show  that  they  practised  their
             faith at all in Pakistan or that they did so on anything other
             than the restricted basis described in paragraph  2(ii)  above
             are in general unlikely to be able to show that their  genuine
             intentions or wishes are to practise and manifest their  faith
             openly on return, as described in paragraph 2(a) above.


         9.    A  sur  place  claim  by  an  Ahmadi  based  on  post-arrival
             conversion or revival in  belief  and  practice  will  require
             careful  evidential  analysis.   This  will  probably  include
             consideration of evidence of the head of the claimant's  local
             United Kingdom Ahmadi community and from the UK  headquarters,
             the latter particularly  in  cases  where  there  has  been  a
             conversion.  Any adverse findings in the claimant's account as
             a whole may be relevant to the assessment of likely  behaviour
             on return.


        10. Whilst an Ahmadi who has been found to be not reasonably  likely
            to engage or wish to engage in paragraph 2(a) behaviour  is,  in
            general, not at real risk on return to Pakistan, judicial  fact-
            finders may in certain  cases  need  to  consider  whether  that
            person would nevertheless be reasonably likely to be targeted by
            non-state actors on return for religious persecution  by  reason
            of his/her prominent social and/or business profile."

Findings of Fact and Analysis of the Evidence

56. It is common ground between the parties that the starting point are the
    findings of fact made by Immigration Judge Vellins as set  out  in  his
    determination which was promulgated on 18th July 2007. They are set out
    at paragraphs 41 to 58 of that  determination.   At  paragraph  42  the
    judge concluded that he "did not find the Appellant to  be  a  credible
    witness and did not believe the core version of events  he  claimed  to
    have occurred to him in Saudi Arabia and in Pakistan."  At paragraph 43
    the judge considered how  the  Appellant  had  left  Saudi  Arabia  and
    concluded that the Appellant had plans to leave voluntarily and not due
    to any fears in Saudi Arabia and that  he  had  planned  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom which were not based on any fears.  At paragraph  44  he
    said that he did not believe the  Appellant's  claim  that  in  Karachi
    while staying at his parents' house on 27th March 2007  that  the  home
    was besieged by a group from KN with eight people shouting  abuse.   He
    also further did not believe the claim that on 7th May 2007  whilst  in
    the United Kingdom members of the KN had entered the parents' home  and
    attacked the Appellant's father and brother.  He found that he did  not
    have genuine fears of persecution from KN as a  result  of  his  Ahmadi
    faith as it was not credible that he would have gone  to  live  at  his
    parents' home in Karachi after he had left Saudi Arabia.  He  had  left
    his parents' house in Karachi and returned there on two occasions which
    was found not to be the action of someone in genuine fear.   The  judge
    also pointed out that the Appellant had arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on 27th April 2007 but did not claim asylum until 14th May 2007.

57. At paragraph 50 Immigration Judge Vellins stated,

         "I find in this appeal that the Appellant is a  practising  Ahmadi,
         who believes in the Ahmadi faith.  The Appellant at  his  interview
         made no claim that  he  preached  either  when  he  was  living  in
         Pakistan or in Saudi Arabia.  I did not believe his claims  in  his
         written statement after the decision that he preached.  I find that
         if he had in fact been  an  Ahmadi  who  preached,  he  would  have
         mentioned this at his interview.  If I am wrong about that and  the
         Appellant did in fact preach, by his own version of events  he  was
         not a prominent preacher, and not a person of high profile."


58. The first question I must ask is whether the claimant genuinely  is  an
    Ahmadi.  As noted by the country guidance  decision,  in  reaching  the
    conclusion on this aspect of  the  case,  the  Tribunal  is  likely  to
    include an  enquiry  whether  the  claimant  was  registered  with  the
    Ahmadiyya community in Pakistan and worshipped and engaged there  on  a
    regular  basis.   Post-arrival  activity  is  also  relevant  including
    confirmation from  the  UK  Ahmadi  headquarters  regarding  activities
    relied on in Pakistan and confirmation from the local community in  the
    UK where the claimant is worshipping.

59.   In the refusal  letter  relied  upon  by  the  Respondent  dated  7th
    September 2012 it is accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State  that
    the Appellant is a follower of the Ahmadi faith as are members  of  his
    family and that they follow the Ahmadi religion  (paragraph  24).   The
    refusal letter also considered evidence that had been provided as  part
    of the fresh claim in support of his following of  that  faith  in  the
    United Kingdom and acknowledged  the  Appellant's  activities  in  Spen
    Valley and in Leeds and  further  acknowledged  the  documentation  and
    letters from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK dated 3rd  July  2011.
    The Secretary of State accepted and acknowledged that he  followed  his
    faith in the United Kingdom  and  that  he  was  of  the  Ahmadi  faith
    (paragraphs 24, 25 and 26).

60. The findings of fact made by IJ Vellins indicate  that  the  Appellant,
    whilst he was a practising Ahmadi who believed in the Ahmadi faith, had
    not preached in Pakistan.  In the alternative that, if he had preached,
    on his own version of events he was not a prominent preacher.  There is
    no information before the Tribunal in support of any activities carried
    out in Pakistan that had been attested to by the AMA  UK.   That  might
    not be surprising given the length of time that the Appellant has  been
    in the United Kingdom and has been following his faith, that is,  since
    2007 and for the past six years.  Nonetheless, the matters set  out  in
    the refusal letter indicate that the Appellant is  genuinely  a  member
    and follower of the Ahmadi faith as are his family members.

61.   I have also considered the evidence before the Tribunal  and  in  the
    light of the oral evidence as to his propagation of his  faith  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Whilst the refusal letter appears to indicate that  it
    was acknowledged  that  the  Appellant  had  taken  part  in  Ahmadiyya
    activities on behalf of the AMA UK  between  2000  and  2010  when  the
    Appellant was living in the Normanton area, it has  been  submitted  on
    behalf of the Respondent that there is little evidence to  confirm  his
    activities during that period.

62. I  have  considered  the  evidence.   The  Appellant  had  applied  for
    verification of his  faith  and  preaching  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom by making an application to the UK Ahmadiyya  headquarters  for
    such verification to take place.  It is known from the country guidance
    case of MN that the AMA UK are a highly organised organisation and have
    an information gathering capacity (see paragraph 66 of  the  decision).
    The AMA UK have no particular interest  in  supporting  any  particular
    Appellant but provide information that is based from their sources.  In
    this appeal a verification letter has been provided before the Tribunal
    dated 3rd July 2011.  The letter is signed by the Secretary of the  AMA
    UK and provides confirmation that the Appellant is "an Ahmadi by  birth
    and a bona fide member of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community".  It sets out
    that since his arrival in the United Kingdom him and his family members
    are "participating in both the activities of  their  local  branch  and
    that of the Association."  It further certifies and confirms  that  the
    Appellant

         "served as the Nazim Itfal (organiser for children) from 2007  till
         2010 in our Spen Valley branch and was the  General  Secretary  and
         Nazim Itfal for the Leeds branch 2010 and 2011."

    I am satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood  that  during  the
    time that the Appellant arrived in Normanton which is between May  2007
    to 2010 that the Appellant formed part of the Spen Valley  AMA  UK  and
    took part in a number of activities on the organisation's  behalf.   In
    particular,  he  held  a  position  in  the  Spen  Valley   branch   as
    demonstrated in the letter of 3rd July 2011 and I also accept his  oral
    evidence that he gave before the  Tribunal  concerning  the  activities
    that he carried out at that time.  I place no weight on the  submission
    that for the seven to eight days in London he did not preach to anyone.
     That is not surprising given the short period of time that he  was  in
    London.  However I do place weight upon  his  evidence  concerning  the
    activities that he carried out in Normanton after his family  had  been
    housed there by the Home Office.  His evidence was that he  had  joined
    the Association as soon as he had gone to Normanton and that  he  would
    take part in the Friday prayers in a hall that had been designated  for
    such a purpose there not being a mosque in  Normanton.   I  accept  his
    evidence that he began preaching generally to neighbours  who  were  of
    Pakistani origin but also those who lived in the surrounding area  such
    as taxi drivers and people who worked in the takeaways.

      I find that his evidence concerning the distribution of  leaflets  in
    Normanton is consistent with that of the witness Dr Salim.   In  cross-
    examination the Appellant was asked if he had distributed  leaflets  in
    Normanton.  The Appellant said that he did not because at that time the
    leaflets had not been printed.  That evidence is  consistent  with  the
    account given by Dr Salim  when  he  was  asked  independently  of  the
    Appellant as to when the leafleting  began  for  the  Association.   He
    confirmed that it began two or two  and  a  half  years  ago  which  is
    consistent with the Appellant's account as to why he has not  leafleted
    in the Normanton area.  Nonetheless the Appellant did refer to  handing
    out some Ahmadi literature but that "tabligh" had been taking place  by
    way of verbal preaching.  He said that he had handed out some  booklets
    which were four or five.  He was able  to  name  the  Normanton  branch
    President and thus I am satisfied that he did undertake activities  for
    the AMA UK between 2007 and 2010.

     I am further satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood  that  he
    took part in activities of "tabligh" or  preaching  during  that  time.
    The Appellant did not attempt to overplay or exaggerate  the  preaching
    that he undertook in the Normanton area.  In cross-examination  he  was
    asked if he had been able to "convert anyone during the  time  that  he
    had been in Normanton".  The Appellant openly stated that  during  that
    time he had not.  However there does appear to be a misunderstanding as
    to the general tennets of the Ahmadi faith.  As both the Appellant  and
    Mr Salim testified, "tabligh" is not aimed to convert people but it  is
    the process of informing others, giving them knowledge and then for the
    individual concerned to make a decision as to whether or not they  wish
    to show interest in the faith.  As Dr Salim said in his oral  evidence,
    preaching the message is one thing but someone accepting the message is
    another thing.  He said "our  job  is  to  carry  out  the  process  of
    preaching faith and to provide information for them to  make  up  their
    own  mind."   I  am  therefore  satisfied  that   the   Appellant   has
    demonstrated that during that period of time 2007 to 2010 the Appellant
    was an active member of the Spen Valley Association  and  during  which
    time he actively propagated his  faith  and  was  preaching  to  people
    within that area.  I am also satisfied that he held  the  positions  as
    set out in the letter of 3rd July 2011.

63. I now turn to his activities in the UK between the period 2010 to date.
     As noted earlier in this determination, there did not appear to be any
    dispute in the refusal  letter  that  the  Appellant  had  participated
    actively in activities on behalf of the AMA UK.  The skeleton  argument
    prepared by Mr Wardle refers to the evidence of the  Appellant  and  in
    particular his account of preaching in the United  Kingdom,  leafleting
    door to door and holding a stall in the  Leeds  city  centre.   It  was
    noted that there were no real details provided about that and that  the
    burden was on the Appellant to demonstrate that he intended  or  wished
    to practise  manifest  aspects  of  his  faith  openly  that  were  not
    permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code (paragraph 123 MN and Others).

64.   Thus the skeleton argument proceeded on the basis  that  the  account
    given by the Appellant as to his activities, whilst accepted,  appeared
    to be vague.

65. I do not find that that is the position having heard  the  evidence  in
    this appeal.  The activities that the  Appellant  has  carried  between
    2010 to date in 2013 have been evidenced in detail by the Appellant and
    by the witness Dr Salim whose evidence I place weight upon.   This  was
    explored in cross-examination quite properly  by  Mr  Wardle.   He  was
    cross-examined concerning the leafleting  that  he  said  that  he  had
    carried out for the Association as part of his  preaching  and  tabligh
    activities.  The  Appellant  had  given  an  account  during  his  oral
    evidence as to when he began leafleting in the Leeds, the  method  that
    was adopted by him and what had happened as a result of the  leafleting
    that had taken place.  He answered the questions in a credible way  and
    a way that was consistent by the independent evidence of Mr  Salim  who
    gave his evidence after the Appellant.  As to  the  leafleting  in  the
    Leeds area he gave a credible account, which was confirmed by Dr  Salim
    as to  the  instructions  that  they  had  been  given  concerning  the
    leafleting process.  He described that a note was taken  of  the  areas
    that they had already leafleted and said that  particular  streets  had
    been identified.  He further gave an account as to how he  would  knock
    on the door but only three times and if no-one had  answered  he  would
    place the leaflet through the letterbox.  However if someone did answer
    he would talk to them about the religion to see if they were interested
    but if they were not he would politely leave.  He made it clear that he
    had been leafleting throughout the period of the last two and two and a
    half years which was consistent with the evidence of Mr Salim.   As  to
    the point made in  cross-examination  that  no-one  had  contacted  the
    Bradford/Leeds office, as a result  of  the  leafleting,  that  is  not
    surprising.  The leaflets that  were  produced  demonstrated  that  the
    telephone  number  for  the  initial  contact  was   for   the   London
    headquarters.  The reason for that was obvious; they have a  number  of
    staff who are able to deal with any telephone enquiries who then direct
    the particular person to the area in which they live.  That  was  borne
    out not only by the leaflets themselves for which no telephone  numbers
    are given for local  areas  but  also  by  the  evidence  of  Mr  Salim
    concerning the process of the supply of information.

66. The Appellant has  also  provided  evidence  of  him  being  active  in
    propagation of his faith in the Leeds city centre at the tabligh stall.
     The pictures clearly show the Appellant manning  the  stall  in  Leeds
    city centre, approaching people with leaflets and engaging with  people
    concerning the Ahmadi faith.  The evidence of the Appellant was that he
    had done this on two occasions both last year  and  this  year  as  the
    council allowed them to have a stall on that basis.  Whilst photographs
    of this nature are always self-serving, I find when  that  evidence  is
    placed in the round that it is  further  support  for  the  Appellant's
    genuine and active participation in the tabligh process of  the  Ahmadi
    faith.

67. The Appellant has also held positions within  the  AMA  UK.   The  most
    recent elections in 2013 show that he was voted the General  Secretary,
    the Secretary for Sami Basri (dealing  with  the  technical  aspect  of
    meetings) and a Secretary Talimul  Quran  and  Waq  Fardi  which,  upon
    further exploration, was that the Appellant was the  organiser  of  the
    periods  of  time  used  by  members  of  the  Association  undertaking
    voluntary work for religious purposes during  times  of  annual  leave.
    The process of the elections was described by the witness Mr Salim  and
    that those offices held by the Appellant were scrutinised and confirmed
    by the spiritual leader before such a post could be held.

68.   I have also had the opportunity of hearing the oral  evidence  of  Mr
    Salim.  He is the President of the Leeds  jama'at  and  has  known  the
    Appellant since 2010.  His evidence was clear that having known him for
    a significant period of time that  there  was  no  doubt  in  his  mind
    whatsoever concerning this Appellant's  faith.   He  further  confirmed
    that in his opinion and in his knowledge the active  participation  and
    practising his faith was  very  important  to  him.   He  said  in  his
    evidence that he considered him to be a  "very  active  member  of  the
    Ahmadi faith" and that he has been preaching and propagating his  faith
    actively whilst in the United  Kingdom.   He  said  that  he  had  been
    elected in 2013 to those positions as a result of his participation and
    faith and that the people who voted were looking for "a person  who  is
    active in all the local activities including preaching and  tabligh  in
    addition to the day-to-day activities of a good Ahmadi."  He said  that
    he was a  "good  example  of  an  Ahmadi  showing  connections  to  the
    headquarters."  He said that he had always found  him  to  be  "a  very
    strong Ahmadi, a strong colleague and  a  strong  active  preacher  and
    member of the Association in Leeds."  He believed  from  his  firsthand
    knowledge of the Appellant that he was a strong believer in tabligh and
    that it was an integral part of his religion and a requirement to be  a
    good Ahmadi and this had been shown in  his  conduct  during  the  last
    three years and his active involvement.

69.   I have considered with care the oral evidence heard from Dr Salim  in
    the light of the evidence of the Appellant and also the evidence before
    this Tribunal as a whole.  Having done so, I am satisfied to the  lower
    standard of proof that the Appellant has demonstrated  that  he  is  an
    active and prominent  member  of  the  Ahmadi  faith.   He  has  sought
    advancement of that faith by holding offices for the  committee  and  I
    place weight upon the evidence of Dr Salim concerning this  Appellant's
    belief and propagation of his faith.  He has known  him  for  the  last
    three years and I place weight  upon  his  personal  knowledge  as  the
    President of the Leeds jama'at branch concerning the Appellant's  faith
    generally.  I find that there is an abundance  of  evidence  concerning
    his participation in the faith  in  the  United  Kingdom.   As  I  have
    stated, that does not simply  include  the  evidence  relating  to  his
    period in Leeds but over a significant period of time from  2007  until
    2013.  It has been supported by the oral  evidence  of  Dr  Salim,  the
    President of the  local  jama'at  in  Leeds  who  knows  him  well  and
    confirmed by the AMA UK and the Secretary of  that  Association.   That
    information has been given some consideration in the  country  guidance
    decision of MN as the kind of evidence that lends support and weight to
    a particular Appellant's account of his claimed faith.

70.   I have also  considered  the  photographic  evidence  confirming  his
    activities showing him distributing leaflets and preaching  to  members
    of the local Leeds community.  Thus I have concluded that the Appellant
    is a genuine Ahmadi for the reasons given.

71.  The next step is to involve an enquiry into the Appellant's intentions
    or wishes as to  his  or  her  faith  if  returned  to  Pakistan.   The
    relevance of that is clear as it is because of the  need  to  establish
    whether it is of particular importance to the religious identity of the
    Ahmadi concerned to engage  in  the  behaviour  noted  in  the  country
    guidance case.  I recognise that the  burden  is  on  the  claimant  to
    demonstrate that any intention or wish to practise the manifest aspects
    of the faith openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan  Penal  Code
    (PPC) is genuinely held and of particular importance for the  Appellant
    to preserve his or her religious identity.

72.   In this regard I  have  evaluated  the  evidence  before  me  and  in
    particular the evidence of the Appellant's conduct since his arrival in
    the United Kingdom.  Whilst the Appellant did not demonstrate  that  he
    had been at any risk of his faith in Pakistan, it was noted that he had
    practised his faith in Pakistan.  Over the last six years which I  find
    to be a significant period,  the  Appellant  has  demonstrated  by  his
    active participation and propagation of his faith in the United Kingdom
    that he actively believes in the preaching and propagation part of  the
    faith.  The evidence as to his intentions concerning his faith must  be
    seen in the light of  the  significant  period  of  time  that  he  has
    practised his faith in the United Kingdom.  It should not only be  seen
    in that light but also in the light of the evidence of Dr Salim, who  I
    accept whose evidence was that he had been  considered  a  very  active
    member of the Ahmadi faith and was active in tabligh and was  a  strong
    active  preacher.   He  believed  that  it  was  an  integral  of  this
    Appellant's faith and religion and that he believed that  wherever  the
    Appellant lived this was so integral to his being that he  would  carry
    out that faith.  That is consistent  with  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant who gave credible reasons as to why he  would  continue  with
    his faith knowing that his wish to practise  manifest  aspects  of  the
    faith openly would not be permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code and that
    this would bring him to the attention of the authorities and members of
    the KN.

73.   The country guidance case notes that a sur place claim by  an  Ahmadi
    based on post-arrival conversion or  revival  in  belief  will  require
    careful evidential analysis.  I do not find that this is  a  sur  place
    claim  based  on  post-arrival  conversion.   It  is  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that he was a genuine Ahmadi practising his religion
    in Pakistan.  The only real issue was that it was not accepted that  he
    had preached in Pakistan.  Thus it could not be said that there  was  a
    revival in his  belief.   Nonetheless  even  taking  into  account  the
    adverse findings in the claimant's  account  concerning  activities  in
    Pakistan, this has to be set against  the  significant  period  of  six
    years of the active participation in the faith that I have referred to.
     I am satisfied to the lower standard that the Appellant,  if  returned
    to Pakistan, would seek to continue the propagation of  his  faith  and
    the active participation in it as he has done in the United Kingdom.  I
    am satisfied from the evidence  before  me  that  the  restrictions  on
    Ahmadis in Pakistan on the practice  of  his  faith  is  of  particular
    importance to his religious identity and that he has shown an intention
    or wish to defy such restrictions.  I have reached the conclusion  that
    the restrictions in the Pakistani Penal Code on  his  ability  to  live
    openly as an  Ahmadi  are  matters  of  particular  importance  to  his
    religious identity and I conclude that he has demonstrated his wish  to
    continue with his practice of his faith if returned to Pakistan.

74. In the light of those findings as set  out  above,  the  Appellant  has
    discharged the burden of proof upon him to demonstrate that  he  is  in
    need of protection and has demonstrated that he has a well founded fear
    of persecution on account of  his  religious  beliefs  if  returned  to
    Pakistan.  The  family  members  are  dependants  upon  his  claim  and
    therefore should be granted leave to remain as part of  the  family  of
    the Appellant.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The determination is set aside.  The  decision  is
remade as follows:-

The appeals are allowed on asylum and human rights  grounds  (Article  3  of
the ECHR).






Signed                                  Date 24/9/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

