
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA085042015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2016                                 |On 17 June 2016               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    [M M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, [MM], born on  [  ]  1983  claims  to  be  a
    citizen of Iran.  The appellant may be returned not to Iran but  rather
    to Italy under the provisions of the  Dublin  Agreement.   He  appealed
    against the decision to remove him to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Hindson) on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  His claim under Article 8 ECHR had
    been considered and rejected by the respondent by a decision  dated  18
    May 2015

 2. Notwithstanding what Judge Hindson states at the end  of  his  decision
    ("the appeal is allowed on human rights grounds")  he  considered  only
    Appendix FM and EX1 of HC 395.  Notwithstanding his stated intention to
    deal only with Article 8 ECHR, there was no analysis of the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 3. The judge accepted that the appellant is suffering from  post-traumatic
    stress disorder (PTSD) and moderate depression.  Both the judge and the
    respondent accept that the appellant is "heavily reliant on his partner
    for support and care owing to his frail mental state".  The judge noted
    [31] that the appellant had given an account of "substantial  privation
    while he was living  in  Italy  legally  as  an  asylum  seeker".   The
    appellant had lived in the United Kingdom with a [V]  and  their  child
    had been born here  in  July  2015.   The  judge  noted  that  "neither
    representative was able to say what the status of  [V]  and  their  son
    would be in Italy should they travel there  with  the  appellant".   At
    [32] the judge stated:

         "The appellant says he has no access to medical treatment in  Italy
         and I believe him;  his  account  generally  is  credible  and  his
         authenticity has for the most  part  not  been  challenged  by  the
         respondent.  It is clear from  the  medical  evidence  that  he  is
         having medication for his medical health problems and needs further
         treatment  from  a  psychologist.   The  respondent   accepts   the
         appellant relies heavily upon  [V]  in  this  regard.   ...  I  can
         therefore find that both the appellant  and  [V]  would  face  very
         significant difficulties in continuing family life  in  Italy.   In
         addition  the  difficulties  faced  by  the  appellant   in   Italy
         previously and which he would face again on return, he has now been
         diagnosed with two serious mental illnesses for which he would  not
         get treatment.  His partner would face similar economic deprivation
         and both have the added responsibility of  caring  for  their  very
         young child."

 4. I have no doubt that the judge felt sympathy for the appellant and  his
    partner and child.  However, I find that he has made findings  of  fact
    upon which are not supported by the evidence.  For example, it  appears
    that the judge  found  that  there  would  be  "no  access  to  medical
    treatment in Italy" because he believed the appellant's  uncorroborated
    assertion that that was the case.  That finding  of  fact  is  unsound.
    The appellant obviously has a reason for  stating  that  he  could  not
    access medical health services in Italy (a claim which clearly supports
    his claim to remain in the United Kingdom) but it is not clear  whether
    his medical condition was such that he required treatment when  he  was
    last in Italy or whether, having sought it, he could not obtain it.   I
    take judicial notice of the fact that Italy has a  functioning  medical
    service and I have no evidence at all to show that  asylum  seekers  or
    those suffering from mental  illness  are  specifically  excluded  from
    seeking treatment there.  It was, simply, not possible to maintain  the
    assertion that the appellant would be unable to seek medical  treatment
    in Italy on the basis of the evidence available to the FTT.

 5.  Secondly,  the  judge  has  moved  swiftly  and  without  any   proper
    examination of the evidence from a finding that the appellant  and  his
    partner  and  child  would  face  "very  significant  difficulties"  in
    continuing their family  life  in  Italy  to  finding  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles (such as to satisfy EX2)  to  concluding  that
    they would face "economic deprivation".  There  was  no  evidence  that
    asylum seekers in Italy would face circumstances so  severe  as  to  be
    described properly as "economic deprivation".

 6. In the circumstances, I set aside the judge's decision and have  remade
    the decision.  On the evidence available,  I  am  not  satisfied  that,
    notwithstanding his mental health difficulties, the appellant  and  his
    partner and their child would face insurmountable obstacles which would
    prevent them continuing their family life together outside  the  United
    Kingdom (in particular, in Italy).  I do  not  accept  that  living  in
    Italy for the appellant and his partner and child  would  "entail  very
    serious hardship".  The appellant does not, therefore, come within  the
    provisions of HC 395 (Appendix FM).  Similar  considerations  apply  to
    the determination of the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The  public
    interest concerned with the removal of the appellant whose  asylum  and
    Article 2/3 ECHR claims have been certified as clearly unfounded  is  a
    strong one.  I accept that there would be a degree of upheaval  to  the
    appellant and his family should they need to move to  Italy  but  I  am
    unable to find that such upheaval would render the interference  caused
    to their family and private lives disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 8 December  2015
    is set aside.  I have remade  the  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 18 May 2015  is  dismissed
    on all grounds.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 1 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
