
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08369/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 March 2016                              |On 18 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                          Mr Peter Omoghene-Osiaro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Stevens, Legal Representative, Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jones QC to dismiss his appeal against a decision of the
    respondent to refuse an application for leave to remain in the UK  both
    on asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

2.   The appellant was given permission to  appeal  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fisher on 4 February 2016 because Judge Fisher noted a number  of
    factual  errors  in  the  decision,  including,  at  paragraph  48,  an
    erroneous finding that there was a lack of evidence to support the fact
    that  the  appellant's  wife's  suffered  from  post-traumatic   stress
    disorder when in fact there was evidence in  the  bundle  of  documents
    produced by the appellant (at pages 429 to 432) which showed  that  his
    wife may have suffered from post-traumatic stress  disorder.   Secondly
    the judge erroneously referred to the appellant's wife as not  being  a
    native of the UK but being a native of Nigeria when in fact, Mr Stevens
    has informed me, she was born in the UK and  has  a  British  passport.
    There was also a discrepancy between the judge's finding in relation to
    the appellant's wife's employment in  that,  at  paragraph  45  of  his
    decision, the Immigration Judge referred to the appellant's  [wife]  as
    not being in employment, whereas in fact, she  was  employed  part-time
    and remains employed part-time.

3.   Ms Sreeraman has defended  the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  on  the
    basis that the errors identified above were not material to the outcome
    of the appeal before him.  The  Immigration  Judge  made  comprehensive
    findings against the appellant.

Discussion

4.   I have considered the need  for  fairness  to  both  the  parties.  The
    appellant may perceive a lack of fairness in  the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision in that he may not have considered adequately all the evidence
    adduced on the appellant's behalf.  I  find  a  number  of  the  errors
    identified were potentially material. In  particular,  the  Immigration
    Judge appears not to have fully considered the evidence relating to his
    wife. With respect, the Immigration Judge appears to have misunderstood
    parts of the evidence and mistakenly found that  the  appellant's  wife
    was a native of Nigeria when in fact she was British.  In  summary,  it
    therefore  appears  that  those  matters  raised  by  Judge  Fisher  at
    paragraph 3 in the grant of permission need  to  be  looked  at  again.
    Neither party sought to adduce any further evidence under  rule  15  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Accordingly,  I
    will proceed to remake the decision based on the evidence submitted  to
    the FTT.

Conclusions

5.   The appellant  has  a  poor  immigration  history,  coming  to  the  UK
    illegally in 2008.  He  then  made  a  bogus  asylum  claim  which  was
    dismissed  on  19th  May  2015.  The  appeal  to  the  FTT  on   asylum
    /humanitarian  protection  grounds  was   rightly   rejected   by   the
    Immigration Judge. There  is  no  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appellant does not satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    either. Indeed, I do not understand it to be contended in  the  grounds
    of appeal that the Immigration Judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules was  wrong.   Specifically,  the  appellant
    does not meet any of the family life provisions contained  in  Appendix
    FM or the private life provisions in paragraph 276 ADE. In  any  event,
    by virtue of section 117B of the 2002 Act, little weight was to  attach
    to family life formed when the  appellant  has  been  here  unlawfully,
    which  appears  to  be  the  case  here.   However,   the   appellant's
    representatives contend that his wife's medical condition is such  that
    this amounted to an insurmountable obstacle to the  appellant  and  his
    wife relocating to Nigeria.  It is claimed that  the  appellant's  wife
    suffered her PTSD as a consequence of an incident at the hands of  Boko
    Haram and this represented a significant obstacle to the appellant  and
    his wife returning to Nigeria to continue their family life there.  The
    appellant's wife is a British  citizen  who  ought  to  be  allowed  to
    continue her family life with the appellant in the UK. Her health would
    be likely to deteriorate in Nigeria. Reference  is  also  made  to  the
    appellant's health, although that does not  appear  to  have  been  the
    subject of any identified  arguable  error  of  law  in  the  grant  of
    permission. The appellant suffers from insulin dependent  diabetes  and
    HIV. It is argued on the appellant's behalf that there needs  to  be  a
    strong reason to  justify  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules and that  given
    the family life he has undoubtedly formed here the  appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal  of  further  leave  to  remain  should  have  been
    allowed.

6.   I am not satisfied that the appellant's or his wife's state  of  health
    render the respondent's decision  to  refuse  the  appellant  leave  to
    remain in the UK  disproportionate.  Ms  Ikeagwu  has  numerous  health
    problems but the alleged psychological component to her state of health
    is not straightforward. A  number  of  medical  practitioners  make  no
    reference to it and she does not appear  to  have  undergone  a  proper
    clinical examination under a psychiatrist. The report from Sarah Stubbs
    does not  amount  to  a  clear  diagnosis  of  PTSD.  I  note  that  on
    examination in July 2014 by  an  identified  Dr  at  South  London  and
    Maudley NHS Trust (at C21 in the respondent's bundle) it  was  recorded
    that [Ms] Ikeagwu complained of intrusive  thoughts.  However,  it  was
    noted the following December (see C20) that no suicidal  thoughts  were
    disclosed. It does not appear from Ms Stubbs' report that the intrusive
    or suicidal thoughts from which Ms Ikeagwu has suffered are due  to  an
    incident with Boko Haram, there being a reference to  trauma  connected
    with "lost children". In any event  there  is  no  evidence  that  [Ms]
    Ikeagwu would not be able to receive suitable treatment in Nigeria.  In
    so far as it is also relevant to look at the  appellant's  own  medical
    condition at the date of the hearing, his condition was, sadly, not out
    of the ordinary and he could no  doubt  be  treated  for  these  common
    conditions in Nigeria, as the Immigration Judge indicated at  paragraph
    51 of his decision.

7.   Although the Immigration Judge wrongly referred  to  the  appellant  as
    being Nigerian in origin, she has spent a great deal of her life there,
    having studied in Nigeria and obtained qualifications at university. In
    addition, she married the appellant there. It is  not  a  country  with
    which she has no connections. She has relatives in a  wide  variety  of
    locations and the appellant has a number of relatives there.

8.   There appear to be strong public interest grounds (now set out  in  the
    amendments  to  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002
    introduced by the Immigration Act 2014) why the appellant ought  to  be
    required to return to Nigeria and, if desired, continue his family life
    with Ms Ikeagwu away from the UK.  In particular, by virtue of  section
    117 B (3)  little  weight  is  to  attach  to  a  relationship  with  a
    qualifying partner formed at a time when the appellant was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.

9.   I have considered all the evidence which might have a  bearing  on  the
    assessment  under  article  8,  including  the   evidence   which   the
    Immigration Judge failed to have proper regard  to.   Having  carefully
    considered all the evidence, I have come to the  same  conclusion  that
    the Immigration Judge came to.  Even if the Immigration  Rules  do  not
    fully address the issues in this appeal  and  the  case  is  considered
    outside those rules, I have concluded that the respondent carried out a
    full  assessment  and  there  were   no   exceptional   or   compelling
    circumstances why the appellant's case  should  be  considered  outside
    those rules. It was correct of the respondent  to  conclude  that  [Ms]
    Ikeagwu could reasonably be expected to  return  to  Nigeria  with  the
    appellant and continue their family life there or for the appellant  to
    make an appropriate application under the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

10.  Having found a material error of law in the decision it  was  necessary
    to set as side that decision. I have decided to  re-make  the  decision
    which is to dismiss the appeal  against  the  respondent's  refusal  of
    leave to remain in the UK under the ECHR.

    The appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse leave to  remain
    is dismissed on all other grounds

Anonymity

The FTT made no anonymity direction and I make no such direction either.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
