

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: AA/08412/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21st February 2018                      |  On 22nd February 2018        |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     ZM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Packer of Duncan Lewis solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Byass, GLD

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  ZM.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings


   1. It is uncontentious that I have jurisdiction  to  hear  and  determine
      this appeal.


   2. On 10th June 2016 I found an error of law and set aside  the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal for the following reasons:


                  1. The appellant was  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
                     decision   of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Telford
                     promulgated on 11th April 2016. ZM did  not  appear  in
                     person at his hearing before Judge Telford  because  he
                     had been  removed  from  the  UK.  There  were  pending
                     judicial review proceedings  in  connection  with  that
                     removal. An earlier decision of the First-tier Tribunal
                     in 2014 had been set  aside  for  unlawfulness  -  ZM's
                     asylum appeal had been determined under the "Fast Track
                     Scheme". An application for an adjournment was made  to
                     Judge  Telford  which  he  refused.  It  is  a   little
                     confusing on what basis he refused the adjournment - on
                     the one hand he seems to be saying that because  ZM  is
                     in Cameroon and able to send emails he could not be  in
                     hiding as he claims and this  affects  his  credibility
                     and thus his reasons for an adjournment which  included
                     that he be able to give live evidence on matters  where
                     the  credibility  of  his   asylum   claim   had   been
                     challenged.


                  2. Permission  to  appeal  was  sought  not  only  on  the
                     adjournment issue but also that  the  Judge  had  taken
                     impermissible notice of a previous determination of the
                     First-tier Tribunal which had been set aside  as  being
                     in error ( the "Fast track" determination), had reached
                     conclusions unsupported by evidence (that there was  no
                     evidence of torture despite ZM referring to torture  in
                     his interview record and the acceptance of him into the
                     Helen Bamber Foundation) and that the lack of  evidence
                     was damaging to his claim rather  than  neutral.  There
                     was no evidence from ZM's friend yet  the  judge  found
                     that ZM's account  differed;  the  judge  was  mistaken
                     about the purpose of ZM's arrival in the UK. The  judge
                     fails to consider the  impact  on  ZM  of  his  claimed
                     detention and proceeded on the  basis  that  there  had
                     been no such detention. The  judge  failed  to  address
                     adequately with reasons the claim that ZM was bisexual.


                  3. As Mr Deller so eloquently put it,  taken  as  a  whole
                     there  was  a  general  unlawful  unfairness   in   the
                     proceedings both procedurally and in  the  approach  of
                     the judge to the evidence before him.


                  4. I agree. I set aside the decision to be remade.


   3. There then followed a number of case management  hearings  to  try  to
      enable ZM to give evidence by video link.


   4. Today, Mr Byass, on behalf of  the  SSHD  accepted  that  ZM's  appeal
      should be allowed on asylum and Article 3 grounds, an appeal with  the
      same factual matrix having been allowed in the case of  PA/06114/2017.
      I therefore formally allow the appeal by ZM on asylum and human rights
      grounds - Article 3.


   5. Having allowed the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds, it  is  not
      necessary for me to determine the Article 8 ground of appeal.


   6. It will be seen from the brief history of this appeal, set out  above,
      that considerable time has elapsed since I set aside the earlier First-
      tier Tribunal decision. I have  on  previous  occasions  expressed  my
      concern at the length of time that it was taking for  this  appeal  to
      come to substantive hearing. I note that Mr Byass, on  behalf  of  the
      SSHD, stated that the SSHD will actively liaise with  ZM's  solicitors
      regarding the return of ZM to the UK. Given the delays to date and the
      basis upon which this appeal is allowed  I  anticipate  that  a  quick
      decision will be taken by the SSHD to comply with  and  activate  this
      appeal outcome.




Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside and I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it  on
    asylum and Article 3 grounds.

                                    Date 21st February 2018
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
