
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08216/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th October 2016                          |On 17th October 2016           |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The Appellant a national of Cote D'Ivoire appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  13th  May
    2015 to refuse his application for asylum or humanitarian protection in
    the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego dismissed the appeal and the
    Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant arrived in  the  UK
    on 2nd January 2011 and claimed asylum two days later.  The Appellant's
    claim for asylum was based on his contention that he was  subjected  to
    torture and ill-treatment in Cote D'Ivoire in 2002, 2004 and 2010 as  a
    result of his Dioula ethnicity, his support for opposition parties  and
    his participation in demonstrations.

 3. The Appellant's application was refused on 21st January  2011  and  his
    appeal against that decision was dismissed in a decision by  Designated
    Immigration Judge (DIJ) Manuell in a decision promulgated on  16th  May
    2011.  The Appellant made further submissions in 2011 and in  2013  and
    in a decision dated  13th  May  2015  (the  decision  appealed  against
    herein) the Respondent refused the  Appellant's  protection  and  human
    rights claim.  The Appellant appealed against that  decision  and  that
    appeal was dismissed on 29th October 2015 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Chana. The Appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  that
    decision was successful and on 10th February 2015 the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Chana was set aside and the appeal was  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.

 4. The remitted hearing took place in the First-tier Tribunal on 27th July
    2016 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego. Prior  to  that  hearing
    two applications for adjournment  had  been  made  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf on 25th and 26th July 2016.  Both applications had been  refused
    on the papers.   A  renewed  application  was  made  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Housego in order to enable the Appellant to obtain legal
    representation and further medical evidence. The Appellant attended the
    hearing accompanied by Mr Fish, a psychotherapist from Room to Heal who
    is assisting the Appellant.  The judge had before him a letter from the
    Helen Bamber Foundation seeking an adjournment to enable the  Appellant
    to  obtain  representation  and  further  medical  evidence.   Mr  Fish
    objected  to  the  hearing  proceeding  in   the   absence   of   legal
    representation. The judge  refused  that  adjournment  application  and
    proceeded with the hearing. He said that he treated the Appellant as  a
    vulnerable witness in accordance with the Joint  Presidential  Guidance
    Note number 2 of 2010  because  of  his  PTSD.  The  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the Appellant and went on to dismiss the appeal.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal against Judge  Housego's
    decision on  three  grounds.   The  first  ground  is  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law in failing to adjourn the appeal  in  light  of
    the Joint Presidential Guidance in relation to treatment of  vulnerable
    witnesses and the medical evidence before him.  The  second  ground  is
    that the judge failed to make a finding on a material  matter  that  is
    the Appellant's allegation that he had been tortured as described.  The
    third ground contends that the judge erred  in  his  treatment  of  the
    decision of DIJ Manuell under the  guidelines  set  out  in  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKIAT 00702.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    the basis that it is arguable that the judge  may  have  erred  in  not
    adjourning the hearing where the Appellant had PTSD, required a  health
    professional with him for his mental  health  during  the  hearing  and
    appeared to be trying to get legal representation.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me Ms Loughran submitted that it  is  clear  from
    the adjournment application that it was the Appellant's  case  that  he
    would have legal representation the following week  as  new  solicitors
    were being instructed.   She  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  a
    material error in refusing to adjourn having treated the Appellant as a
    vulnerable witness  in  that  he  failed  to  follow  the  Presidential
    Guidance  Note.  She  further  submitted  that,  even  though   medical
    professionals were engaged in his case, there was no up-to-date medical
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal which would have  informed  the
    judge  how  to  deal  with  the  case  in  light  of  the   Appellant's
    vulnerability.  She pointed to the decision where the judge set out the
    questions he had asked the Appellant [53 - 55].  She  highlighted  that
    it was recorded that the Appellant had become upset and then went on to
    be subjected to cross-examination and further questions from the  judge
    [56-65]. She  therefore  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  given  a
    significant amount of evidence as well as the submissions  recorded  at
    paragraph 78 notwithstanding the fact that he was unrepresented and the
    judge had purported to accept that he was a  vulnerable  witness.   She
    submitted that if the case had been adjourned  medical  evidence  would
    have addressed the Appellant's ability to give  evidence  and  to  make
    submissions.

 8. Ms Loughran submitted that the judge failed to follow the  Presidential
    Guidance in his assessment of the evidence as he  made  no  attempt  to
    identify the extent of the Appellant's vulnerability and the effect  of
    that vulnerability on  his  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  evidence.
    Although the judge had concluded that the Appellant has PTSD and has  a
    genuine fear of return to the Cote D'Ivoire, she submitted that  it  is
    clear that the judge failed to consider the effect of the PTSD  on  the
    Appellant's ability to give a clear account and to present his case.

 9.  In  relation  to  Ground  2  Ms  Loughran  submitted  that  the  judge
    acknowledged that there was no current medical evidence and  said  that
    there was no evidence of a suicide risk or as  to  the  extent  of  the
    depression said to be suffered by the Appellant.  She  noted  that  the
    judge  said  at  paragraph  97  that  the  extent  of  the  Appellant's
    depression was "not proved".  However  the  basis  of  the  adjournment
    request had been to obtain up-to-date medical evidence and  this  would
    clearly have been material to the issue of suicide risk.  She submitted
    that it was clear that the judge was unable to deal with this aspect of
    the Appellant's claim without medical evidence so therefore the failure
    to adjourn was material to issues to be determined.  She submitted that
    this is further demonstrated by the judge's  conclusions  at  paragraph
    94.

10. Ms Loughran submitted that the judge assumed at paragraph 94  that  the
    Appellant had been tortured without making findings despite this  being
    the very task the judge had been given in relation to this appeal.  She
    submitted that a finding on this issue is essential for the  assessment
    of any suicide risk, the assessment as to whether the Appellant  has  a
    genuine and subjective fear, the assessment as  to  whether  there  are
    significant obstacles to his return and reintegration in Cote  D'Ivoire
    and  for  the  assessment  as  to   whether   there   are   exceptional
    circumstances to go on to consider the case outside Article 8.

11. The Appellant's third Ground of Appeal is that  the  judge  misdirected
    himself in relation to Devaseelan. It is contended that the  judge  did
    not take the decision of DIJ Manuell as his starting point.

12. In response  Ms  Fijiwala  submitted  that  the  judge  did  treat  the
    Appellant as a vulnerable witness.  She referred to paragraph 39 of the
    decision where the judge said so and to paragraph 48 where, in refusing
    the adjournment, the judge invited Mr Fish to stay to ensure  that  the
    Appellant's mental health  was  safeguarded  throughout  the  case  and
    reiterated that he treated the Appellant as a vulnerable witness.   She
    submitted that it is clear from the record of the questions put by  the
    Appellant that he was given breaks.  She submitted that the judge noted
    that the psychotherapist confirmed that he had no objection to the  way
    the case had been handled [79].  She submitted  that  the  judge  dealt
    with the appeal fairly.  She submitted that  there  was  no  indication
    that funds would be available or representation would be  available  or
    as to when.  Although an indication was given that the  case  would  be
    ready to go ahead in twelve weeks there was no indication  as  to  when
    the report would be available  [41].   She  submitted  that  the  judge
    handled the case appropriately, that the Appellant was able to put  his
    case and the benefit of the doubt was properly applied.

13. Ms Fijiwala  submitted  that  the  judge  did  consider  the  available
    evidence noting at paragraph 90 that the medical  evidence  was  nearly
    five years old. She submitted that the judge did consider the  evidence
    before him [91]. The judge accepted that the Appellant has  PTSD.   The
    Appellant did not provide any further evidence.  She submitted that  at
    paragraph 94, in assuming the Appellant had been  tortured,  the  judge
    took the case at its highest and went on to assess the risk  on  return
    on that basis.  She pointed out that there was no evidence in  relation
    to suicide risk even though the Helen Bamber  Foundation  and  Room  to
    Heal were involved in the Appellant's  case.   In  her  submission  the
    judge  therefore  had  sufficient  reasons   for   finding   that   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, and  Article
    3 and Article 8 of the ECHR had not been met.

14. Ms Fijiwala accepted that the  judge  misdirected  himself  in  law  in
    failing to take DIJ Manuell's decision as a  starting  point.   However
    she submitted that this is not a material error given that DIJ  Manuell
    had dismissed the Appellant's appeal finding that the Appellant was not
    credible and the judge did consider the new medical evidence which  had
    not been before DIJ Manuell.

Error of Law

15. I have considered all of the Grounds of Appeal and the submissions.

16. The judge said that he treated the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable  adult
    under the Joint Presidential Guidance Note [39].  Ms Loughran  set  out
    extracts from that Guidance Note in her Grounds of Appeal  and  I  note
    that it states that it is a matter for the Tribunal  to  determine  the
    extent of an identified vulnerability, the effect of the quality of the
    evidence and the weight to be placed on such vulnerability in assessing
    the evidence taking into account the evidence as a whole. The  Guidance
    also  states  that  the  Tribunal  should  record  the  effect  of  the
    identified vulnerability  in  the  assessment  of  the  evidence.   The
    Guidance further states at 5.1 that if a vulnerable  Appellant  is  not
    legally represented the Tribunal should consider whether an adjournment
    of the substantive hearing would enable representation to be  obtained.
    At 10.2 the Guidance states that an  adjournment  may  be  required  to
    enable expert evidence to be called as to the effect of the Appellant's
    vulnerability on his ability to give  cogent  evidence  of  the  events
    relied upon.

17. There are two difficulties in relation to the judge's approach in  this
    case arising from this Guidance. Whilst the judge says that he  decided
    to treat the Appellant as a vulnerable adult as a result  of  his  PTSD
    [39] [85], it is not clear that he took this vulnerability into account
    in considering the adjournment request. Secondly, it is not clear  from
    the analysis of the case at paragraphs 90 to 100 that  the  judge  took
    the Appellant's accepted vulnerability into account  in  assessing  the
    actual evidence before him.

18. For example at paragraph 90 the judge accepted that there was  no  room
    for doubt that the Appellant suffers from PTSD. However at paragraph 92
    the judge said that he found it difficult  to  make  a  causative  link
    between the alleged torture and PTSD because the Appellant was  visibly
    moved when speaking of the death of his brother.   However  it  is  the
    Appellant's account that his brother was  taken  when  the  authorities
    came looking for him (Q76 asylum interview) and the judge records  that
    the appellant was upset when giving evidence about being tortured [55].
    It is therefore unclear how the judge made the link he did between  the
    PTSD and its cause. It is unclear how the judge  took  account  of  the
    fact that the Appellant has PTSD when reaching conclusions  as  to  its
    cause.

19. In my view the most significant difficulty  arising  from  the  judge's
    decision to refuse the  adjournment  request  is  in  relation  to  the
    conclusions reached at paragraph 94. There the judge said:

         "However for the purposes of this decision I will assume  that  the
         appellant was tortured as he described.   If  there  is  any  other
         hearing in this case that may have to be established one way or the
         other as a  clear  finding  of  fact  at  that  hearing,  when  the
         appellant may be represented.   However  I  would  not  allow  this
         appeal even if I had made findings of fact as the appellant  states
         occurred, and so proceed on the basis that the finding of  fact  is
         unnecessary.  There would need to be much  greater  exploration  of
         the facts in evidence-in-chief and in cross-examination in order to
         make a secure finding of fact on that issue than  was  possible  in
         the  hearing  before  me,  particularly  as  I  take  no   judicial
         cognisance of findings of any previous hearing  save  uncontentious
         ones".

20. It is clear from this paragraph that it is as a direct  consequence  of
    his decision to refuse the  adjournment  request  that  the  judge  was
    unable to make 'a secure finding of fact' on a  central  issue  in  the
    Appellant's claim, that is whether he had been tortured in the past. In
    indicating that further exploration of the facts would be  required  in
    evidence-in-chief and cross-examination it seems  that  the  judge  was
    unable  to  make  secure  findings  because  the  Appellant   was   not
    represented. It may also be because of the Appellant's PTSD or  because
    of the lack of up-to-date medical evidence before him.  These  are  all
    issues which would have been addressed and remedied had  the  Appellant
    been  granted  an  adjournment.  Therefore  the  judge's  decision  was
    adversely impacted by the refusal to grant the adjournment in that  the
    judge was unable to make complete, secure and full findings in relation
    to the matters central to the Appellant's case.

21. It is therefore the cumulative  effect  of  the  fact  that  the  judge
    treated the Appellant as a vulnerable adult yet failed to consider  the
    Guidance along with the fact that the judge was unable to  make  secure
    findings on the very issues  that  would  have  been  addressed  by  an
    adjournment that leads me to the conclusion that the  judge  materially
    erred in his approach to the adjournment application in this case.

22. It is contended in the third Ground of Appeal that the judge materially
    erred in his approach to the case of Devaseelan.  This was accepted  by
    the Respondent.  I cannot agree with the Respondent's  submission  that
    this was not a material error. The guidance in Devaseelan is clear.  As
    the decision of DIJ Manuell was not overturned that decision should  be
    the starting point for any judge subsequently dealing  with  the  case.
    Whilst it may be that First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego came to similar
    conclusions to those reached by DIJ Manuell it is difficult to say with
    confidence that had he approached the appeal in the correct manner  the
    outcome would have been no different.  Therefore there  is  a  material
    error in the judge's approach to the evidence in terms of the  guidance
    in Devaseelan.

23. I therefore find that the grounds have been established in  this  case.
    The errors identified go to the  heart  of  the  decision  and  to  the
    fairness  of  the  proceedings  before  First-tier   Tribunal   Housego
    therefore the decision should be set aside in its entirety.

24.  The  parties  were  in  agreement  with  my  view   that,   in   these
    circumstances, the nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which
    is necessary in order for the  decision  to  be  remade  is  such  that
    (having regard to the overriding objective  in  Rule  2  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to remit the  case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

25. The judge hearing the case in the First-tier Tribunal should  obviously
    take the decision of DIJ Manuell as the starting  point  in  accordance
    with the guidance in Devaseelan.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.


Signed                              Dated: 14 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 14 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

