
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08251/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26th January 2016                      |On 4th April 2016                   |
|                                          |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                     ABDELAZIZ HASSAN MOHAMMED GHASHLAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Barnfield of Counsel instructed by Halliday
Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. At the first hearing of this appeal in the Upper Tribunal before me  on
    26th October 2015 I reached the conclusion that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained a material error on a point of  law  such
    that it should be re-made in relation to the limited issue  of  claimed
    evasion of military service by the appellant. However, I also concluded
    that the First-tier Judge's  rejection  of  the  main  element  of  the
    appellant's claim to fear persecution as a result of an argument with a
    person who  lent  him  money,  should  stand.   My  reasons  for  those
    conclusions are set out in a separate decision, the  relevant  part  of
    which I now quote below:

         "1.  In a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal, permission was
             granted on 15th July 2015 to the appellant to  appeal  against
             the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Place  in
             which she dismissed the appeal  on  all  grounds  against  the
             decision of the respondent to refuse asylum, humanitarian  and
             human rights protection to the appellant, an adult citizen  of
             Egypt.

          2. Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor granted permission  on  the
             basis that the judge's conclusions about the appellant's claim
             to fear persecution because of  an  unwillingness  to  perform
             military service was flawed.  However, it was  concluded  that
             there was no arguable error in relation to  the  other  ground
             raised in  the  application,  namely,  that  the  police  were
             looking for the appellant because of his fight with  a  person
             from whom he had borrowed money called Mahmood.

          3. Judge Norton-Taylor noted that the appellant's case  had  been
             put not only on refugee  grounds  but  also  humanitarian  and
             human rights protection grounds particularly applying  Article
             3.   Thus,  the  appellant's  argument  that  any  failure  to
             undertake  military  service  would   result   in   a   year's
             imprisonment and  consequent  ill-treatment  could  have  been
             considered on that basis.  Further, although the judge  stated
             that  there  was  no  objective  material   to   support   the
             appellant's claim that he would be imprisoned, there was  such
             evidence before the judge  in  an  Australian  Refugee  Review
             Tribunal document (page 33 of the appellant's bundle).

         Error on a Point of Law

          4. At the hearing before me Mr Lane submitted a skeleton argument
             which  confirms  the  background  I  have  summarised  in  the
             previous paragraph.  Additionally, it is argued that the judge
             also erred in failing to consider evidence that the  appellant
             was refusing to perform military service  for  moral  reasons,
             the Australian document showing that  conscientious  objection
             was not a reason for exemption.  There was also clear evidence
             in the respondent's Operational Guidance Note (pages 21 to  24
             of  the  appellant's  bundle)  that   prison   and   detention
             conditions in Egypt fell below the Article 3 threshold.

          5. Mr McVeety argued that the judge had correctly concluded  that
             the appellant had never refused to  perform  military  service
             but had simply 'skipped' it.  He also  pointed  out  that  the
             details of imprisonment on page 33 of the  appellant's  bundle
             originated in a 1998 document from War Resisters International
             and so was out of date and did not give any examples  of  such
             imprisonment.   Further,  the  Australian  report  shows  that
             exemption from military service can be applied for as  in  the
             case of family breadwinners.  Thus, he submitted, there was no
             evidence to show  that  the  appellant  would  be  imprisoned.
             However,  in  drawing  attention  to  paragraph   5   of   the
             appellant's statement (page 4 of the bundle), Mr  McVeety  had
             to concede that the appellant had claimed not to be  the  main
             breadwinner  in  his  family  and  had  raised  an  issue   of
             conscientious objection instead of  simply  wishing  to  avoid
             military service.

          6. Mr Lane concluded his  submissions  by  drawing  attention  to
             information which showed that alternatives to military service
             were no longer available.  He argued that there  was  evidence
             that the  appellant  would  be  treated  as  a  draft  evader.
             Although he suggested that if an error in relation to military
             service was found the matter should be remitted to the  First-
             tier Tribunal.  However, I reminded Mr Lane of the  provisions
             of the Practice Statement of the Senior President at paragraph
             7.2 which would not allow for such a  remittal  if  there  was
             only a limited judicial fact-finding exercise involved in  re-
             making the decision.  At the end of the hearing I reserved  my
             decision.

         Conclusions

          7.  The  decision  of  the  experienced   First-tier   Judge   is
             comprehensive and well written.  There is clearly no error  in
             the judge's rejection of the main element of  the  appellant's
             claim to fear persecution as a result of an argument with  the
             person who lent him money.  Cogent reasons are given  for  the
             judge's negative conclusions in  this  respect  including  the
             conclusion that the appellant's main  motivation  for  leaving
             Egypt was economic - particularly bearing in mind that he  had
             spent three years in Italy and France without claiming asylum.

          8. However, the judge's conclusions about  the  military  service
             claim are based upon the conclusion that the  appellant  would
             not be imprisoned if prosecuted for avoiding military  service
             for whatever reason.  In reaching that  conclusion  the  judge
             appears to have overlooked the information  contained  in  the
             Australian report  on  page  33  of  the  appellant's  bundle.
             Although that information is sourced from a document  produced
             in 1998 and so might not be regarded as a reliable  indication
             of the present situation, it was incumbent upon the  judge  to
             examine that information  and  other  objective  material  put
             before her which suggested imprisonment for draft evasion  and
             the risk of  serious  harm  in  prison.   On  that  basis  the
             decision shows an error on a point of law which is material to
             the judge's conclusion that the appellant was not entitled  to
             humanitarian or human rights protection.

         Decision

          9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an  error  on  a
             point of law in relation to the judge's conclusions about  the
             claimed evasion of military service by the appellant.  To that
             extent the decision should be re-made, although such re-making
             should continue before the Upper Tribunal where the matter can
             proceed by way of  submissions  only  drawing  upon  objective
             material relating to risk on return for  evasion  of  military
             service in Egypt."



Resumed Hearing

 2. Prior to the resumed hearing Mr Barnfield handed to me a 30 page bundle
    of objective material consisting of:

      i) A BBC report.

     ii) An Al-Monitor report on Egypt's "draft dodgers".

    iii) A Global Voices report on the campaign against compulsory  military
         service.

     iv) European Asylum Support Office (EASO) report of October 2015.

 3. In addition to the above documents Mr Barnfield also indicated that  he
    would rely upon the respondent's Operational Guidance Note of  2013  to
    be found on page 5 of the appellant's  original  hearing  bundle  which
    contains information about the harshness of prison conditions in  Egypt
    (from paragraph 3.14) and  information  about  restrictions  to  travel
    abroad for those who have not  completed  compulsory  military  service
    (paragraph 2.3.6).  He  also  made  reference  to  the  Australian  RRT
    research response from page 27 of the bundle  which,  at  paragraph  3,
    contained the information  on  the  treatment  of  persons  opposed  to
    military service containing information dating from 1998.

 4. Mr Barnfield reminded me that the appellant had not performed  military
    service as required for a person of his  age  and  that  the  appellant
    would therefore be at real risk, having left  Egypt  illegally  without
    performing such service, of imprisonment and harsh treatment.

 5. Mr McVeety emphasised that there was no current objective  evidence  to
    specify exactly what would happen if there was  a  failure  to  perform
    military service and he also stated that it had  been  found  that  the
    appellant had avoided service because he did not wish to fight but  not
    for an obvious reason of conscience.  In particular he emphasised  that
    the question of what would actually  happen  to  the  appellant  if  he
    returned had not been answered.  As to the BBC News report  he  pointed
    out that this was dated 2005 so was before the regime changed in Egypt.
    He also pointed out that the high profile objector referred to on  page
    5 of the Al-Monitor report was clearly a  high  profile  objector.   He
    commented that the EASO report  showed  that  there  were  options  for
    military service (page 20).  The appellant might simply have to  pay  a
    fine or just do the service he should have  performed.   The  appellant
    might also have avoided such service in  the  first  place  because  he
    could have been regarded as a sole breadwinner (although this  appeared
    to be inconsistent with the appellant's claim in  paragraph  5  of  his
    statement (page 4 of the original bundle) that  he  was  not  the  main
    breadwinner in his family).

 6. Mr Barnfield concluded his remarks by emphasising  that  the  appellant
    would immediately be drawn to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  on
    return as he had illegally left the country without the  stamp  in  his
    identity card showing performance of military service.





Conclusions and Reasons

 7. The issue for me to decide is whether the appellant has shown,  to  the
    lower standard, that  he  will  be  punished  for  failing  to  perform
    military service before leaving Egypt and  that  such  punishment  will
    involve a period of imprisonment where, it is  clear,  he  will  suffer
    harsh treatment which will reach the level of  severity  proscribed  by
    Article  3.   His  asylum  claim  has  failed  so  I  do  not  consider
    humanitarian protection.

 8. My first step is to examine the appellant's attitude to the performance
    of military service.  He is not, I conclude, a  conscientious  objector
    to military service but a person who does not like  the  idea  of  such
    service because he is averse to the thought of having to fight for  his
    country.   The  First-tier  Judge  reached  this  reasoned   conclusion
    although omitted consideration of  the  1998  Australian  report  which
    indicated that refusal to perform military service was punishable by  a
    year's imprisonment  and  a  fine  and,  possibly,  a  prolongation  of
    military service for up to three years.  There is also the  possibility
    that a draft evader who had fled abroad could not  renew  his  passport
    but, in my conclusion, the appellant will not be seen as a draft evader
    as such but an economic migrant from his country.

 9. The latest objective material put before me does not, I conclude, show,
    to the lower standard, that the appellant will suffer  imprisonment  as
    opposed to a prolonged period of  military  service  and,  possibly,  a
    fine.  The BBC report of 2005 relates to an  individual  who  had  been
    sentenced to two years for evading military service but it is not clear
    what the circumstances of his specific offence  were.   The  Al-Monitor
    report of 2015 only suggests that a  conscientious  objector  might  be
    imprisoned.  Ahmed Hassan, a 20 year old law student and  secretary  of
    the Conscientious Objector Movement states "If I  have  no  choice  but
    being imprisoned or travelling abroad, I will leave".   I  cannot  draw
    the conclusion of likely imprisonment for the appellant on  that  basis
    because the statement is neither conclusive  nor  is  the  appellant  a
    conscientious objector.  The Global Voices report focuses on  a  person
    taken into military custody for failing to perform military service but
    who was then granted a medical exemption of military service because of
    a "character disorder".  So that report is of limited relevance save to
    indicate that an exemption from service may be possible.

10. As to the EASO COI query and final answer given  on  9th  October  2015
    this reports under the heading "General Information" that  applications
    can still be made for exemption to military service which is  otherwise
    of a mandatory nature.  The punishment for desertion referred to  would
    not appear to be relevant because the appellant cannot be said to  have
    deserted from military service which he has not commenced.  The  report
    of imprisonment and fine for a refusal to perform military service  is,
    unfortunately, a repeat of the information provided in 1998.  Whilst in
    response to question 3, there is the suggestion  that  those  who  were
    over the age of  30  who  have  deliberately  skipped  the  examination
    process  for  military  recruitment  might  receive   a   sentence   of
    imprisonment for up to two years and a fine, that does  not  cover  the
    appellant's situation as a person who could still  return  and  perform
    military service even if he does not like the idea of it.  Therefore, I
    am unable to draw conclusions from the EASO report that there is a real
    risk of imprisonment in the  appellant's  situation  as  opposed  to  a
    requirement to perform military service, even if prolonged, on  return.
    In reaching that conclusion I bear in mind that the appellant is  still
    under the age of 30 and there is nothing  to  suggest  that  he  cannot
    physically perform military service.

11. Whilst the  respondent's  Operational  Guidance  Note  makes  it  clear
    (paragraph 2.3.6) that the appellant would be a person who  would  draw
    the attention of the authorities on the basis that he may have left the
    country illegally because he failed to perform military service, I have
    to bear in mind that he is still of an eligible  age  to  perform  that
    service.  Thus, the conclusion I reach is that on return, the appellant
    will certainly be required to perform  military  service.   Bearing  in
    mind that there is no indication that the appellant has actually  taken
    deliberate steps to evade military service whilst in  Egypt,  I  cannot
    conclude that he has shown that he will suffer punishment in  the  form
    of imprisonment and consequent ill-treatment.  Therefore, I  am  unable
    to conclude that his Article 3 rights will be  infringed.   No  general
    human rights claim was put before me.

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  asylum   and
humanitarian protection claims stands.

I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested  nor  do  I  consider  it  appropriate  in  this
appeal.









Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As this appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
