
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08860/2015
                                                               AA/09039/2015
                                                               AA/09041/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2016                  |On 06 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     n K
                                     M k
                                     m k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr C McWatters instructed by Migrant Legal Project


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order given the respondents are
    claiming asylum and two are children.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
    Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall  directly
    or indirectly identify the respondents.  This direction applies to both
    the appellant and to the respondents and a failure to comply with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will hereafter refer to the parties as they appeared before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The three appellants are citizens of Albania.  The first  appellant  is
    the mother of the second and third appellants.   The  three  appellants
    were born respectively on 15 August 1987, 1 April  2008  and  2  August
    2009.  They  arrived  in  the  UK  on  22  February  2013.   They  were
    encountered by immigration officials departing from a Eurostar train at
    St Pancras Station in London.

 4. The first appellant claimed asylum.  The basis of her  claim  was  that
    she was a victim of trafficking.  She claimed that she  (together  with
    her two daughters) had been abducted by men to whom  her  husband  owed
    money.  She had been forced into prostitution by the men and  was  kept
    locked up in a building.  She was allowed to leave temporarily when she
    said that one of her daughters  was  ill.   Instead  of  going  to  the
    hospital, she went to a police station and applied for a passport using
    $3,000 she had hidden in her baby's nappy and which was the proceeds of
    jewellery.  She returned in a fortnight to collect her  passport.   She
    was subsequently helped by a man, whom she met at the  police  station,
    to leave Albania with her two children eventually arriving in the UK.

 5. On 21 May 2015, the Secretary of State refused the  appellants'  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 6. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. In a decision promulgated on 8 March 2016,  Judge  Fowell  allowed  the
    appellants' claims on asylum grounds, humanitarian  protection  grounds
    and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8.  The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the grounds:

         (1)  That although the judge found that  the  first  appellant  had
             been trafficked in the past, he failed  to  make  any  finding
             that she was at future risk;

         (2)  The judge failed to consider properly, or at all, whether  the
             first appellant would obtain a sufficiency  of  protection  in
             Albania;

         (3)  The judge failed to  consider  whether  the  appellants  could
             safely and reasonably internally relocate within Albania; and

         (4)   The  judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  finding  in   the
             appellants' favour under Art 8.

 9. On 5 April 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Kimnell)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

10. On 22 April 2016, the appellants filed a rule 24 response (made without
    sight of the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal) seeking to  uphold
    the judge's decision on the basis that  he  had  properly  applied  the
    country guidance case of TD and AD (Trafficked women)  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00092 (IAC).

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

12. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
    judge had made a number of adverse findings concerning the  appellants'
    account at paras 42, 44 and 46.  In particular,  the  judge  had  found
    that aspects of the appellants' account were implausible and  were  not
    genuine.  Nevertheless, Mr Richards submitted the judge  found  in  the
    appellants' favour based essentially on expert medical reports relating
    to the first appellant's PTSD and the mental health  of  her  children.
    Mr Richards submitted that, although the judge accepted that the  first
    appellant had been abducted and forced into prostitution, at  no  point
    did he find or give reasons for finding that she would be  at  risk  on
    return to Albania.  Mr Richards submitted that the  judge  had  wrongly
    simply moved from a finding that she had been trafficked to  a  finding
    that she would be at risk on return.

13. Further, Mr Richards submitted that the judge had  failed  properly  to
    consider the issue of "sufficiency of protection".   At  para  55,  the
    judge had simply stated that it would be  "unduly  harsh"  for  her  to
    "avail of the state protection available". That, Mr Richards  submitted
    was not the appropriate test to  determine  whether  a  sufficiency  of
    protection was available based upon the case law such as Horvath v SSHD
    [2000] UKHL 37.

14. Finally, in relation to the international protection claim, Mr Richards
    submitted that the judge had failed to consider whether relocation  was
    an option for the appellants.  He submitted that, perhaps, this was not
    surprising given that the judge had failed to find where and from  whom
    the risk to the first appellant lay on return.

15. In relation to Art 8, Mr Richards submitted  that  it  was  essentially
    based  upon  the  premise  that  the  appellants  succeeded  in   their
    international protection claim and if the latter was set aside then the
    Art 8 decision could not stand.

16. He invited me to set aside the judge's decision and remit the appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

17. On behalf of the appellants, Mr McWatters submitted that the judge  had
    accepted that the first appellant fell within a particular social group
    on the basis that she  was  a  victim  of  sex-trafficking  and,  as  a
    consequence, was at risk on return.  Mr McWatters  submitted  that  the
    judge had found that the  first  appellant  was  vulnerable  to  sexual
    exploitation and, having set out and applied TD and AD, the  judge  had
    considered all the circumstances and had found that there would  be  an
    absence  of  state  protection.   That  reasoning  had,  Mr   McWatters
    submitted, effectively decided the issue of internal relocation in  the
    first appellant's favour.

18. Finally, he submitted that the judge's finding in respect of Art 8 were
    valid.

Discussion

19. The hearing before the judge was, perhaps, somewhat complicated by  the
    fact that the new country guidance case of TD and AD was  published  on
    the day of the hearing.  As I understand it, both parties were  invited
    to make written submission in respect of TD and AD after  the  hearing.
    There does not appear to have been any oral submissions in relation  to
    it.  Nevertheless, at para 45 of his determination, the judge  set  out
    at least some of the head note of TD and AD, namely paras (d)-(h).  The
    guidance in full is as follows:

         "a)  It is not possible to set out a typical profile of  trafficked
             women from Albania: trafficked women come from  all  areas  of
             the country and from varied social backgrounds.

         b)   Much of Albanian society is  governed  by  a  strict  code  of
             honour which not only means that trafficked women  would  have
             very considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home
             areas on return but also will affect their ability to relocate
             internally.  Those who  have  children  outside  marriage  are
             particularly vulnerable.  In extreme cases the close relatives
             of the trafficked woman may  refuse  to  have  the  trafficked
             woman's child return with her and could force her  to  abandon
             the child.

         c)   Some women are lured to leave Albania with false  promises  of
             relationships or work.  Others may  seek  out  traffickers  in
             order to facilitate their departure  from  Albania  and  their
             establishment in prostitution  abroad.   Although  such  women
             cannot be said to have left Albania against their will,  where
             they have fallen under the  control  of  traffickers  for  the
             purpose of exploitation there is  likely  to  be  considerable
             violence within the relationships and a lack of freedom:  such
             women are victims of trafficking.

         d)   In the  past  few  years  the  Albanian  government  has  made
             significant efforts to improve its  response  to  trafficking.
             This includes widening the scope  of  legislation,  publishing
             the Standard Operating Procedures, implementing  an  effective
             National Referral Mechanism, appointing a new Anti-trafficking
             Co-ordinator,  and  providing  training  to  law   enforcement
             officials.  There is in general a Horvath-standard sufficiency
             of protection, but it will not be  effective  in  every  case.
             When considering whether or not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
             protection  for  a  victim  of  trafficking   her   particular
             circumstances must be considered.

         e)   There is now in place a reception and reintegration  programme
             for victims of trafficking.  Returning victims of  trafficking
             are able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases'
             may be able to stay there for up  to  2  years.   During  this
             initial  period  after  return  victims  of  trafficking   are
             supported and protected.  Unless the individual has particular
             vulnerabilities such as physical or mental health issues, this
             option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable; whether it
             is must be determined on a case by case basis.

         f)   Once asked to leave the shelter a victim  of  trafficking  can
             live on her own.   In  doing  so  she  will  face  significant
             challenges including, but not limited to,  stigma,  isolation,
             financial  hardship  and  uncertainty,  a  sense  of  physical
             insecurity and the subjective fear of being  found  either  by
             their families or former traffickers.  Some  women  will  have
             the capacity  to  negotiate  these  challenges  without  undue
             hardship.  There will however be victims of  trafficking  with
             characteristics,  such  as  mental  illness  or  psychological
             scarring, for whom living alone in these  circumstances  would
             not be reasonable.  Whether a particular appellant falls  into
             that category will call for a careful assessment  of  all  the
             circumstances.

         g)   Re-trafficking is a reality.  Whether that risk exists for  an
             individual claimant will turn in part on the factors that  led
             to the initial trafficking, and on her personal circumstances,
             including her background, age, and her willingness and ability
             to seek help  from  the  authorities.   For  a  proportion  of
             victims of trafficking, their situations may  mean  that  they
             are especially vulnerable to re-trafficking, or  being  forced
             into other exploitative situations.

         h)   Trafficked women  from  Albania  may  well  be  members  of  a
             particular social group on that account alone.   Whether  they
             are at risk of persecution on account of such  membership  and
             whether they will be able to access sufficiency of  protection
             from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual
             circumstances including but not limited to the following:

             1)   The social status and economic standing of her family

             2)   The level of education of the victim  of  trafficking  or
                  her family

             3)   The victim of trafficking's state of health, particularly
                  her mental health

             4)   The presence of an illegitimate child

             5)   The area of origin

             6)   Age

             7)   What support network will be available"

20. The thrust of this guidance may, so far as relevant, be  summarised  as
    follows.  Assuming  for  this  purpose  that  the  first  appellant  is
    properly  seen  as  a  "trafficked  woman"  (the  sexual   exploitation
    occurring in Albania), the risk of re-trafficking turns on the  factors
    that led  to  the  initial  trafficking  and  her  individual  personal
    circumstances.  An individual's personal circumstances may mean that  a
    person is especially vulnerable to re-trafficking or being forced  into
    other exploitative situations.  There is in general a  Horvath-standard
    of sufficiency of protection in Albania but it will not necessarily  be
    effective in every case.  Whether or not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection requires  a  consideration  of  an  individual's  particular
    circumstances.  The guidance at para h) sets out  circumstances  to  be
    taken into account in assessing whether an individual  is  at  risk  of
    persecution on account of being a trafficked woman and whether she will
    be able to access a sufficiency of  protection  from  the  authorities.
    The guidance sets out a non-exclusive list of seven circumstances.   As
    regards internal relocation, the guidance recognises that there may  be
    "very considerable" difficulties in a  trafficked  woman's  ability  to
    relocate internally.

21. In this appeal, Judge Fowell made certain  adverse  finding  concerning
    the first appellant's account.  At para 42 he said this:

         "42.     Her account does contain a number of  inconsistencies,  as
             pointed out in the Reasons for Refusal Letter,  together  with
             some implausible  features.   Of  these,  the  main  and  most
             striking one is that she returned to her captors to spend  the
             two week period before collecting her  passport.   That  meant
             she had to submit to further rapes, with her children being in
             a place of danger, separated from  her  by  day  and  in  some
             distress.  I find this aspect of  her  account  impossible  to
             accept, even to the lower standard.  She had  money  to  allow
             her to hide with her children for a while, even if there  were
             no friends or relatives to whom she could  turn,  which  seems
             unlikely given her extreme plight.  There can also  have  been
             little to lose from telling the police.  Electing to return to
             a place of danger carried with it the further danger that  she
             would not  be  released  to  collect  her  passport  with  her
             children at the end of that period.  Indeed the whole  account
             of being released at all with both children to see the doctor,
             of having such  money  available  and  undiscovered,  and  the
             chance meeting with [D] is a series of improbabilities which I
             cannot accept as a genuine account."

22. In para 43 he referred to the details provided by the  first  appellant
    as being "untenable" but then at para 44 he said this:

         "44.     I can understand the  respondent's  frustration  with  the
             ready acceptance by a number of the experts involved that  the
             appellant's account is true, but the most  likely  explanation
             appears to  me  that  it  has  been  embellished  but  is  not
             fundamentally false, in that  there  was  a  period  of  being
             abducted and forced prostitution.  There may be  a  number  of
             reasons for such embellishment, including shame, or an attempt
             to avoid any share of responsibility for bringing it about, or
             simply a wish to improve her  prospects  of  obtaining  asylum
             Overall however, applying the lower threshold, I  conclude  in
             view of the  various  experts'  reports  set  out  above,  the
             combined effect of  which  is  particularly  persuasive,  that
             although the appellant's particular account is false, she  has
             been a victim of sex-trafficking and is therefore a member  of
             this particular social group."

23. The judge's finding that  the  appellant  has  been  a  victim  of  sex
    trafficking and that as such she is a member  of  a  particular  social
    group is a finding that he accepts, as he put it,  that  she  had  been
    "abducted and forced [into] prostitution".  However, he did not  accept
    aspects of her claim which he considered to be "embellishments" of  her
    account.  The fact that  the  first  appellant  had  been  forced  into
    prostitution was not in itself a finding that she was at risk of forced
    prostitution in the future.  Her asylum claim was dependent upon such a
    finding in her favour.  As the case of TD and AD emphasises at para  g)
    of the head note, whether an individual is at risk on return depends on
    that individual's personal circumstances including in part the  factors
    that led to  her  initial  trafficking.   Judge  Fowell,  in  rejecting
    aspects of the appellant's account, goes no further than accepting that
    for "a period" she was "abducted"  and  "forced  [into]  prostitution".
    The judge does not make clear whether he accepts that that was  because
    she was targeted by men who were owed money by her husband or for  some
    other reason.  Whilst I accept that the judge goes on in paras 46 to 55
    to consider that the first appellant is vulnerable, he fails to  ground
    his decision in full consideration of her circumstances.  The bare fact
    that she had been previously abducted and forced into prostitution  was
    not enough.  The circumstances of her past ill-treatment were  relevant
    as to whether she was at risk in the future as well as  an  assessment,
    as  TD  and  AD  also  requires,  of  her  circumstances  such  as  her
    vulnerability.  I agree with Mr Richards that it does not  follow  that
    because an individual has been the subject of trafficking that there is
    then ipso facto a real risk that they will be trafficked in the future.
     In the absence of findings either  explicit  or  implicit  (and  I  am
    unable to detect any in the determination) as to which parts,  if  any,
    of the first appellant's account the judge accepts, it is not  possible
    to see the basis upon which the judge found that the appellant  was  at
    risk on return to Albania.  In fact, as Mr Richards submitted, there is
    no actual finding on that aspect of the appellant's  claim:  merely  to
    state that she is a victim  of  sex  trafficking  and  a  member  of  a
    particular social group does not amount to a finding  that  she  is  at
    real risk on return.  The absence of such a reasoned finding is, in  my
    judgment, a material error of law in the judge's determination and  his
    decision to allow the appeal on international protection grounds.

24. Further, I also accept Mr Richards's  submission  that  the  judge  has
    failed  properly  to  grapple  with  the  issue  of   "sufficiency   of
    protection".  Nowhere does the judge deal with the starting  point  set
    out in TD and AD at para d)  that  in  general  a  Horvath-standard  of
    sufficiency of protection exists in Albania.  Whilst it  is  true  that
    the judge finds that the first appellant is vulnerable, his finding  in
    para 55 does not adequately explain his finding,  if  indeed  he  makes
    such a finding, that there would not  be  an  adequate  sufficiency  of
    protection available to her.  His conclusion is based on  the  premises
    that there are "no viable means of support available to  the  appellant
    on return" and that it would be "unduly harsh, given the  pressures  on
    her  and  her  vulnerability"  for  her  to  avail  herself  of   state
    protection.  The difficulty with the first premise is that it is  based
    on an unfound fact that her husband's family would not be able to offer
    her any practical support.  That is referred to by the judge at para 46
    based upon a comment made in an expert  report.   However,  that  could
    only possibly  be  justified  if  the  judge  had  accepted  the  first
    appellant's account of how and why she was  abducted  and  forced  into
    prostitution.  As I have already indicated, the judge made  no  finding
    on that and Dr Young's view is based upon an acceptance  of  the  first
    appellant's account.  Likewise, that it would be "unduly harsh" for the
    first appellant to avail herself of state protection,  does  not  fully
    and properly engage with whether  the  state  would  be  "willing"  and
    "able" to provide a sufficiency of protection.

25.  Finally,  although  the  judge  considers,   at   some   length,   the
    vulnerability of the first appellant (and indeed the children) he makes
    no specific finding in relation as to whether internal  relocation  was
    reasonably and safely open to the appellants.  The judge  was  required
    to give adequate reasons and make a specific finding on that issue.

26. For these reasons, the judge erred in law in allowing  the  appellants'
    appeals on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds. (He  could  not,
    in any event, have  allowed  the  appeal  on  both  grounds:  they  are
    alternatives (see, para  339C(ii),  Immigration  Rules  and  Art  2(e),
    Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC)).

27. As regards Art 8, I accept Mr Richards's submission  that  the  judge's
    reasoning is,  in  effect,  premised  on  there  being  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to the appellants returning to Albania which,  in  turn,  is
    premised  upon  the  favourable  conclusion  in   their   international
    protection claims.  Since the latter cannot stand, in my judgment,  the
    decision in respect of Art 8 also cannot stand.

Decision and Disposal

28. Thus, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appellants'
    appeals on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights  grounds
    involve the making of an  error  of  law.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

29. The consequence of the material errors of law that I have identified is
    that the judge's determination, as a whole, should be set aside and the
    appeal should be reheard de novo.

30. Given the nature and extent of fact finding required,  and  bearing  in
    mind para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    such a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Fowell.


                                 Signed


                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 06 December 2016


