
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08300/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th October 2016                           |On 4th October 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                MR DAGNEW [S]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Kelly) promulgated on  14th  June  2016  by  which  he
      dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.

   2. The Appellant claimed to be a citizen of Eritrea born on 1st September
      1990. He entered the UK,  clandestinely  on  14th  November  2014  and
      claimed asylum three days later.

   3. The Secretary of State refused the Appellant's claim on the basis that
      she did not accept that he was an Eritrean national and asserted  that
      he was in truth an Ethiopian national.

   4. The Appellant claimed to have been  born  in  Assab  in  Eritrea.  His
      parents, he claimed, had been soldiers of the Dergue regime who fought
      against Eritrean independence from Ethiopia. They remained in  Eritrea
      following independence in 1993, earning their living as small traders.
      The Appellant never attended school.

   5. He claimed that in 2000 his parents were called to a  meeting  with  a
      government official in Asmara where they  were  arrested  and  killed.
      Following that incident, his aunt sent him immediately  to  Sudan.  He
      was aged 11. In Sudan he lived with a female Eritrean  national  until
      2014 when he left for Libya. The Eritrean lady fed and clothed him  in
      exchange for him looking after her children while she worked.

   6. During his time in Sudan he met and married an Ethiopian national.

   7. In June 2014 the Appellant left for Libya,  helped  by  an  agent  and
      crossed into Italy where he says he tried to claim asylum. However, as
      nothing happened he travelled on to Paris by train and from  there  to
      Calais where he secreted himself in a lorry and entered the UK.

   8. The Appellant claimed to be at  risk  from  the  Eritrean  authorities
      because his parents were Dergue fighters.

   9. The Secretary of State noted  that  at  his  screening  interview  the
      Appellant claimed to speak Tigrinyan and Amharic, but later claimed to
      speak only Arabic and Amharic. The Secretary of State  noted  that  he
      had limited local knowledge about Eritrea. Furthermore, the  Secretary
      of State noted that the Dergue was an Ethiopian army  whose  rule  had
      come to an end by the mid 1990s. This also suggested to the  Secretary
      of State that in truth the Appellant's parents, and therefore he, were
      Ethiopian. The Secretary of State did not  accept  that  such  persons
      would have remained in Eritrea following independence  in  1993  where
      they would clearly have been at risk of persecution.

  10. In his Decision and  Reasons  Judge  Kelly  noted  that  he  had  been
      provided with a bundle of documents from the Respondent  and  that  he
      heard oral evidence from the Appellant's using an Amharic interpreter.

  11. At paragraph 24 the Judge's findings commence with a consideration  of
      whether the Secretary of State had established that the Appellant  was
      a national of Ethiopia. He concluded that she had not. He did not find
      the evidence of language to be sufficiently  compelling  to  establish
      that fact and he did  not  agree  that  the  information  given  about
      Eritrea by the Appellant was anything other than consistent  with  the
      background information.

  12. The Judge went on to find  it  damaging  to  the  Appellant's  overall
      credibility that he failed to claim asylum in either Italy  or  France
      and did not accept his explanation  for  leaving  those  countries  in
      order to pursue a claim in the UK.

  13. The Judge also found that he had provided no credible  explanation  as
      to why he had felt the need to leave Sudan which had been his home for
      10 years where he had lived a settled existence with a wife who had  a
      good business.

  14. The Judge did not accept the Appellant's explanation for  stating,  at
      his screening interview, that he spoke Tigrinya as he  found  that  at
      that time he  was  represented  and  his  representatives  would  have
      corrected any error.

  15. The Judge found that it was not credible that the Appellant was unable
      to speak Tigrinya if he had  been  brought  up  by  Tigrinya  speaking
      parents until the age of 10 years.

  16. At paragraph 31 the Judge considered the evidence in the round.  While
      he had not found that the Appellant was a national of Ethiopia he  was
      not satisfied that the Appellant had  established,  even  to  the  low
      standard of proof that he was a national of Eritrea and  as  such  his
      claim could not succeed.

  17. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      who felt that the Judge had  not  made  appropriate  findings  on  all
      issues.

  18. However, while the burden of proof is on Secretary  of  State  if  she
      asserts the Appellant to be a different nationality than claimed,  the
      overall burden of proof remains on  the  Appellant  to  establish  his
      claim for asylum, albeit to a low standard of proof. He must establish
      that he is a refugee and to establish that he is  a  refugee  he  must
      establish that he is outside his country of nationality due to a  well
      founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason.

  19. The Judge found that he had not established that he was a national  of
      Eritrea and therefore could not pass the  first  hurdle  of  what  was
      required.

  20. The Appellant pointed out that  there  was  a  document  that  he  had
      provided to the First-tier Tribunal that the Judge had not taken  into
      account, which he said proved that he was Eritrean. That document is a
      letter from the Eritrean community in  Lambeth  in  London.  It  is  a
      letter dated 24th March 2016 which suggests that the  Appellant  is  a
      member of their community and an Eritrean  national  who  has  been  a
      member of the community since June 2015.

  21. Mrs Petterson argued that that  letter  was  inadequate  to  establish
      nationality and I agree with her. Firstly, the Eritrean  community  in
      Lambeth is in London and the Appellant has  always  been  resident  in
      Liverpool. The  letter  is  vague  in  the  extreme  as  to  how  they
      established with certainty that the Appellant is a national of Eritrea
      as they assert. In particular, I note that the letter  says  that  the
      Appellant is  an  extremely  good  member  of  the  community  and  is
      dedicated to assist people in the community. He is a  very  benevolent
      youth member of the community and always dedicated to it.  Given  that
      he does not even live in London I find that a  strange  assertion  for
      the community to be able to make. The letter is highly  unsatisfactory
      as to its methods for confirming nationality and is overall,  I  find,
      wholly inadequate in terms of establishing  nationality,  particularly
      given the adverse matters indicating otherwise.

  22. Accordingly, while the Judge ought  to  have  considered  and  made  a
      specific finding with regard to that letter, I find  it  cannot  upset
      the overall credibility findings in relation to nationality which  are
      all soundly based on the evidence. It is not sufficient to  upset  all
      of the other adverse matters.

  23. I therefore find the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error
      of law and the Decision and Reasons shall stand.

  24. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

  25. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.




Signed                              Date 4th October 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
