

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08853/2013
     AA/08854/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  8 April 2014                              |On 10 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                              HANIEH SADAT MIRI
                           AMIR RASKHADIVMASOULEH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                 SECRETARY 0F STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr Gayle, Elder Rahimi solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwncyz, HOPO

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   1. These are the Appellants' appeals against the decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hemingway made following a hearing at Bradford  on  the
      21 October 2013, dismissing their  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
      decision to refuse to grant them asylum.


   2. The first appellant's claim is based upon a raid of her father's house
      when her computer was taken, which contained  incriminating  material,
      her conversion to Christianity, and on the basis of being at  risk  on
      return to Iran because of the deteriorating situation there since  the
      case of SB Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 53.

   3. The first appellant's sister was granted asylum in the  UK  apparently
      on the basis of the same raid, following interview.

   4.  The  judge  made  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the  first
      appellant, substantially  because  there  was  a  lack  of  supporting
      evidence from the family, in particular the sister who is in the UK.

   5. Mr Gayle argues with merit that the judge erred because he  failed  to
      take into account the documentary evidence from  the  mother,  in  the
      form of an email in the appellant's bundle, and  because  he  made  an
      unsustainable finding that the raid did not occur.

   6. Mr Diwncyz defended the  determination,  which  is  characteristically
      thorough and generally well reasoned, and I agree that the  challenges
      to the judge's findings in respect of the conversion to  Christianity,
      and the SB point, have not been made out. However, the combination  of
      the lack of  consideration  of  important  evidence  from  the  mother
      (especially since the judge's  primary  reason  for  disbelieving  the
      appellant was the lack of family support), and the  finding  that  the
      raid did not occur, when it has been accepted that it did as the basis
      for the sister's grant of asylum, persuade me that this decision  must
      be remade.

   7. The decision is set aside. The appropriate course is remittal  to  the
      first-tier tribunal. The case should be listed at  Bradford  before  a
      judge other than Mr Hemingway, whose findings  on  the  conversion  to
      Christianity will of course be the starting point for the next judge's
      considerations.




Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
