
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08288/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  M NGWENYA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A J Bradley, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 17 August 1969.  He has
    not asked for an anonymity order.  The SSHD refused  his  asylum  claim
    for reasons explained in a decision  dated  12  May  2015.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio allowed his appeal by decision promulgated on
    16 November 2015.

 3. The SSHD's grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  headed  as
    "Failing to resolve conflict on a material matter", and  run  (somewhat
    repetitively) as follows.  The appellant delayed his claim for 12 years
    after entering the UK.  The judge fails to address the point  that  his
    family history is said to  put  him  at  risk,  yet  his  parents  have
    remained in Zimbabwe throughout the time he has been in the UK  without
    any allegation of any difficulty.  The judge says  that  the  appellant
    would be detained at the airport because his  relatives  were  and  are
    political opponents of the regime, but no reasons are given as  to  how
    his parents are able to remain yet he is unable to return.   There  was
    evidence from a cousin of the appellant who has been  recognised  as  a
    refugee and is the UK chair person of an organisation, MGBDA, which  is
    said to be troublesome to the Mugabe government.  The judge  failed  to
    consider whether the appellant's explanation for delay  was  reasonable
    in light of his cousin's influence and status in the UK.   The  grounds
    next depend on  lengthy  extracts  from  CM  CG  [2013]  UKUT00059,  in
    particular paragraphs 176 - 179 and 191 - 195.  The judge  is  said  to
    have failed to identify why the appellant might still  be  at  risk  on
    return to the airport, so long after he left, in context of his  family
    history and the country guidance.

 4. On 1 December 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Haynes granted permission,
    on the view that while it might not have been an error of law  to  have
    accepted the appellant's explanation for failing to claim  asylum,  the
    same could not be said of the failure to address the country  guidance,
    or the fact that the appellant's family had lived in  Zimbabwe  without
    any problems from the authorities.

 5. Mr Matthews submitted along the lines of the grounds of appeal.

 6. Mr Bradley relied upon EM and others  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]
    UKUT 98, paragraph 266, which states that  country  guidance  regarding
    risk at the airport continues to be as set out in HS (returning  asylum
    seekers)  Zimbabwe [2007] UKAIT 00094.  He submitted that  the  crucial
    conclusions in the determination at paragraphs 52 and 53 on that  issue
    are justified by the judge's findings on the facts and the  application
    of HS.

 7. Mr Bradley's submission is well founded.  The broader and later country
    guidance leaves intact  the  point  on  which  this  particular  appeal
    succeeded.  The respondent's grounds disclose no error of  law  in  the
    judge's ultimate conclusion.

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           26 January 2016


