
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08854/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th October 2015                 |On 23rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                            Nasratullah Popalzai
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Claimant: Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pooler dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision to refuse him further  leave  to  remain  and
    removal directions under section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and was granted permission
    to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge  Lindsley.  The  grounds  upon  which
    permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

      i) It is arguable that the approach to  the  evidence  concerning  the
         Appellant's conversion to Christianity is unlawful or  applies  the
         wrong standard of proof, and that no weight has been given  to  the
         Appellant's own  testimony  despite  his  being  found  a  credible
         witness generally;

     ii) It is arguable that there may be a risk  in  the  Appellant's  home
         area; and

    iii) It is arguable that there is an error in relation to Article 8.

 3. Whilst permission was granted on the all  grounds,  it  is  clear  that
    Judge Lindsley despite granting permission was less impressed with  the
    second and third points above.

 4. I was provided with a Rule  24  response  from  the  Respondent  and  a
    Skeleton Argument from the Appellant's  counsel  (whom  was  unable  to
    attend), both of which documents I took into full consideration  before
    reaching my decision.

    Error of Law

 5. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I find that there was an error of law
    in  the  decision  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's   conversion   to
    Christianity and the risk on return in Ourzgan, such that it should  be
    set aside. I do not find in the Appellant's  favour  on  the  remaining
    ground. My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 6. In relation to the first ground, it is correct that the judge found the
    Appellant consistent in his evidence and  rejected  his  conversion  to
    Christianity solely due to an absence of supporting oral testimony from
    a Minister of Religion regarding his conversion. This  finding  however
    ignores the fact of evidence being  given  by  the  Appellant's  foster
    carer, the Appellant himself and documentary evidence  from  a  Pastor,
    all of which went to the fact of conversion.  As  Mr  Whitwell  rightly
    summarised, this is the Appellant's strongest ground of appeal. I  find
    that the judge's consideration of this crucial  issue  is  cursory  and
    lacks scrutiny  of  the  other  evidence  before  the  judge  going  to
    conversion, which omission is fatal given that if  such  conversion  is
    made out, then on return to Afghanistan a Christian convert would  need
    to hide their true faith and would be  at  real  risk  of  persecution,
    pursuant to NM (Christian converts) Afghanistan CG [2009]  UKAIT  00045
    at [66].

 7. Whilst the letter from the  Pastor  (at  page  11  of  the  Appellant's
    Bundle) simply states that the Appellant attends church,  and  did  not
    state the extent of the Appellant's journey to  Christianity,  I  noted
    the attendance at the Upper Tribunal of the  Pastor  whom  I  was  told
    would attend to give evidence in relation to this issue to  assist  the
    Upper Tribunal in its fact-finding, were an error of law to be found in
    the judge's analysis on this subject.

 8. I find that the judge committed  an  error  in  law  in  assessing  the
    Appellant's alleged conversion to Christianity such that this  discrete
    element of the determination should be set aside.

 9. In relation to the return to  Ourzgan  (or  Uruzgan  as  spelt  in  the
    Appellant's Skeleton Argument), the Appellant is correct  to  highlight
    that the judge noted that the country evidence confirms that there  was
    forced recruitment in that area historically (and the other  subjective
    findings of fact found in the Appellant's favour at paragraph 24).  The
    Appellant  contends  that  pursuant  to  [34]  of  HK  &  Ors  (minors,
    indiscriminate violence, forced recruitment by  Taliban,  contact  with
    family  members)  Afghanistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT   378   (IAC),   forced
    recruitment cannot be ruled out  and  the  level  of  violence  in  the
    Appellant's  home  area  is  a  'proxy  measure  of  risk  of  forcible
    recruitment'. However, Mr Whitwell contends  that  AK  (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) is still extant  Country  Guidance
    and as and until there is substantial evidence that changes that status
    quo, it remains good law.

10. The judge is criticised by the  Appellant  for  failing  to  take  into
    account two pages of the Appellant's 500-page bundle. The  document  in
    question  is  the  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  for  assessing   the
    International  Protection  needs  of  Asylum-seekers  from  Afghanistan
    (August 2013) and the pages in question were pages 248 and 259 (section
    3). This criticism fails however to mention that when  confronted  with
    the  sheer  size  of  the  bundle,  the  judge  asked  the  Appellant's
    representative to draw the judge's attention to evidence on  which  the
    Appellant relied. A perusal of paragraphs 30-32 mentions that  exchange
    and demonstrates incontrovertibly that  the  representative  failed  to
    refer the judge to the relevant UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines  that  are
    said to be so important today. It also became apparent that no Skeleton
    Argument was served on the Appellant's behalf referring to the relevant
    pages of the bundle either as would normally be expected in  an  asylum
    appeal.  Therefore,  Mr  Whitwell  is  right  to  submit  that  it   is
    inappropriate for the Appellant to criticise the judge for  not  noting
    evidence which  was  never  drawn  to  his  attention  when  the  judge
    explicitly asked that this be done and  expressed  that  he  could  not
    wholly familiarise himself with all 500 pages.

11. I found this issue a particularly troubling one.  Had  the  appeal  not
    concerned  international   protection,   in   circumstances   where   a
    representative  has  failed  to  draw  the  judge's  attention  to  key
    documentation in a 500-page bundle despite being  asked  to  do  so,  I
    would not have been prepared to entertain  the  Appellant's  complaint.
    However given the context of irreversible harm that  may  occur  should
    that assessment not be correctly discharged and given  the  seriousness
    of events that the judge already accepted  befell  the  Appellant,  and
    given that he is not to blame for any flaws in the presentation of  his
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, I am just prepared to find  that
    the failure to consider  the  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines,  although
    entirely inadvertent, do result in an error such that the  findings  in
    relation to this discrete issue should be set aside. However,  I  would
    remind the Appellant's representatives of the second headnote[1] in  HK
    & Ors, which may prove difficult to  overcome  if  the  Appellant  only
    seeks to rely  upon  two  mere  references  to  the  UNHCR  Eligibility
    Guidelines suggesting that forced recruitment continues in  Ourzgan  in
    general terms.

12. Turning  to  the  final  issue  of  tracing,  I  accept  Mr  Whitwell's
    submission that the Appellant said he left his mother in  a  particular
    village and that there is no basis to conclude that she would not still
    be there. As Mr Reza rightly accepted, in  light  of  TN,  MA  &  AA  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 40, the argument
    concerning alleged failures in  tracing  is  unlikely  to  succeed  and
    indeed does not succeed. There was nothing said to me that could  cause
    me to depart from that authority which I am bound by.

13. In the light of the above  findings,  I  set  aside  the  decision  and
    findings in relation to the issues of  the  Appellant's  conversion  to
    Christianity  and  the  risk  of  forced  recruitment.   The   findings
    concerning Article 8 shall stand.

    Decision

14. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  to  the  extent
    indicated.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  heard  by  a
    differently constituted bench.

    Anonymity

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and I  was  not
    asked to make one and do not see reason to do so at present.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

-----------------------
[1] While forcible recruitment by the Taliban cannot be discounted as a
risk, particularly in areas of high militant activity or militant control,
evidence is required to show that it is a real risk for the particular
child concerned and not a mere possibility.

