


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/08370/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields             |            Decision & Reasons          |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 26 May 2017                     |            On 31 May 2017              |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                     WMM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss V.Adams, Counsel, instructed by Barnes, Harrild and
Dyer, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:  Mr.Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. The appellant claimed protection from the respondent. He said he was an
   Eritrean national born in February 1995 and a member of the Eritrean
   Liberation Front (ELF). He had spent all his life in Saudi Arabia where
   his family had relocated. If returned to his country of nationality he
   faced a real risk of persecution because of his political opinions. He
   would also be required to undertake national service, the conditions of
   which would breach his human rights.

2. The respondent refused his claim in May 2015. The respondent accepted
   his account of being an Eritrean national who had spent his life in Saudi
   Arabia. The respondent did not accept that he had been a member of the
   ERF when living in Saudi Arabia or had he been an active member in the
   United Kingdom. Regarding national service, as he was not from Eritrea he
   was not evading service. The country guidance case of MO [2011] UKUT
   00190 referred to indefinite military service. However, the respondent
   referred to up-to-date information as indicating the Eritrean authorities
   have resorted back to an 18-month time limit for military service.

The First tier Tribunal

3. His appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on 25
   September 2015 and was dismissed. The judge found he would not be linked
   to the ELF. As he had never lived in Eritrea he would not be seen as
   someone who had left illegally. At paragraph 36 of the decision the judge
   found that he might well be required to perform national service but that
   it would not breach his article 3 rights. The judge referred to the
   country guidance case of MO [2011] UKUT 00190 and the subsequent 2014
   Danish report on Eritrea. He also referred to the subsequent comments of
   Prof Kibread criticising the way the information provided was handled.
   The judge acknowledged the wide-ranging dispute over the reliability of
   this report and the attendant country information. The judge decided to
   continue to follow the original guidance given in MO [2011] UKUT 00190
   and did not accept that the situation had changed. The judge did not find
   the appellant would be regarded with hostility by the Eritrean
   authorities.

The Upper Tribunal

4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes erred in his conclusion on articles 3
   and 4 given the conditions imposed on conscripts and the indefinite
   length of military service.

5. The appeal was heard by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis on 15 March
   2016. He concluded that there was a material error of law in the judge's
   assessment of the requirement to undertake military service in Eritrea
   given the conditions imposed on conscripts and the indeterminate length
   of service. MO and the earlier decision of MA (Draft evaders -illegal
   departures -risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UK AIT 00059 were distinguished as
   the present appeal concerned solely the requirement to undertake service
   and not evasion. The judge adjourned for further submissions on this
   issue.

Remaking the decision

6. The country guidance decision of MST and Others (national service -risk
   categories ) Eritrea CG [2016]UKUT 00443 was heard in June 2016. The
   earlier hearings did not have the benefit of this decision. It confirmed
   parts of the earlier country guidance cases and confirmed that the
   Eritrean system of national service remains indefinite. Both
   representatives agreed I was in a position to remake the decision given
   the absence of any material factual dispute.

7. This appellant would be within the applicable age limits for
   conscription. If someone of draft age is perceived as an evader, subject
   to certain exceptions such as family connections, then they face a real
   risk of persecution or ill-treatment contrary to article 3 or 4. Someone
   who had exited lawfully who faced national service on return would also
   be at risk of persecution or serious harm contrary to articles 3 or 4(2)

8.  Miss Adams relied upon this latest country guidance case. Mr.Diwnycz
   said that he was tied by the original decision which predated MST. He
   acknowledged the fact the appellant had lived all his life outside
   Eritrea was unlikely to materially change the risk he faced in relation
   to conscription or the treatment during service.

9. It was my conclusion that this appellant would face conscription on
   return. He had not left the country illegally because he was not born
   there nor had he ever lived there. However, at best his position on
   return would be akin to someone who had left the country lawfully but
   faced conscription. It is my conclusion in light of the country guidance
   cases the appeal succeeds. The appellant indicates he does no wish to
   serve in the military and consequently, he faces persecution by reason of
   imputed political opinions. Given the conditions of service he would be
   at risk of a breach of his articles 3 and 4 rights.

Decision.

The appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention and Articles 3 and 4.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

26th May 2017

