
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08602/2012
     AA/08616/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 26 June 2013                               |On 15 July 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                              mr mwandida meki
                              ms tamala gumboh
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Ismail, Counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. On 20 March 2013 First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge  Birkby  dismissed  the
appellants' appeals against a decision made by the  respondent  refusing  to
remove them by way of directions - having  refused  to  grant  them  asylum.
They were successful in obtaining a  grant  of  permission  limited  to  two
grounds, the first was an alleged error  in  the  treatment  of  the  expert
evidence from Dr Aguilar.  It was said that contrary to the  guidance  given
by the Court of Appeal in AM [2012] EWCA Civ 521 the judge had rejected  the
second appellant's account on the sole basis that the expert had  'accepted'
the appellant's account.  The second error was an alleged reliance  on  pure
speculation in coming to a conclusion that  the  second  appellant  probably
still had a Malawi  passport.  One  consequence  of  there  being  only  two
grounds in play is that the first appellant's case is entirely dependent  on
the outcome of the second appellant's case in respect of those  two  grounds
although I shall deal in para 10 with what might be said  to  be  either  an
extension of ground 2 or a separate ground.

Ground 1

2. The second appellant's asylum claim was based on fear of  persecution  in
Zambia due to her father's political activities and a fear that if  returned
to Malawi, she would  face  serious  difficulties  because  of  her  Zambian
origins and her lack of family ties in Malawi. It is common ground  that  if
the second appellant was properly found by the FtT judge not to be  at  risk
on return to Malawi, the grounds of appeal could not succeed.   Although  it
was accepted that the second appellant came  to  the  UK  using  a  Malawian
passport, it  was  argued  that  her  behaviour  would  cause  the  Malawian
authorities to regard her as having shown disloyalty or treason against  the
Malawian government and someone who could not be deemed  a  Malawi  citizen.
Particular criticism was made of what the judge had said a [52], in  dealing
with the second appellant. The judge said that it was clear to him that:


    "Dr Aguilar accepted the plausibility of  the  account  of  the  second
    appellant's history which I believe has  undermined  his  findings  and
    conclusions.  Dr Aguilar has  not  shown  an  awareness  of  the  above
    evidence of the second appellant's lack of credibility.   Consequently,
    I cannot rely on his conclusions.  Whilst it may be the case  that  her
    history  included  many  difficulties  for  her  father,  it  is   also
    apparently the case that Dr Aguilar is of  the  view  that  the  second
    appellant has been in the UK since 2004

3. I am not persuaded that the judge's treatment of  Dr  Aguilar's  evidence
was vitiated by legal error.

4. It is first of all clear that the FtT judge took careful account  of  the
evidence of Dr Aguilar within the context of the evidence as  a  whole:  see
[49].

5. Secondly, the judge's comments at [52] did not amount  to  a  failure  to
recognise that Dr  Aguilar's  evidence  was  independent  evidence  (such  a
failure would have violated the principles set out in AM), but  simply  that
the value to be attached to  this  report  as  evidence  was  undermined  by
certain aspects of it.


6. Thirdly, it is far from clear that Dr Aguilar's report had been  prepared
with reference to the respondent's Reasons for Refusal  (RfR)  Letter  dated
18 September 2012 relating to the  second  appellant.  Dr  Aguilar's  report
does state he has read the asylum interview and "supporting  documents"  but
despite stating that "the  client's  account  is  plausible",  there  is  no
reference in it to the adverse view taken of various aspects of  the  second
appellant's evidence in the  RfR.   This  RfR  letter  had  noted  that  the
background  evidence  did  not  support  her  or  her  brother's   (Kondwani
Gumboh's] claim regarding their father being  a  victim  of  persecution  in
Zambia because his problems had only been with one man in Zambia;  that  she
had not provided any evidence that their remaining  brother  in  Zambia  had
had any problems due to his relationship with their father nor  her  or  her
brother; that it was not accepted that she had arrived in the UK in 2004  or
that she was ignorant of the fact that she could make  a  claim  for  asylum
for some eight years after her arrival in the UK or  four  years  after  her
brother claimed asylum for her to  claim,  nor  why  she  had  waited  until
arrested to do so; that when she was first  arrested  she  had  indicated  a
willingness to return to Malawi; that her failure to  disclose  the  claimed
incident of rape including to her own family meant that this aspect  of  her
claim remained in doubt; and that n any event on her own  account  this  was
an isolated incident unrelated to the problems her father faced  in  Zambia.
Further, she had failed to demonstrate that the authorities in Zambia  would
be unable or unwilling to protect her.  In relation to her claim to have  no
family in Malawi, the letter noted that her brother Kondwani had written  to
state that their father was now living in Lronga, which was in the north  of
Malawi.  Dr Aguilar's report fails to address these findings or  reasons  to
any significant degree. In relation to the second  appellant's  father,  his
opinion that he "would face difficulties as a person who had never lived  in
Malawi" and that he "is likely to be perceived as a traitor to his  Malawian
heritage" was  clearly  made  in  ignorance  of  the  appellant's  brother's
evidence to the contrary. I shall deal with another aspect of  Dr  Aguilar's
report when addressing ground 2.

Ground 2

7. As regards the second ground  on  which  permission  was  granted,  which
alleged that the FtT judge erred in speculating about the  second  appellant
having renewed her passport, or having  returned  her  passport,  I  do  not
consider it is made out either.  A key part of the appellant's claim  to  be
at risk in Malawi was  that  she  had  lost  her  passport  and  the  Malawi
authorities would not renew it because she had been outside the country  for
seven years without proper registration with  the  Malawian  Consulate.   At
the hearing the respondent  had  challenged  her  claim  to  have  lost  her
passport and to face being denied a new passport.  She was  asked  when  she
lost the passport and she was vague and evasive about the  date,  about  why
she had not reported it to the police and why, even though her brothers  had
made enquiries about  Malawian  citizenship,  she  had  not  inquired  about
replacing her passport.  The judge also noted that  the  evidence  given  by
her brother to Judge Kopieczek in October 2008 was that she (the  appellant)
had been able to get her Malawian citizenship when in Malawi  on  the  basis
that she and her brother were  under  21  and  had  returned  their  Zambian
passports and  applied  for  Malawian  passports.   On  the  basis  of  that
evidence the judge was fully entitled to find that  the  appellant  had  not
shown her passport was lost and that if there were  any  doubts  as  to  her
Malawi citizenship she would have contacted the Malawian authorities in  the
UK.  Even if the judge might be said to have gone  beyond  the  evidence  in
stating that "in all probabilities" the appellant  still  had  her  Malawian
passport, that did not undermine the cogency of her reasons for finding  the
second appellant's claim about not being a citizen of Malawi  or  not  being
likely to be accepted as such by the Malawian authorities, not  credible.  I
would observe that  the  second  appellant  has  had  ample  opportunity  to
produce evidence to show that the Malawian  authorities  would  not   accept
either  that she had been issued with a Malawian passport  which  was  still
current or that if she applied to renew her passport she would be refused.

8. I do not  consider  that  the  FtT  judge  erred  in  not  attaching  any
significant  weight  to  what  Dr  Aguilar  had  to  say  about  the  second
appellant's nationality and passport problems. First of  all,  it  is  clear
that  significant  passages  of  Dr  Aguilar's  report  are  based  on   the
assumption that the second appellant would be returned or would return on  a
former (as opposed to a current) passport or without a valid passport or  in
some way illegally.  (In that respect  I  attach  no  blame  to  Dr  Aguilar
because the question posed to him was whether the second  appellant  "has  a
claim/or is likely to be given Malawian nationality or any rights  to  enter
and/or remain given her family's background and past events of  persecution"


9. Second, leaving aside the fact that it is a matter for the respondent  to
deal with the practical arrangements  of  securing  travel  documents  which
will  be  acceptable  to  destination  state  authorities,  on  the  judge's
findings of fact the appellant  would  not  be  returning  without  a  valid
passport or in some way illegally. Second, to the extent that  Dr  Aguilar's
report sought to maintain that the second appellant would have  difficulties
on return the report appears to be addressing the  situation  of  those  who
are suspected by local authorities of  not  being  Malawian  despite  having
passports and in that context they can face difficulties . However,  on  the
judge's findings the  second  appellant's  father  was  living  in  northern
Malawi and hence there was no reason to think the second appellant would  be
unable to satisfy the local authorities of her bona fides.

10. I  noted  earlier  that  there  is  a  further  argument  which  may  be
considered either as an extension of Ground  2  or  a  separate  ground.  It
seeks to argue that the judge was wrong to  confirm  the  respondent's  view
that the appellant was entitled  to  Malawian  citizenship  given  that  she
faced exclusion. In any event, however classified, it needs addressing.

11. Insofar as reliance is placed on this argument,  I  do  not  it  at  all
persuasive.  As regards the text of Malawian nationality law,  even  on  the
basis of the expert's opinion, the appellant would only  face  exclusion  if
she was either -

    (i)  a person who has shown disloyalty, or treason against  the  Malawi
         government;


    (ii) a person who had been resident outside Malawi for seven  years  or
         more without proper registration.


12. However, on the basis of the judge's findings of fact  (which  were  not
inconsistent  with  Dr  Aguilar's  analysis  of  Malawian  nationality   law
provisions)-

    (i)  there was no reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the  second
         appellant would be considered to have shown disloyalty, or  treason
         against the Malawi government; and


      ii) the second appellant had not shown she had  been  outside  Malawi
          for seven years - on the judge's findings she had not  shown  she
          was not there is  2008  and,  even  if  the  appellant  had  been
          accepted as being outside Malawi for seven  years,  she  had  not
          shown she lacked proper registration.


13. For the above reasons I consider that the grounds  of  appeal  have  not
been made out.


14. Accordingly my conclusion is that the FfT judge did not err in  law  and
his decision to dismiss the appellants' appeals shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

