
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08059/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                               NARESH SINGARAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit of Counsel instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Tamil national of Sri Lanka  born  on  29  September
    1984.  In May 2009 he came to the United  Kingdom  as  a  student  with
    leave until 10 June 2013.  In February 2014 the Appellant  returned  to
    Sri Lanka.

 2. On 21 March 2014 the Appellant returned to the United  Kingdom  and  on
    arrival claimed asylum because on his return to Sri Lanka he  had  been
    detained and ill-treated on  account  of  his  political  opinions  and
    ethnicity.  On 24 September 2014 the Respondent refused his  claim  and
    made a decision to refuse him leave to enter  and  proposed  directions
    for his removal to Sri Lanka.

The Respondent's Decision

 3. By a letter dated 19 September 2014 (the reasons letter) the Respondent
    gave reasons for her decision.  She noted the Appellant's claim that he
    had first become involved with the Liberation  Tigers  of  Tamil  Eelam
    (the LTTE) after the tsunami  of  December  2004.   He  had  worked  on
    projects to assist the victims with the Institute  of  Nursery  Studies
    and Gender Development.  He had undergone three months' basic  military
    training and had then  monitored  Sri  Lankan  military  movements  and
    reported on them to the LTTE.

 4. After his training he returned to work with the Institute and monitored
    Sri Lankan army  movements.   This  monitoring  of  military  movements
    continued until 2008, at which time  the  LTTE  was  losing  ground  to
    government forces.

 5. The Respondent noted the Appellant had said that  subsequently  he  had
    not had any problems with the Sri Lankan government  before  coming  to
    the United Kingdom as a student.

 6. The Appellant claimed that on return to Sri Lanka in February 2014  his
    fingerprints and photographs were taken and soon after he was  detained
    by the authorities and questioned about his links to the LTTE.  He  was
    accused of working for the LTTE while in the United  Kingdom.   He  had
    been detained for one month and nine days during which time he had been
    questioned, badly beaten and subjected to ill-treatment.

 7. He said a maternal cousin had arranged his release by  paying  a  bribe
    whereupon he went to his cousin's home  before  travelling  to  Colombo
    where he stayed at the home of an agent until returning to  the  United
    Kingdom.

 8. The Appellant said that subsequently the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  had
    detained his younger brother for two days and tortured  and  questioned
    him.  His brother had been released  on  intervention  by  the  village
    headman.

 9. The Respondent doubted the credibility of the Appellant's  account  and
    relied on the possibility that the injuries which the Appellant said he
    had suffered at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities could have been
    caused other than by torture and inhuman treatment.  It was  considered
    the Appellant could return to Sri Lanka either to his home area  or  he
    could re-locate elsewhere within Sri Lanka.

10. Reference was made to paragraph 356(7) of  GJ  and  Others  (Post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and the Respondent
    considered  the  Appellant  did  not  fall  into  any  of  these   risk
    categories.

11. There was no evidence of the Appellant's  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the Respondent  considered  his  private  life  by  way  of
    reference to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Appendix  FM
    including Section EX.1.  There were no other  circumstances  which  the
    Respondent considered would justify the grant  of  discretionary  leave
    under Article 8 of the European Convention outside the  Rules  and  the
    application was refused.

12. On 11 October 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds briefly recite the  Appellant's  narrative  and
    then  refer  to  background  evidence  about  Tamils  in   Sri   Lanka,
    maintaining the  Appellant's  credibility  and  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was in error.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

13. By a decision promulgated on 10  July  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Henderson dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

14. On 27 July 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lambert  granted  the
    Appellant permission to  appeal  noting  the  Judge  had  accepted  the
    Appellant had been detained and seriously ill-treated by the Sri Lankan
    authorities in 2014 and had taken part in Tamil demonstrations  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2013 but had nevertheless concluded there was no real
    risk of future persecution because his  Diaspora  activities  were  not
    likely to indicate a present risk to the Sri Lankan state.  He found it
    was arguable the Judge's reasoning for the decision that the  Appellant
    was not at risk on return to Sri Lanka was unclear, particularly as the
    Judge had accepted the Appellant's arrest in  Sri  Lanka  in  2014  was
    subsequent to his attendance of a demonstration against the Sri  Lankan
    government in the United Kingdom in 2013.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

15. The Appellant was present although he took no part in the  proceedings.
    There was no  additional  evidence  or  documentation  other  than  the
    judgment in MN (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 160 handed up for the
    Respondent.

Submissions for the Appellant

16. Mr Muquit submitted that the facts as found by the Judge had  not  been
    challenged.   The  Appellant  had  been  involved  in  Tamil   Diaspora
    activities in London in 2013 referred to at  paras.30  and  37  of  the
    Judge's decision.  She accepted these were a factor in his detention in
    2014 on return to Sri Lanka, referring in particular to paragraph 35 of
    her decision in which she found there was no evidence to challenge  the
    Appellant's credibility on the matter of his claimed detention and ill-
    treatment.  At paragraphs  36,  37  and  39  she  had  dealt  with  his
    activities in London and again had accepted he  had  been  involved  in
    demonstrations in November 2013.

17. Mr Muquit continued that at paragraph 45  of  her  decision  where  the
    Judge had turned to address  the  issue  of  the  future  risk  to  the
    Appellant, she had taken little or no  cognisance  of  the  Appellant's
    history.  She had focused only on his activities in the United  Kingdom
    subsequent to his return at the end of March 2014  and  had  failed  to
    give adequate, if any, weight to the Appellant's activities  in  London
    before he had left the United  Kingdom  for  Sri  Lanka  and  what  had
    happened to him after he had returned to  Sri  Lanka.   The  Judge  had
    accepted the Appellant's  narrative  and  the  proper  reading  of  the
    evidence and the jurisprudence meant that the Appellant would on return
    to Sri Lanka still be of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities and  so
    at risk.  At paragraph 47 the Judge had said that the  Appellant  could
    not demonstrate his Diaspora  activities  were  so  significant  as  to
    attract the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities but  it  was  these
    self-same activities in 2013 which had brought  the  Appellant  to  the
    attention of the authorities on his return.

18. The Judge had erred in not giving any weight to  what  the  Appellant's
    mother had said in her letters.  Even if self-serving, they  were  some
    evidence of the authorities'  continuing  interest  in  the  Appellant.
    Additionally, the Judge had  failed  to  address  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant's younger brother had been detained by  the  authorities  "in
    lieu" of him.  The content of the letters from the  Appellant's  mother
    were not inconsistent with the facts which the Judge herself had found.



19. At the hearing before the Judge the Appellant had led evidence that  he
    was a member of the British  Tamils  Forum.   He  said  the  Forum  was
    referred to in GJ.  This would appear to be at paragraph 23 of Appendix
    F.  In  the  circumstances  and  perhaps  wisely  he  made  no  further
    submissions on this particular  point.   He  concluded  the  Judge  had
    failed to put the evidence of what had happened to the Appellant in Sri
    Lanka in February- March 2014 before he  had  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom at the end of March 2014 in context and in  doing  so  she  had
    made an error of law.

Submissions for the Respondent

20. Ms Sreeraman relied on the Respondent's  response  of  26  August  2014
    under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
    The response was that the Judge had considered  all  the  evidence  and
    been entitled to conclude that despite the Appellant's detention he had
    not shown the Sri Lankan authorities had any current interest  in  him.
    The Judge was entitled to attach little weight to the evidence from the
    Appellant's mother because she had not had the benefit of  hearing  her
    oral evidence.  There  were  sustainable  reasons  for  concluding  the
    Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof  on  him  to  show  he
    would be at risk on return.  He had not shown he would be on any "watch
    list"  and  the  Judge  had  found  his  sur  place   activities   were
    insufficient to be perceived a threat to the  integrity  of  Sri  Lanka
    state by the Sri Lankan authorities.

21. The proper focus should be on whether the Appellant continued to be  of
    interest.  The Judge had given little weight to  the  evidence  of  his
    mother, noted there was no evidence of any warrant for his  arrest  and
    no mention of any formal procedures, such as  reporting  subsequent  to
    the release of the Appellant on payment of a bribe.

22. The Judge had considered the Appellant's sur  place  activities  before
    his return to Sri Lanka in 2013.  He had been detained and released and
    the Judge was entitled to conclude that his subsequent 2014  sur  place
    activities did not place him at risk on return now.  She  had  referred
    generically to paragraphs 335-352 of GJ being the paragraphs under  the
    heading "Diaspora Activities".

23. On the evidence the Judge was entitled to  reach  the  conclusions  she
    did.  The decision should stand.

Findings and Consideration

24. At paragraph 43  of  her  decision  the  Judge  found  the  Appellant's
    diaspora activities subsequent to his return to the United  Kingdom  at
    the end of March 2014 did not indicate he was likely to be perceived as
    a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state or to show  he
    has a significant role in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
    within the Diaspora.

25. In the next paragraph she rightly notes that past persecution is a good
    indicator of future risk unless there  are  good  reasons  to  consider
    otherwise.  She goes on to give little weight to the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's mother and comments that the Appellant's mental  health  is
    not in itself evidence he would be persecuted on return. She  concludes
    in the next paragraph that the Appellant's diaspora activities were not
    likely to  cause  him  to  attract  the  interest  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

26. This analysis does not take an overall approach to the  evidence.   The
    Judge  has  detached  the  evidence  about  the  Appellant's   diaspora
    activities subsequent to his return to the United Kingdom in March 2014
    from the rest of his account, all of the material aspects of which  she
    has accepted.  The passage of time  between  the  Appellant's  diaspora
    activities in November 2013 and his subsequent  detention  and  release
    coupled with further diaspora activities on his return  to  the  United
    Kingdom cannot safely be said  to  be  sufficiently  long  that  he  is
    unlikely any longer to be of interest and at  risk  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.

27. For  these  reasons  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  contains  a
    material error of law in its assessment of the evidence and failure  to
    look at all the evidence in the round  before  reaching  a  conclusion.
    Consequently, its conclusions are set aside but the findings of fact in
    respect of findings of fact are preserved.

Re-Making the Decision

28. On his return to Sri Lanka in February 2014, the Appellant was  not  on
    the "stop" list.  His photograph and  fingerprints  were  taken  as  he
    passed through the airport on his way home.  Within a matter  of  days,
    on 7 February 2014  he  was  detained  by  the  Criminal  Investigation
    Department (CID).  He was subjected to ill-treatment  described  in  an
    expert report of 14 December 2014 by  Dr  Izquierdo-Martin  which  also
    affected his  psychological  state  as  described  by  Dr  Dhumad:  see
    paragraphs 31-34 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

29. The Respondent states the Appellant's account of his release  does  not
    include  any  reference  to  normal  post-release  conditions  such  as
    reporting.  The Appellant's claim is that he was released on payment of
    a bribe and immediately travelled with an agent from his home  area  to
    Colombo.  There is no evidence in the file either at  interview  or  in
    the Record  of  Proceedings  or  in  paragraph  8  of  the  Appellant's
    statement to the issue of bail or other release conditions.   It  would
    appear the Appellant was  not  asked  about  these  and  therefore  the
    omission to make mention of them from the Appellant's point of view  of
    his immediate departure for Colombo on release cannot fairly  be  taken
    adversely against him.

30. I do not draw assistance from the judgment in MN.  There  are  material
    differences between the accounts of the Appellant and MN.  MN  came  in
    February 2012 and claimed asylum on the basis he had been kidnapped  in
    2009, some three and a half years before he came to the United Kingdom.
     In this case, the Appellant claimed asylum immediately  on  return  to
    the United Kingdom within less than eight weeks of being  detained  and
    tortured.

31. It  is  too  soon  after  the  recent  presidential  and  parliamentary
    elections in  Sri  Lanka  in  which  the  new  president  and  the  new
    government both come from a different part of  the  political  spectrum
    from the previous president and  government  for  any  changes  in  the
    situation on  the  ground  in  Sri  Lanka  to  be  reliably  evidenced.
    Accordingly, for the reasons well-expressed by the Judge  at  paragraph
    44 of her decision, the Appellant remains at real risk  of  persecution
    for his political opinion or ethnicity or both on return to Sri  Lanka.
    The appeal is therefore allowed on asylum  grounds  and  for  the  same
    reasons is allowed on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

32. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
    appeal do not think one is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law  such
    that its conclusions  (but  not  its  findings)  are  set  aside.   The
    following decision is substituted:-

         The appeal is allowed on refugee grounds.

         There can be no appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

         The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

         No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 04. xi. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

No fee was paid on the appeal and so no fee award is made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 04. xi. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

