
  [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
Aa/08353/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 March 2016                        |     On 7 April 2016                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     MP
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. K. Chandrasingh, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shergill, promulgated on 8 October  2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.


 2. I have made an anonymity direction continuing that made in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds challenge the judge's credibility findings.  It is claimed
    that the judge made findings based on his assumptions; placed too  much
    weight on the discrepancies in the appellant's screening interview  and
    asylum interview; and erred in relying  on  the  evidence  in  the  COI
    report of 7 March 2012 about the  procedure  used  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in issuing a summons and an arrest warrant.   I  find  that
    all the grounds raise an arguable error of law."


 4. The Appellant did not attend the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from
    both representatives following which I reserved my  decision,  which  I
    set out below with reasons.


Submissions


 5. In relation to the first ground of appeal,  that  the  judge  had  made
    findings  based  on  his  own  assumptions,  I  was  referred  by  Miss
    Chandrasingh  to  paragraph  [44]  of  the  decision.   The  judge  had
    considered only the earlier points when making this  finding.   He  had
    not considered the further evidence provided by the Appellant.   I  was
    referred to paragraph [12] of the Appellant's statement  regarding  how
    he had found out about B's involvement.  The judge had  not  considered
    the letter from the Appellant's uncle (page 38).  He had not considered
    the evidence in the round and  his  findings  were  based  on  his  own
    assumptions of how the police would act in Sri Lanka.


 6. In relation to the second ground of appeal, that the judge had erred in
    placing too much weight on discrepancies between the interviews, it was
    submitted that  too  much  weight  had  been  put  on  the  absence  of
    information in the screening interview.  I was referred  to  paragraphs
    [45] to [52] of the decision.  I was referred to  question  A2  of  the
    screening interview - the Appellant had  only  been  required  to  give
    brief details.  He had been heavily criticised for not  mentioning  his
    brother-in-law at the screening interview and  undue  weight  had  been
    placed upon this.  I was referred to the Appellant's statement, [16] to
    [18], and his asylum interview, Q62.  I was also referred to  the  case
    of YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 00145.


 7. In relation to the third ground relating  to  the  summons  and  arrest
    warrant, the judge had referred to the  evidence  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter regarding the court summons, paragraphs 20 and  21.   It
    was submitted that the way a summons was issued in Sri  Lanka  was  not
    specific, and the evidence on which the judge had relied which set  out
    the procedure did not describe a mandatory procedure.  The judge should
    not have relied on this.


 8.  In  relation  to  the  fourth  and  fifth  grounds  of  appeal   Miss.
    Chandrasingh relied on the grounds of appeal.


 9. In response Mr. Jarvis submitted that the grounds were little more than
    a disagreement with the findings of the  judge.   In  relation  to  the
    first ground, when challenging the factual findings, it  was  necessary
    to identify perversity, illogicality, or  a  material  error  of  fact.
    This was a high hurdle.  The judge had not applied his own  assumptions
    separate from the evidence.  Looking at the judgement as a whole it was
    a careful judgement with a structured  approach.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraph [70] where there was a global assessment of credibility.   He
    submitted that it was  not  necessary  for  the  judge  to  proceed  to
    consider section 8 in the light of these findings.


10. It was submitted that the judge understood that he needed  to  approach
    each matter separately.  I was referred to paragraphs [25] to [27] of Y
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1223.  The judge could look at the plausibility  of  an
    account but must avoid putting his own  cultural  or  national  concept
    onto the evidence.  It was necessary to look at  the  context.   I  was
    referred to paragraph [44] of the decision.  The judge had put it  into
    context and had found that on  the  Appellant's  own  evidence  it  was
    difficult to see why the police would have acted  in  that  way.   This
    alone was not determinative of the appeal but was one aspect which  was
    considered in line with the Court of Appeal in Y.


11. It was submitted that the judge was aware of the  Appellant's  evidence
    and had not missed anything.  He had considered the Appellant's father-
    in-law's letter, [61], and found that  it  was  more  problematic  than
    beneficial to the Appellant.


12. In relation to the second  ground  of  appeal,  a  screening  interview
    always formed part of the evidence.  YL held that the judge must direct
    his mind to the context of the interview and  must  take  into  account
    that claimants were giving brief  responses.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge had understood the context of the  screening  interview.   I  was
    referred to paragraphs [46] to [52].  His findings were lawful in  line
    with the case of YL.


13. In relation to the third ground of appeal, he submitted that there  was
    nothing in this.  I was referred to paragraph [21] of the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  The judge had not acted in a way which was  irrational
    or perverse.  The complaint was that the evidence was  vague  but  this
    was not an error of law, and there was no material error of fact.   The
    judge was entitled to draw on  that  evidence.   Where  the  judge  had
    talked about forgery that should be read as a reference to weight.  The
    judge had taken the proper approach set out in  Tanveer  Ahmed  by  not
    affording weight to the documents.


14. In relation to the fourth ground, this was just a disagreement and  the
    findings were open to the judge.  In  relation  to  the  fifth  ground,
    section 8, I  was  referred  to  paragraph  [70].   Given  his  earlier
    findings in this paragraph, it was arguably not necessary for the judge
    to proceed to address section 8.


15. It was submitted that the  case  of  GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319  (IAC)  did  not  bite.   The
    judge had found that the Appellant had not told the truth to the  lower
    standard of proof.  Being Sri Lankan in and of itself was  not  enough.
    There was no sur place claim.


16. In response Miss.  Chandrasingh  submitted  that  the  grounds  pleaded
    collectively showed a material error of law.  The judge had  relied  on
    drawing adverse credibility findings from the screening interview.   At
    the first opportunity in his asylum interview the Appellant  had  given
    all the details.   The judge had erred in giving too much  emphasis  to
    the screening interview to make a finding of adverse credibility  which
    made the whole determination unsafe.


Error of Law


Ground one

17. I have carefully considered paragraph [44].  This states as follows:


    "The interpretation I make when considering these points alone is  that
    the alleged police interest in the appellant seems somewhat  misplaced.
    Objectively, it is difficult to understand why the police consider  the
    appellant to be implicated in supporting B's alleged LTTE  activity  if
    the appellant had complied with registering B's residency from as  long
    ago as 2008.  That fact alone would seem to suggest the opposite;  that
    the appellant was innocent in any involvement with B.  If the appellant
    was giving refuge to the LTTE one would have thought  this  would  have
    been clandestine rather than in plain sight.  I find  it  difficult  to
    understand the police's  logic  in  pursuing  the  appellant  in  those
    circumstances.  These are  observations  as  of  course  the  appellant
    cannot answer for the police but they are important observations in the
    background context of the claims made."


18. I find  that  the  judge  has  not  made  findings  based  on  his  own
    assumptions.  As he states in the last sentence of this paragraph these
    observations are made "in the background context of the  claims  made".
    They are based on the Appellant's own evidence.  When the judge  states
    that he finds it difficult to understand the police's logic in pursuing
    the Appellant in those circumstances, the circumstances are those which
    the  Appellant  himself  has  described.   The  judge  is  not   making
    assumptions based on what he considers the police would do but  against
    the background of the claims before him.  He has not  applied  his  own
    assumptions separate from the evidence before him.


19. Further, it is necessary to look at the decision as a  whole.   I  have
    considered paragraph [70] in this context.  This states:


    "I have taken a global assessment of credibility (see R  (Sivakumar)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department 2003 UKHL 14, [2003]  1  WLR
    840).  I do not consider that it is necessary to further undermine  the
    accounts given by the appellant in light of all of my negative findings
    above.  However, given the delay in claiming asylum this further  moves
    the appellant's accounts away from any grain of truth  and  would  meet
    the condition under paragraph 339L (iv).  As I am obliged  to  consider
    issues relating to section 8 of the Asylum (Treatment of Claimants) Act
    2004 I note the following.  There is a significant  delay  between  the
    events in 2011 and the claim for asylum.  I  do  not  consider  that  a
    reasonable explanation has been put forward by the appellant as to  why
    he did not claim  asylum  earlier.   He  was,  so  it  is  claimed,  so
    concerned by the events of June 2011 that he was unable to complete his
    course.  The police continued to pursue him  during  the  ensuing  time
    period.  He was here studying so must have some degree of intelligence,
    common sense and general knowledge.  His wife would  have  had  contact
    with United  Kingdom  health  workers  and  other  officials  when  the
    children were born - either of them could have tried to find  out  what
    to do.  It is highly implausible that the appellant  did  not  have  an
    understanding of how to look for help from a lawyer or  otherwise  seek
    assistance in claiming asylum."


20. The judge has not just made his credibility findings based on paragraph
    [44].  He has  considered  all  of  the  evidence  in  the  round  from
    paragraphs [35] to [72] and  made  important  credibility  findings  in
    paragraph [70].  He has considered aspects of the claim separately, and
    his findings in paragraph [44] are just one aspect of the  claim  which
    was considered.  I have considered paragraphs 25 to 27 of  Y.   I  find
    that the findings in paragraph [44] are in line with the case of Y.   I
    find that the judge has "looked through the spectacles provided by  the
    information he has about conditions in the country in  question"  [27].
    His findings are made against the context of the Appellant's own  claim
    and I find that there is no error of law in  the  judge's  findings  in
    paragraph [44].


Ground two


21. I have carefully considered paragraphs [46] to  [52]  of  the  decision
    under the heading "Discrepancies in the interviews".  It is clear  from
    paragraphs [46] and [47] that the judge was aware of the context of the
    screening interview.  The judge quotes question 4.2 from the  screening
    interview.  The judge notes the response that is recorded  to  question
    4.2, and finds in paragraph [48] "Even taking account  of  the  matters
    that I have noted in the two paragraphs above I have concluded that the
    omission relating to X is significant, even when assessed at the  lower
    standard".


22. In paragraph [49] the judge gives further reasons for why he  considers
    the omission relating to X to be significant.  He states  that  one  of
    the reasons is because of the seriousness of what the appellant alleges
    has happened to X.  He states in paragraph [51] that he  was  satisfied
    that the Appellant would have been  aware  of  X's  disappearance  very
    shortly after it had happened.  He states "I  am  satisfied  that  this
    would have been a key part of the fear on  return  to  explain  at  the
    screening interview" [51].


23. In paragraph [52] the judge considers  the  explanation  given  by  the
    Appellant as to why X's disappearance was not mentioned, but he  states
    that he is not satisfied by the explanation and does  not  accept  that
    there was a plausible reason for not mentioning  the  disappearance  at
    the screening interview.  I find that the  judge  does  not  give  this
    issue undue weight but gives careful and considered reasons for why  he
    does not accept the Appellant's explanation for his failure to  mention
    X's disappearance during his screening  interview.   I  find  that  the
    judge has not erred in placing too much weight  on  the  discrepancies.
    He is fully aware of the context of a screening interview and makes his
    findings against the background of that context.  There is no error  of
    law in the judge's treatment of the screening interview.



Ground three


24. In paragraph [56] the judge states:


    "In terms of the summons, the appellant relies on there only being  two
    summons served.  That was confirmed in oral evidence.  They were served
    by the police.  I have taken  into  account  the  matters  set  out  at
    paragraph 20 and 21 of the refusal.  No other objective information has
    been provided to counteract the  legal  process  evidence  relating  to
    summons in Sri Lanka.  I am satisfied that the objective evidence shows
    that a summons has to be issued three times before an arrest warrant is
    issued".


25. I have considered the reasons for refusal letter, paragraphs 20 and 21.
     This sets out evidence from the British High  Commission  in  Colombo.
    One of the questions asked is "how many summonses are issued  before  a
    warrant for arrest is issued?"  The judge finds that  he  is  satisfied
    that this evidence shows that a summons has to be issued  three  times.
    I find that there is no material error of fact  in  the  judge  drawing
    this conclusion from the evidence at paragraph [21].  I  find  that  he
    was entitled to find in paragraph  [57]  that  "the  lack  of  a  third
    summons leads me to find that an  arrest  warrant  was  not  issued  as
    claimed".  The judge also states in paragraph  [56]  that  he  was  not
    provided with any information to counteract this evidence.  I find that
    the judge was entitled to make  these  findings  with  respect  to  the
    number of summonses.


26. It is further submitted that the judge erred in rejecting the  summons.
    The judge states that he has considered the objective evidence relating
    to  the  fraudulent  obtaining  of   summons.    He   refers   to   the
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's accounts and the lack  of  plausible
    explanations to conclude that the summons are not genuine "when  looked
    at in the round with all the  other  evidence".   He  has  afforded  no
    weight to these documents, which he is entitled to  do,  having  placed
    the documents against the background of the  rest  of  the  Appellant's
    account and the lack  of  plausible  explanations.   I  find  that  his
    approach is not contrary to Tanveer Ahmed.  The judge is not  satisfied
    that the Appellant has shown that the documents on which  he  seeks  to
    rely can be relied on, and he gives reasons for this finding.   I  find
    that there is no error of law in his consideration of the  summons  and
    arrest warrant.


Ground four


27. It is submitted in the grounds of appeal that the judge's findings "are
    contrary to his own findings" with reference  to  paragraphs  [63]  and
    [64].  I have found above that the judge has not made findings based on
    his own assumptions in paragraph [44] and I  find  similarly  that  the
    judge has not made findings based on his own assumptions in  these  two
    paragraphs.  In  paragraph  [63]  the  judge  considers  the  newspaper
    articles relating to an attack in  2009.   He  considers  the  evidence
    provided by the Appellant and finds that this aspect of the Appellant's
    claim "is highly  implausible  when  assessed  at  the  lower  standard
    looking at all of the evidence in the round".  It  is  clear  that  the
    judge has considered this aspect of the claim against the background of
    all of the evidence in the Appellant's case.


28. In paragraph [64] he considers the claim that B was in the  LTTE  at  a
    senior level.  Again he considers this  claim"looking  at  all  of  the
    evidence in the round".  I do not find that there is any merit  in  the
    claim that the judge has made findings on his own assumptions.  Neither
    do I find that these findings are contradictory to  the  judge's  other
    findings.


Ground five


29. It is submitted that the judge  erred  in  law  in  making  credibility
    findings based on the Appellant's delay.  I  find  that  a  reading  of
    paragraph [70] indicates that this is not the whole  picture.   I  have
    set out paragraph [70] in full above  (see  paragraph  19).   Prior  to
    considering section 8 of the judge states:


    "I do not consider that  it  is  necessary  to  further  undermine  the
    accounts given by the appellant in light of all of my negative findings
    above."


    He proceeds to consider section 8 as he is obliged to do.  He considers
    section 8 only after making findings based on the Appellant's  account.
    Prior to considering section 8 he refers to "all his negative  findings
    above".


30. I find that there is no error of law in the  judge's  consideration  of
    the Appellant's delay in claiming asylum.  He is  obliged  to  consider
    this and he has done so only after he  has  made  credibility  findings
    based on the Appellant's own account.


31. In relation to the case of GJ, given that the judge did not accept  the
    Appellant's account, and given that the Appellant has  not  claimed  to
    take part in any sur place activities, the judge was entitled  to  rely
    as he did on the part of the reasons for refusal letter which addressed
    the risk on return to the Appellant,  [73].   Given  that  he  has  not
    accepted the Appellant's account, he  is  entitled  to  find  that  his
    profile does not meet any of the categories set out in GJ by  reference
    to the reasons for refusal letter. Given  that  the  account  has  been
    rejected, the part of the Appellant's claim which is accepted  is  that
    he Sri Lankan and this is not in itself a reason to be granted asylum.




Notice of Decision


32. The decision does not involve the making of an error of law  and  I  do
    not set it aside.


33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 29 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



