
IAC-AH-sar-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08358/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 18th November 2014                |On 28th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                NASREEN BEGUM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Evans of Waddell Taylor Bryan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Birrell promulgated following a hearing on  23rd  January
    2014.  The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born  1st  January
    1953 who claimed asylum on 15th July 2013, having arrived in the United
    Kingdom as a visitor on 2nd November 2012.

 2. Judge Birrell dismissed the appeal on asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds.

 3. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and permission was granted.  At a hearing on 17th September 2014, after
    hearing representations from both parties, I found that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal disclosed  an  error  on  a  point  of  law  in
    relation to consideration of Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention
    on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).  Findings made by the First-tier
    Tribunal in relation to asylum, humanitarian protection and  Article  3
    were preserved and the hearing was adjourned for further evidence to be
    given in relation to Article 8.   The  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal, the grant of permission, and my reasons for setting  aside  the
    decision in relation to Article 8, are contained in my  decision  dated
    18th September 2014 which was promulgated on 24th September 2014.

The Hearing - 18th November 2014

Preliminary Issues

 4. The Appellant attended  the  hearing.   Miss  Evans  advised  that  the
    Appellant would be giving evidence as would her husband, Abdul Aziz, to
    whom I shall refer as the spouse, and her son, Nasir Saeed.

 5. Following the error of  law  hearing  further  documentation  had  been
    submitted by  both  parties.   Neither  party  objected  to  the  other
    submitting further evidence and it was therefore admitted.  The further
    evidence submitted by the Respondent under cover of  a  letter  of  6th
    October  2014  was  the  SET(F)  application  form  submitted  by   the
    Appellant's spouse dated 21st May 2012, and application details  for  a
    visit visa application made by one of the Appellant's daughters,  Naila
    Aziz dated 7th January 2014.

 6. The further evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellant  under  cover
    of letters dated 13th and 14th November 2014, amounted to an additional
    witness statement by the Appellant's spouse, a witness  statement  from
    Nasir Saeed, and medical evidence in relation to the Appellant and  her
    spouse.  Miss Johnstone had not received this evidence and the  hearing
    was therefore put back for this to be considered.

 7. When the hearing resumed both representatives indicated that they  were
    ready to proceed and there was no application for an adjournment.

Oral Evidence

 8. The Appellant and both witnesses gave evidence separately and  all  had
    the assistance  of  an  interpreter,  there  were  no  difficulties  in
    communication.

 9. The Appellant adopted her witness statement dated  14th  January  2014.
    Her spouse adopted his witness statement which is undated but contained
    at pages 58 and 59 of the Appellant's bundle, and his  statement  dated
    12th November 2014.

10. Nasir Saeed adopted his witness statement  dated  12th  November  2014.
    The Appellant and witnesses were questioned both representatives, and I
    recorded all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings, and  it
    is not necessary to reiterate them here.

11. In very brief summary the Appellant's case is that she would  still  be
    at risk if returned to Pakistan despite the findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal that she would not.  The Appellant's  spouse  has  been  given
    indefinite leave to remain in  this  country,  and  Nasir  Saeed  is  a
    British citizen.  The Appellant and her spouse have two adult daughters
    and four adult sons living in the United Kingdom.  One of those sons is
    awaiting the result of an asylum claim.  They have two adult  daughters
    living in Pakistan who they contend are in hiding.

12. The Appellant's spouse owns two houses in Pakistan and it was contended
    that these are unoccupied and locked up, as family members fear to live
    there because of the dispute with the Appellant's former son-in-law who
    in July 2010 shot and wounded  the  Appellant  and  her  daughter,  and
    killed the Appellant's grandson.

13. The Appellant and her spouse live alone and are looked after  by  their
    children in the United Kingdom and are dependent upon them.   Both  are
    receiving medication in the United Kingdom.

14. It was contended that contrary to the findings made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the Appellant's spouse had not obtained indefinite  leave  to
    remain by misrepresentation or deception.  The Appellant  claimed  that
    there would be nobody to look  after  her  if  she  had  to  return  to
    Pakistan and she cannot look after herself.

15. Nasir Saeed stated in his witness statement at paragraph 12;

         "In Pakistan they had a very comfortable life and if they  did  not
         have a fear then they will be happy to live there.  Now  with  what
         had happened and my father's health getting  worse  and  my  mother
         following the shooting and her  everyday  difficulties  it  is  not
         possible for them to return".

The Respondent's Submissions

16. Miss Johnstone submitted that the starting point for  consideration  of
    the appeal in relation to Article 8 should be the preserved findings of
    the First-tier Tribunal in which both the Appellant and her spouse were
    described as unimpressive witnesses and  they  were  not  found  to  be
    credible.

17. I  was  asked  to  note  that  following  submission  of  the  spouse's
    settlement  application  form  which  disclosed  he  had  said  he  was
    separated from his wife in Pakistan and that she had  refused  to  look
    after him, the Appellant and her spouse and her son, were  now  seeking
    to place the  blame  upon  the  legal  advisor  who  had  prepared  the
    application.  I was also asked to note that when  the  application  was
    made, the Appellant was in the United Kingdom and was not  in  Pakistan
    as had been indicated in the application form.  I  was  asked  to  find
    that the advisor was not at fault in  that  specific  detail  had  been
    submitted which could only have come from the Appellant or her  family.
    There was a conflict between the Appellant and her spouse as to whether
    when they lived in Pakistan they  were  separated  as  claimed  by  the
    spouse, whereas the Appellant in answer to question 90  of  her  asylum
    interview when asked the whereabouts of her husband stated "he was with
    me".

18. Miss Johnstone also submitted that there was  a  conflict  in  evidence
    between the Appellant and her spouse, in that the Appellant  in  answer
    to questions 105-106 of her asylum interview stated that the family  in
    Pakistan were not wealthy but not poor and had their own house and some
    farming land whereas the spouse had said in oral evidence that  he  had
    sold the farming land in 1993/1994.

19. I was asked to note in relation to  credibility  that  the  Appellant's
    spouse admitted in oral evidence that he had  undertaken  work  in  the
    United Kingdom in January 2013 after he had submitted  his  application
    for leave to remain as a dependant of his son Nasir Saeed.

20. Miss Johnstone submitted that the Appellant had a large extended family
    in Pakistan and that the visa application made by  Naila  Aziz  on  7th
    January 2014 gave her address  as  the  family  home  Afghan  Abad  and
    indicated that she had lived there "since long time"  which  conflicted
    with the claim made by the Appellant and Sponsor that the property  was
    deserted because family members feared to live there.

21. I was asked to find that EX.1 of Appendix FM could not be satisfied  as
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing  in
    Pakistan.  One of their homes in Pakistan had eight bedrooms,  and  the
    Appellant's spouse had confirmed that he received a pension, and  there
    was also finance available from relatives in the United Kingdom.

22. Nasir Saeed had given evidence that he had  remarried  and  his  second
    wife and his child both lived in  Pakistan  and  he  had  visited  them
    relatively recently and intended to do so again.

23. Miss Johnstone submitted  that  Article  8  should  not  be  considered
    outside the rules but if it was, I  was  asked  to  take  into  account
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (the
    2002 Act).  I was asked to note the Appellant cannot speak English, and
    has  had  a  precarious  immigration  status,  and  that  she  is   not
    financially independent.  I was asked to dismiss the appeal.

The Appellant's Submissions

24. Miss Evans did not accept that the Appellant's spouse had been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain by reason of deception or  misrepresentation
    and pointed out that in section 3 of the  application  form  there  had
    been disclosure that his  wife,  two  daughters  and  a  son  lived  in
    Pakistan so he was not contending that he had no relatives in Pakistan.
     I was asked to note that since that application was made his  son  who
    is living in Pakistan had travelled to the United Kingdom  and  applied
    for asylum and therefore the Appellant and  her  spouse  only  had  two
    daughters living in Pakistan.

25. I was asked to accept that there had been a misunderstanding  and  that
    before leaving Pakistan the Appellant and her spouse were living  apart
    because of the injuries sustained by the Appellant but they were living
    in adjacent houses with the Appellant being looked after by one of  her
    daughters and her spouse would spend most of the day  with  her  before
    returning to his own home next door for the evening.

26. In relation to the visa application made by Naila Aziz, I was asked  to
    note that she was required to give her permanent  residential  address,
    and it is the Appellant's case that  she  currently  does  not  have  a
    permanent address but is moving to different addresses within  Pakistan
    and therefore she had given the family home as  the  address.   Another
    explanation put forward on behalf of the Appellant was that Naila  Aziz
    had given that address because it was the address on her identity  card
    and passport.  I was asked to accept  that  the  family  home  was  not
    occupied.

27. Miss Evans submitted that the Appellant's spouse had only worked in the
    United Kingdom for a short period of time because his son, who had been
    financially supporting him, had lost his job.  The spouse  subsequently
    suffered a stroke which meant he could no longer work.

28. Miss Evans submitted that EX.1 of Appendix FM should be considered  and
    the appeal could be allowed on  this  basis  as  the  Appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with her spouse who is  settled  in
    the United Kingdom and there would  be  very  significant  difficulties
    faced by the Appellant and her spouse in  continuing  in  their  family
    life together in Pakistan, and such difficulties could not be  overcome
    or would entail very serious hardship.

29. I was asked to accept that both  the  Appellant  and  her  spouse  have
    medical issues and although it was not suggested that this appeal could
    succeed on medical grounds alone, this was  a  relevant  consideration.
    Miss Evans  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  spouse  had  been  given
    indefinite leave to remain in this country on the basis that he did not
    have family in Pakistan who could support him.

30. If the appeal was not  allowed  with  reference  to  EX.1,  Miss  Evans
    contended that it should be allowed with reference to Article 8 outside
    the Immigration Rules.  I was asked to consider  that  the  appropriate
    test as to whether it would be proportionate to remove the Appellant is
    one of reasonableness.

31. I was asked  to  accept  that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant's spouse to accompany her back to Pakistan, and that both the
    Appellant and her spouse are  dependent  upon  their  children  in  the
    United Kingdom and there is no-one in Pakistan  who  could  look  after
    them.  I was asked to take into account the medical evidence.

32. In relation to private life, Miss Evans  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    could not satisfy paragraph  276ADE  and  asked  that  I  consider  the
    private life of the Appellant's spouse  who  had  always  been  in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully.  If the Appellant had to return to Pakistan to
    make an entry clearance application, this  would  be  contrary  to  the
    principles outlined in Chikwamba [2008]  UKHL  40,  and  the  Appellant
    would be unlikely to succeed with  such  an  application  on  financial
    grounds, and she would not be able  to  rely  upon  EX.1  in  an  entry
    clearance application.

33. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

Preserved Findings

34. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal that are preserved in  relation
    to asylum, humanitarian protection and Article 3 are set out below;

         "22. The Appellant's claim to be at risk on return to  Pakistan  is
             underpinned by two facts which are central to the narrative in
             this case: her daughter Naila was unhappily married  and  then
             divorced and the incident of  27th  July  2010  in  which  the
             Appellant was shot and her grandson killed.  These  are  facts
             which are common and consistent throughout the accounts  given
             and supported by documentary evidence in  the  form  of  court
             records and medical evidence from Pakistan.  I am prepared  to
             accept that these events occurred.
         23.  Having accepted that they occurred I have considered whether I
             accept the Appellant's claim that these events put her at risk
             on return.  Taking the Appellant's evidence  in  the  round  I
             find that even  allowing  for  the  lower  standard  of  proof
             required, the Appellant has failed to prove the truth  of  the
             facts upon which she relies in relation to her risk on  return
             and thus in consequence  has  failed  to  prove  that  she  is
             entitled to be treated as a credible witness.  It  may  assist
             if I were to summarise some of the main reasons for my finding
             that the Appellant has failed to prove that she is entitled to
             be treated as a credible witness in relation to this issue  of
             risk on return.  However my summary should not be seen  as  an
             exhaustive list for my reasons for reaching  my  decision.   I
             would restate that I have taken into account the  totality  of
             the Appellant's evidence before reaching my  findings.   I  am
             also required by section 8 Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
             of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 to take into account as  damaging
             the Appellant's credibility any behaviour to which the section
             applies  and  I  am  satisfied  that  much  of  her  narrative
             undermines her credibility  by  falling  into  the  section  8
             category of behaviour.
         24.  I heard evidence from the Appellant and her husband about  the
             claimed continuation of the threats.  I found them both to  be
             unimpressive witnesses in that they were vague, evasive and in
             Mr  Aziz's  case  deliberately  refusing  to   answer   simple
             questions about whether he himself had  received  phone  calls
             since he had been in the United Kingdom or  whether  they  had
             been directed at other family  members.   Although  given  the
             opportunity more than once to answer this simple  question  he
             gave what can only be described  as  an  incoherent  response.
             The Appellant was also  vague  and  imprecise  when  asked  to
             specify whether  she  had  personally  been  threatened  since
             coming to the United Kingdom.   As  a  consequence  I  do  not
             accept that the Appellant has  continued  to  receive  threats
             from the family of Rashid.
         25.  The Appellant claimed that both  she  and  her  daughter  were
             threatened by Rashid and other family members with guns.  They
             neither report the matter to the  police  nor  do  they  claim
             asylum on arrival in the United Kingdom in November 2009.
         26.  The Appellant and her husband arrived in the United Kingdom on
             1st May 2012 and did not claim asylum although she claims that
             she  was  the  subject  of  threats  against  her  life.   The
             Appellant had no coherent explanation  for  this  when  cross-
             examined merely stating that she had thought about it.   I  am
             satisfied that she was familiar with the system having claimed
             asylum 20 years previously in the United Kingdom.
         27.  I note that the Appellant's daughter  claimed  asylum  on  the
             basis of largely the same facts as the Appellant  except  that
             she claimed that she also feared that  the  Appellant  herself
             would force her to return to her husband.  Naila's  claim  was
             refused and was not appealed and she returned to Pakistan.
         28.  On 1st October 2012, although claiming to be in fear  for  her
             life, the Appellant returned to Pakistan and had  no  coherent
             explanation for this when cross-examined by Mr Tan.
         31.  When the Appellant returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  2nd
             November 2012 again she did not  claim  asylum.   Indeed  when
             asked by Mr Tan she confirmed that she  had  no  intention  of
             returning to Pakistan and yet told the Immigration Officer  at
             Border Control that she had simply come to the United  Kingdom
             to visit her daughter.
         32.  Not only did the Appellant not claim asylum but  she  made  an
             application for leave on an entirely  different  basis,  under
             Appendix FM and it was only when that was refused in June 2013
             that the Appellant finally claimed asylum.
         33.  A number of the incidents described by the  Appellant  involve
             her son Yasir.  He, it is alleged, is  the  subject  of  false
             FIRs raised at the instigation of Rashid's family.   When  the
             Appellant's hearing was adjourned it was indicated  that  both
             he and his father would give evidence and yet  Yasir  did  not
             attend court and there was no explanation for his absence.   I
             note that although a copy of the FIR raised against Yasir  was
             produced he was able to leave Pakistan using his own passport.
              Therefore I am not prepared to rely on this document to  show
             that  there  is  any  interest  in  Yasir  arising  from   any
             complaints.
         34.  If I accepted that the Appellant was the  subject  of  threats
             which I do not it is  further  suggested  that  the  Appellant
             cannot be protected by  the  Pakistani  state  authorities  in
             relation to the threats made.  However, although I accept that
             there are issues in relation to the efficacy of the  Pakistani
             police which are set out in the COIS, in this case even on the
             Appellant's account the perpetrators of the incident  of  27th
             July 2010 were arrested, prosecuted and the  main  perpetrator
             has  been  sentenced  to  death.   This  does  not  show   any
             unwillingness on the part of the authorities to  act.   Indeed
             on the one occasion described by the Appellant when the police
             were slow to act, in relation to the complaint made in respect
             of Raja Qayyum in 2012 when the Appellant's son complained  to
             a judge the matter was pursued.  I note  that  the  conviction
             and sentence of her grandson's murderer stands and there is no
             evidence before me to  suggest  that  it  has  been  appealed.
             Therefore even if I were to accept that the Appellant has been
             threatened,  which  I  do  not,  I  am  satisfied   that   the
             authorities in Pakistan have shown a willingness to assist.
         35.  In conclusion therefore while I accept  that  the  Appellant's
             son-in-law has been convicted of murdering her grandson  after
             divorcing her daughter I do not believe that the Appellant  is
             at risk or indeed believes herself to be at risk from  him  or
             his  family  members.   I  am  satisfied  that  if  she   were
             threatened the authorities have shown a willingness to act  in
             her case".
My Conclusions and Reasons

35. In considering the issue of Article 8 and the  Appellant's  family  and
    private life in the United Kingdom I have taken into  account  all  the
    evidence placed  before  me  together  with  the  submissions  of  both
    representatives.  If a piece of evidence is not  specifically  referred
    to, this does not mean that it has  not  been  considered,  as  I  have
    considered all the evidence in the round.

36. In considering Article 8 in relation to the  Immigration  Rules,  which
    involves considering  Appendix  FM  in  relation  to  family  life  and
    paragraph 276ADE in relation to private life, the burden of proof is on
    the Appellant.

37. In relation to Article 8 outside the rules,  the  Appellant  must  show
    that she has established a family and/or private life and that  Article
    8 is engaged, and the Respondent must then show that the decision is in
    accordance with the law, necessary and proportionate.

38. I accept that the Appellant's spouse was granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on  17th  October  2012.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal when considering this  issue  did  not  have  before  it,  the
    settlement application form which was  subsequently  submitted  by  the
    Respondent under cover of letter dated 6th October 2014.  I  accept  in
    section 3 of that form there is a disclosure that the Appellant  is  in
    Pakistan as are her two daughters Farhat Yasmeen and  Naila  Aziz,  and
    her son Yasir Saeed.

39. I am however satisfied that an accurate portrayal  of  the  Appellant's
    spouse's circumstances in Pakistan was  not  given.   In  my  view  the
    application clearly indicated that the Appellant and  her  spouse  were
    separated, and the application indicated that the  Appellant  had  left
    her spouse and refused to look after him.  There is no mention  in  the
    application of  Yasir  having  employment  in  Pakistan,  although  the
    Appellant's spouse gave evidence to the First-tier Tribunal that  Yasir
    was in fact working.  The Respondent's case record indicates  that  the
    Respondent believed that the Appellant and her  spouse  were  separated
    and the other children were present and settled in the United  Kingdom.
    I am not  making  a  finding  that  the  Appellant's  spouse  committed
    deception, but I am satisfied that there was a misrepresentation of the
    circumstances, and when indefinite leave  to  remain  was  granted  the
    Respondent did not appreciate the correct position in Pakistan.

40. I am satisfied that the  Appellant's  spouse  owns  two  properties  in
    Pakistan and they have two daughters living in Pakistan, one of whom is
    married with children.   I  accept  Nasir  Saeed's  evidence  that  the
    Appellant has a brother and sister in  Pakistan,  and  her  spouse  two
    sisters.

41. I do  not  accept  the  Appellant  and  her  spouse  do  not  know  the
    whereabouts of their two  daughters.   I  find  that  they  communicate
    regularly by telephone, and it is not credible that they would not know
    their addresses.  I find that the Appellant's daughter Naila is  living
    at the family home which is why she recorded that address in  her  Visa
    Application Form in January 2014.

42. The finding by the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant would not  be
    at risk if returned to Pakistan is preserved,  and  I  also  make  that
    finding in relation to the Appellant's spouse, who would not be at risk
    if returned.

43. In considering Article 8 and the Appellant's family life, I must  first
    consider Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  I  note  that  on  14th
    November 2012, shortly  after  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    Appellant made an application for leave to remain under Appendix FM and
    this  application  was  refused  on  26th  June  2013.   The  Appellant
    thereafter made a claim for  asylum,  and  also  placed  reliance  upon
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

44. It  has  been  acknowledged  that  the  Appellant  cannot  satisfy  the
    requirements of Appendix FM in order to  be  granted  leave  to  remain
    either as a partner or as a dependent adult relative.   It  is  however
    appropriate to consider section EX.1, and I set out below  EX.1(b)  and
    EX.2;

    (b)  the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

    EX.2 For the purpose of paragraph  EX.1(b)  "insurmountable  obstacles"
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.

45. In considering whether there are insurmountable  obstacles  as  defined
    above, I take into account the finding that neither the  Appellant  nor
    her partner would be at risk if returned to Pakistan.  I find that both
    are receiving medication in the United Kingdom, but if  they  relocated
    to Pakistan the medication that they required would be  available.   It
    was not contended that this would not be the case.   In  oral  evidence
    the Appellant confirmed she had previously received  medical  treatment
    including an operation in Pakistan as had her daughter.   That  medical
    treatment had been paid for.  I have considered  the  medical  evidence
    which is contained  in  letters  from  Dr  Helen  Kavanagh  dated  13th
    November 2014.  The  Appellant  has  iron  deficiency  which  has  been
    corrected by receiving iron tablets and has made a good recovery.   She
    suffers from Vitamin D deficiency and she  has  been  given  Vitamin  D
    capsules and the prognosis is good.  The  Appellant  suffers  abdominal
    pain and hip pain, but she is not having any treatment  for  this,  and
    she is described as using a wheelchair for long distance.

46. The Appellant's spouse has Type 2 diabetes which is described as  being
    well controlled by medication.  He is on medication to thin  his  blood
    following a stroke and the prognosis is described as "fairly good".  As
    with the Appellant, the spouse suffers from Vitamin D  deficiency,  and
    is receiving treatment for this, and he suffers from  prostatism  which
    he has had for some years, and  had  surgical  treatment  for  this  in
    Pakistan.  The prognosis for  this  is  described  as  reasonable  with
    medication, but without any treatment  is  described  as  resulting  in
    ongoing urinary symptoms.

47. Miss Evans in oral submissions conceded  that  this  appeal  could  not
    succeed only on medical grounds, and I find that to be the case.   Both
    the Appellant and her spouse would be able  to  access  the  medication
    that they required in Pakistan, as they have done previously.   I  also
    find that adequate accommodation would be available.  The Appellant and
    her husband own two properties, one of which is of a substantial  size.
    They have family members in Pakistan who would be able  to  offer  them
    some assistance if required.  Both the Appellant and  her  spouse  have
    siblings living in Pakistan and they also have two daughters, and I  do
    not accept that the daughters are having to move addresses.

48. The Appellant's  spouse  gave  evidence  that  he  receives  a  pension
    although it is not clear why this is paid, as he indicated that it  was
    paid in the United Kingdom rather than Pakistan.

49. I find that finance would be available to the Appellant and her  spouse
    and could be provided as it has been in the past by their  children  in
    the United Kingdom.  I accept the evidence of Nasir Saeed at  paragraph
    12 of his witness statement when he referred to his  parents  having  a
    very comfortable life in Pakistan, stating that they would be happy  to
    live in Pakistan if they were not in fear.  The Appellant in  answering
    question 105 of her asylum interview, confirmed that  while  she  would
    not describe herself as wealthy, she was not poor.   In  oral  evidence
    the  Appellant  confirmed  that  they  had   previously   owned   three
    properties, one of which had been sold to finance the applications made
    for leave to remain.  If funds were required it would be  open  to  the
    Appellant and her spouse to sell one of the two properties they own  or
    rent it out.  I am however satisfied that even if they did not do that,
    adequate finance would be available for them from the United Kingdom.

50. The Appellant and her spouse currently live alone and although I accept
    that their adult children may call upon them, it is not  a  case  where
    they require 24 hour care.

51. In conclusion I do not accept this appeal can succeed with reference to
    EX.1 as I do  not  find  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's family life with her spouse continuing outside  the  United
    Kingdom.

52. In considering the  Appellant's  private  life  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, I consider paragraph 276ADE.  It is conceded on her behalf  that
    she cannot satisfy the requirements of this paragraph.  I find this  to
    be the case.  The Appellant has not lived in the United Kingdom  for  a
    sufficiently long period of time to engage this paragraph, and  I  find
    that her appeal cannot succeed with reference to  paragraph  276ADE(vi)
    because I do not find that there would be very significant obstacles to
    the Appellant's integration into Pakistan  if  she  had  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

53. Having found that this appeal cannot succeed with reference to  Article
    8 as contained in the Immigration  Rules,  I  find  it  appropriate  to
    consider Article 8 outside the rules  having  taken  into  account  the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in paragraph 135 of MM  (Lebanon)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985 which is set out below:

         "Where the relevant group of IRs (Immigration  Rules),  upon  their
         proper construction, provide a 'complete code' for dealing  with  a
         person's Convention rights in the context of  a  particular  IR  or
         statutory provision, such as in the case  of  'foreign  criminals',
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with that  code,  although  references  to  'exceptional
         circumstances'   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality exercise.  If the relevant group of IRs is not such
         a 'complete code' then the proportionality test  will  be  more  at
         large, albeit guided by the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg  case
         law".

54. I conclude that the Immigration Rules that  deal  with  deportation  of
    foreign criminals can be regarded as a complete code, but I  find  that
    not to be the case with Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.  I  therefore
    consider Article 8 using the five stage approach advocated by the House
    of Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 which indicates  that  the  following
    questions should be considered;

    (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?

    (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

    (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

    (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

    (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
         end sought to be achieved?

55. The decision in Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL  39  means  that  I  have  to
    consider the family lives of all members of the family,  not  only  the
    Appellant's.

56. I conclude that the Appellant has established a family and private life
    in the United Kingdom.  Her family  life  is  with  her  husband.   Her
    proposed removal will be an interference with her  family  and  private
    life such as to engage Article 8.

57. I find the proposed interference is in accordance with the  law,  as  I
    conclude that the Appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules  which
    set out the requirements for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

58. I find that the proposed interference is necessary in the interests  of
    maintaining effective immigration control, which in turn  is  necessary
    in order to protect the economic well-being of the country.

59. The main issue is whether the proposed interference is proportionate to
    the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  I take  into  account
    section 117B of the 2002 Act  which  states  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest.  It  is  also
    in the public interest and the interest of the economic  well-being  of
    the United Kingdom that a person seeking to remain in this  country  is
    able to speak English.  The Appellant has not demonstrated that she can
    speak English.

60. It is also stated in paragraph 117B that it is in the public  interest,
    and the interest of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom  that
    an individual seeking to remain here is financially  independent.   The
    Appellant is not financially independent.  The  Appellant's  spouse  in
    his oral evidence indicated that rent was being paid on their  property
    by the government.  It is not clear whether  this  meant  that  housing
    benefit was received, but it was clear that it was not  being  paid  by
    the Appellant and her spouse.

61. The case put on behalf of the Appellant by Miss Evans is that if  there
    are insurmountable obstacles to family life being  carried  on  by  the
    Appellant and her spouse outside the United Kingdom,  then  the  appeal
    should succeed under Article 8 because there is a different  test,  and
    the test is not insurmountable obstacles but a test of reasonableness.

62. Miss Evans made reference to Chikwamba and I do not find that this case
    can be equated with that decision.  In this case it is quite clear  the
    Appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules, so  she  is  not  being
    required to leave the country and apply for entry clearance simply as a
    matter of policy.  I would also point out what was stated in  paragraph
    33 of Sabir [2014] UKUT 00063 when the Upper Tribunal  was  considering
    removal of a female Appellant to Pakistan;

         "The likelihood  or  otherwise  of  her  being  able  to  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules for entry clearance  is  not  a  relevant
         consideration - see SB (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 28".

63. In considering proportionality  I  have  taken  into  account  all  the
    matters that I considered and referred to above when  considering  EX.1
    and insurmountable obstacles.

64. In my view the appropriate test  when  considering  proportionality  is
    that set out in paragraph 31 of VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5 when  the
    Court of Appeal approved a test set out by the  AIT  in  the  following
    terms;

         "if a removal is to be held disproportionate, what must be shown is
         more than a mere hardship or a mere difficulty  or  mere  obstacle.
         There is  a  seriousness  test  which  requires  the  obstacles  or
         difficulties to go beyond matters of choice  or  inconvenience.   I
         would respectfully endorse this.  The question in any one case will
         be whether the hardship consequent on removal will  go  far  enough
         beyond this baseline to make  removal  a  disproportionate  use  of
         lawful immigration controls".

65. In my view it is appropriate to place significant weight upon the  fact
    that the Appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I remind myself of paragraph 57 of Patel and Others [2013] UKSC
    72 which is set out below in part;

         "57. It is important to remember that Article 8 is  not  a  general
             dispensing  power.   It  is  to  be  distinguished  from   the
             Secretary of State's  discretion  to  allow  leave  to  remain
             outside the Rules, which may be  unrelated  to  any  protected
             human rights".

66. I find that to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom  would  not
    be disproportionate for the reasons given above.  It would be a  matter
    for her spouse as to whether he wished to remain in the United Kingdom,
    or return to Pakistan where he has lived the majority of his  life.   I
    do not find that it would be unreasonable to  expect  him  to  live  in
    Pakistan.  I find that the weight to be attached to the maintenance  of
    effective immigration control outweighs the weight to  be  attached  to
    the  wish  of  the  Appellant  to  remain   in   the   United   Kingdom
    notwithstanding that she cannot  satisfy  the  appropriate  Immigration
    Rules.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction.   It  was
confirmed before the Upper  Tribunal  that  there  was  no  application  for
anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.


Signed        Date       24th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed        Date       24th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
