
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08235/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 17 January 2017                            |On 07 February 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               r v (Sri lanka)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals, effectively with permission granted by the Court
    of Appeal, against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Manuel, dismissing his appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant
    him refugee  recognition.   The  appellant  appears  in  person  today,
    accompanied by his Catholic priest, the Reverend Peter Morgan, who  was
    a witness for him at the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The basis of the appellant's challenge to Judge  Manuel's  decision  in
    2014 is that as a person of Sinhalese ethnicity, she is biased  against
    all Tamils.  He complains that she made adverse  remarks  about  having
    disallowed a great many Tamil appeals already, and notes  that  between
    the adjourned hearing in December 2013,  and  the  resumed  hearing  in
    January 2014, the Judge took  her  annual  leave  in  Sri  Lanka.   The
    appellant's view is that 'he could not have justice  from  a  Sinhalese
    Judge', even if she is now a British citizen.   The  Reverend  Morgan's
    evidence is to the same effect: he is emphatic about the allegations as
    to the Judge's manner, and what she is alleged to have said.

 3. Those are very serious allegations against an  experienced  Judge,  who
    has taken the judicial oath.  The Judge has since retired and this  may
    have been one of the last cases on which she sat.  The  Judge  has  not
    had an opportunity to comment on these allegations,  since  efforts  to
    contact her in retirement have been unsuccessful. If she is  asked  now
    about the case, it is  most  unlikely  that  the  Judge  will  remember
    whether she made the observations relied upon, 3 years ago.

Procedural history

 4. This application has  been  in  the  system  a  very  long  time.   The
    appellant made his asylum claim to the respondent in November 2007  and
    it was refused on 24 February 2009.  The appeal was heard before  Judge
    Manuel on 5 December 2013 and 14 February 2014, and may well have  been
    one of the last cases she heard  before  she  retired.   Permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted and  on  2  July  2014,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul dismissed the appellant's appeal and upheld  the
    decision of Judge Manuel.

 5. The appellant appealed to the Court of  Appeal  which,  on  26  October
    2016, allowed the appeal for the reasons set out in  the  statement  of
    reasons quashing the decision of the Upper Tribunal in relation to  the
    fourth ground of appeal only, the appearance of bias.  In its statement
    of reasons, the Court of Appeal noted that the case was to be  remitted
    to the Upper Tribunal, the scope of the remittal being limited  to  the
    issue of bias and at paragraph 7 the Court continued

         "If upon remittal the Upper Tribunal concludes that the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal was tainted by the appearance of  bias  the
         parties agreed  that  the  appropriate  course  would  be  for  the
         appellant's appeal to be heard de  novo.   The  parties  considered
         that it would be desirable for a case management  hearing  to  take
         place in the case in order for the Tribunal to  give  consideration
         to what evidence is necessary in  order  to  determine  fairly  the
         allegation of bias and make constant directions."

 6. That is the unsatisfactory basis on which this appeal comes  before  me
    for  a  case  management  review,  over  9  years  after  the  original
    application was made, and 3 years  after  the  decision  of  which  the
    appellant complains.

 7. After discussing the matter with  both  parties  I  have,  reluctantly,
    concluded that in these circumstances the proper  outcome  is  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard completely
    afresh.  The limitation relating to the allegation of bias will not  be
    operative if it is heard afresh and all grounds may then be argued.

 8. The appeal decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date
    to be fixed, with no findings of fact or credibility preserved.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                Date:        6 February 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

