
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08003/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2017                            |On 07 February 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     UR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge  Rimington)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 12 May 2015 refusing her protection claim.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  28  July  1985.   She
    arrived in the UK on 4 October 2009 with a visa as a Tier  4  (General)
    Student  valid  until  September  2010.   Her  leave  was  subsequently
    extended to 22  September  2014.   On  23  January  2015  she  made  an
    appointment to attend the Asylum  Screening  Unit  and  did  so  on  17
    February 2015 when she claimed asylum.

3.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that in February 2007 she  moved
    to Anuradhapura to live with her brother and he  arranged  for  her  to
    take an English language course.  While travelling on a bus she  met  a
    man she came to know as GS and on one journey in  April  2007  the  bus
    broke down and she started to talk to him.  He was a Tamil studying  at
    the local technical college and his  family  came  from  Jaffna.   They
    exchanged  telephone  numbers   and   their   relationship   developed.
    Subsequently, there was a bomb explosion at Anuradhapura Airport  as  a
    result of an attack by the LTTE.  She tried to contact GS but there was
    no response.

4.   In November 2007 four CID  officers  came  to  her  home  and  she  was
    blindfolded and taken to an unknown location where  she  was  held  for
    four months.  She was questioned about GS and was told that it was  not
    his true name but she was unaware of his real identity.   She  did  not
    suspect he was involved with the LTTE and believed he was killed in the
    attack on the airport although this was  not  confirmed.   She  claimed
    that whilst detained  she  was  repeatedly  beaten  and  tortured,  her
    fingernails and toenails were pulled out and a bag full of  petrol  was
    put on her head and she was hit with a belt.  She had marks on her back
    from being burned with iron rods and cigarettes.

5.    She  was  transferred  to  Anuradhapura  jail  where  she  was   raped
    repeatedly by two men.  She was not charged and was not taken before  a
    court.  She was released in March 2008  when  her  brother  managed  to
    arrange bail for her.  The police dropped her, still blindfolded, at  a
    bus station and she travelled to her mother's home  where  she  was  to
    report to the police every week.  The police were very abusive but  she
    was not charged with any offence.  Her  mother  said  that  she  should
    leave Sri Lanka and instructed an agent to assist her but she could not
    at that stage get an offer of a college in the UK and as a  result  did
    not apply for a UK visa until September 2009, eighteen months after she
    was arrested on bail.  She arrived in the UK with her student visa on 4
    October 2009.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  and  her
    partner JA gave oral evidence.  The appellant confirmed  that  she  had
    attended college from 2009 to  2014  but  did  not  complete  the  CIMA
    course, having taken five out of nine papers.  She stopped attending in
    May 2014.  She had met her partner in April 2014 and their relationship
    began in January 2015.  She had not approached student services or  any
    counselling services for her mental health problems  when  she  was  at
    college nor did she register  with  a  GP  at  that  time.   She  first
    registered in June 2014 and confirmed  that  she  first  mentioned  her
    problems to her GP in March 2015, two  months  after  she  had  claimed
    asylum.

7.   The following medical documentary evidence was submitted in support  of
    the appeal: three letters written by her GP, Dr L Clarke, dated 3  June
    2015, 1 March 2016 and 22 March 2016, a  report  from  Dr  Lawrence,  a
    consultant psychiatrist, and a medical report from Professor Lingam.

8.   The judge set out her conclusions  at  [42]-[75].   In  the  course  of
    doing so, she considered the report of Professor Lingam  at  [45]-[51].
    He described the appellant's scarring and confirmed that those  on  the
    appellant's back were caused by heated metal equipment such as  a  thin
    metal rod but accepted that a medical expert in this  field  could  not
    scientifically differentiate between deliberately inflicted wounds (say
    at the third party's behest) or from wounds inflicted from any  trauma.
    It was his opinion that the cigarette burns were  consistent  with  the
    history given by the appellant but the  judge  noted  that  there  were
    inconsistencies  with  regards  the  appellant's  claim  regarding  her
    fingernails and toenails.  In her asylum interview she claimed that she
    had had her fingernails and toenails pulled out.  The  judge  described
    this as a very significant claim and one which it would  be  reasonable
    to expect the  appellant  to  relate  consistently,  particularly  when
    explaining it to a medical expert.  This had not been recorded  in  the
    history given by the appellant to Professor Lingam.

9.   It had been put to the appellant at the hearing  that  the  injury  was
    self-inflicted either on her own or organised through a third party but
    she had merely stated that this had not happened.  Professor Lingam had
    dismissed the possibility of self-inflicted injury  because  the  scars
    were in a position the appellant could not reach but  did  not  address
    the  possibility  that  a  third  party  was  engaged  but  the   judge
    considered, bearing in mind all the evidence,  that  that  was  a  real
    possibility.

10.  The judge then considered the letters from Dr Clarke,  the  appellant's
    GP, at [49]-[51].  She noted that it was only on 4  March  2015,  after
    her claim for asylum, that on the doctor's notes she was recorded as  a
    victim  of  torture.   This  information  had  clearly  come  from  the
    appellant.  The doctor added in his notes that he understood  that  she
    had been assessed by a doctor at Yarlswood and that  this  corroborated
    her history and physical examination whereas the judge  commented  that
    the rule 35 report in fact related the appellant's own account  of  her
    experience without any consideration of credibility.   The  judge  also
    noted that the appellant first registered with migraine problems  on  2
    February 2015 and that was her first encounter with a medical  practice
    in the UK despite having been here since 4 October 2009.  She commented
    that even if the appellant had not wished  to  discuss  rape  with  the
    doctor, it was open to her to discuss the injuries she claimed she  had
    received whilst in detention and their claimed effect but that she  had
    not done so.

11.  She considered the report of Dr Lawrence at [52] onwards.  It  was  her
    view that the report contained contradictions within the report itself,
    contradictions with the expert report of Professor  Lingam,  and  that,
    although part of the appendices stated that victims of PTSD could  have
    a delayed reaction, this was not addressed in the body  of  the  report
    itself [52].  She noted the  view  of  Dr  Lawrence,  when  considering
    whether it was possible that the appellant was simulating her symptoms,
    that he thought this to be  highly  unlikely  as  it  was  possible  to
    pretend to have a particular symptom but very difficult to  simulate  a
    complete syndrome containing a pattern of symptoms  which  all  had  to
    match, many of which were not intuitively obvious.

12.  The judge commented that the symptoms of PTSD were widely available  on
    the internet  and  that  the  appellant  had  not  sought  any  medical
    attention  until  after  claiming  asylum.   Dr  Lawrence  referred  to
    observing physiological symptoms during the appellant's description  of
    being in jail but did not actually describe what they  were  or  indeed
    whether this referred to Yarlswood or Sri Lanka.  The judge referred to
    HE (DRC - credibility and psychiatric reports) DRC [2004] UKIAT  000321
    and to the comment of Ouseley J that there were usually other obviously
    potential causes for signs of  anxiety,  stress  and  depression.   The
    judge also considered that Dr Lawrence's report appeared to stray  into
    assessing credibility [64] and noted his comment that the appellant did
    have PTSD and if what she described was not the  cause,  another  cause
    would have to be postulated  and  discovered  but  this  had  not  been
    explored.

13.  The judge identified inconsistencies within  the  appellant's  account,
    by way of example at [69]-[70].  She explained at [71] why she regarded
    the appellant's partner's evidence as carrying little weight.  She took
    into account the provisions  of  s.8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants) Act  2004.   The  appellant  had  not  claimed
    asylum on entry to the UK despite knowing of her problems at that point
    and asserting that she had come to the UK for  protection.   The  judge
    did not accept in the applications that she made for  leave  to  remain
    and her contact with the Home Office that she would not have raised her
    claim for asylum, particularly as she was  aware  of  her  problems  on
    entry and this was the reason why on her account she left Sri Lanka.

14.  Having considered  the  evidence  overall  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's credibility was damaged and that her account was undermined
    and not credible.  The judge did not accept that she  was  detained  or
    mistreated in Sri Lanka or that she fell within the risk categories set
    out in GJ and Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 319.  For these reasons the claim for asylum was dismissed as  was
    the claim for humanitarian protection.  The judge went on  to  consider
    the application on human rights grounds but was not satisfied that  the
    appellant could bring herself within  the  Rules  or  that  there  were
    adequate reasons for considering a  grant  of  leave  under  article  8
    outside the Rules.

The Grounds and Submissions

15.  The grounds are  very  lengthy  and  detailed.   They  are  not  simply
    grounds of appeal or even a skeleton argument, they are a full  written
    submission 24 pages long in response to a decision 18  pages  long.   I
    will summarise the grounds and identify the core issues  being  raised.
    Ground 1 argues that the  judge  erred  by  making  clinical  judgments
    concerning the medical findings of the GP.  In substance, it is  argued
    that the judge erred in that instead of assessing  credibility  in  the
    light of the medical evidence, she in fact  made  a  medical  diagnosis
    when she held at [66] that she did not accept that the appellant  would
    not have sought specialist professional medical help prior to  2014  if
    she had the difficulties she claimed.  Mr Butterworth relied in support
    of the general principle that  a  judge  should  not  make  a  clinical
    diagnosis on the judgment in R v Secretary of  State  ex  parte  Kharia
    [1998] INLR 71 where Jowitt J held that he did not see on what basis  a
    lay person was able to express a view on a medical  issue  without  the
    benefit of some medical advice.

16.  Mr Butterworth submitted that there were four significant  points:  the
    GP had met with the appellant  for  more  than  a  year,  he  had  been
    consulted as a medical doctor,   he  had  diagnosed  her  condition  as
    significant and referred her to psychiatric services and had  expressed
    a clear view that she had these medical conditions, whereas  the  judge
    at [66] was expressing the view that she did not.   He  submitted  that
    the judge had not simply made a finding on credibility but  had  sought
    to exercise a medical judgment when she was not in a position to do so.



17.  Ground 2 raises a similar issue arguing that the judge erred by  making
    clinical judgments concerning the medical findings of Dr Lawrence.   Dr
    Lawrence had reached a medical conclusion, finding that  the  appellant
    suffered from PTSD and this was a medical diagnosis.  He submitted that
    the judge had been wrong to go behind a clinical assessment and that it
    was not sufficient to refer to the fact  that  symptoms  of  PTSD  were
    widely available on the internet and that the applicant may have viewed
    those websites.  Dr Lawrence had  made  the  point  that  it  was  very
    difficult to simulate a  complete  syndrome  containing  a  pattern  of
    symptoms.  Mr Butterworth submitted that Dr Lawrence and Dr Clarke  had
    been the best qualified to make clinical findings as to whether or  not
    the appellant had PTSD or depression and the judge was not so qualified
    and had erred in doing so.

18.   Ground  3  deals  with  the  impact  of  PTSD  and  vulnerability   on
    discrepancies with regard to the evidence of  torture.  Mr  Butterworth
    accepted that the judge had mentioned the guidelines in [42] and  [43].
    The ground sets out the discrepancies identified in [46] and  [47]  but
    it is argued that there was a failure to take into account the  article
    produced in the appellant's bundle from  the  British  Medical  Journal
    ("BMJ") "Discrepancies and autobiographical memories - implications for
    the assessment  of  asylum  seekers:  repeated  interview  study".   Mr
    Butterworth also relied on dicta in JA  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of
    State [2014] EWCA Civ 450 on the potential for unfairness in relying on
    apparent  discrepancies  between  a  screening  interview  record   and
    subsequent evidence.  The screening interview,  the  asylum  interview,
    the rule 35 report, the GP letters and  two  expert  reports  were  all
    provided following meetings or interviews spaced  over  a  considerable
    length of time and the BMJ article indicated that  this  increased  the
    risk of an individual providing inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  as
    did the diagnosis of PTSD.

19.  Ground 4 relates to Professor Lingam's report and the consideration  of
    whether the  scars  were  self-inflicted.   The  judge  said  that  the
    appellant had a motive to self-inflict  her  injuries  where  Professor
    Lingam had said that there was no way of knowing  how  the  scars  were
    caused and did not address the  possibility  that  a  third  party  was
    engaged.   However,  Professor  Lingam   had   considered   alternative
    causation and had rejected that of self-infliction.

20.  Ground 5 relates directly to the issue of third party  infliction.   It
    is argued that the judge was wrong to reject Professor Lingam's  report
    on the basis that the history given by the appellant  was  inconsistent
    on the issue of injuries to toenails and fingernails and  that  he  did
    not address the possibility that a third party was engaged.  So far  as
    the matter concerning toe  and  fingernails  was  concerned,  this  was
    potentially a reason for finding the appellant not to be  credible  but
    the scarring report was not solely contingent on the  history  provided
    by  the  appellant  but  relied  on  the  assessment  of  the  clinical
    plausibility of the scars together with the account of the  individual.
    As far as the second point was concerned Professor Lingam could not  be
    expected  to  have  done  more  than  he  did  concerning  third  party
    infliction.  He had  considered  alternative  causes  and  applied  the
    Istanbul Protocol while accepting the limitation of  scarring  evidence
    in relation to third parties.  This did not render  his  report  of  no
    value, so Mr Butterworth argued, and did not permit little or no weight
    to be attached to it.  It was important to note that his conclusion was
    that the metal rod injuries were diagnostic of burn  injuries  and  the
    cigarette burns highly consistent with cigarette burn.

21.  Ground 6 argues in substance that the judge was wrong to attach  little
    or no weight to the expert medical reports  to  the  extent  that  they
    relied on information provided by the appellant.  The grounds summarise
    at para 40 where the judge highlighted the extent to which the  medical
    evidence relied  on  what  the  appellant  had  said.   Mr  Butterworth
    submitted that the medical evidence did not depend on  the  appellant's
    account but constituted independent experts making their  own  findings
    and expressing their own opinions.

22.  Ground 7 argues that the judge failed to consider the country  evidence
    regarding torture methodology.  In substance, it is argued that  weight
    should be given to evidence which is consistent with methods of torture
    known to be practised by relevant authorities and that the  appellant's
    evidence is consistent with the country evidence concerning Sri  Lankan
    torture methodologies.  The judge had failed to mention  this  evidence
    and had not compared it with the available country evidence.

23.  Ground  8  relates  to  the  judge's  comments  about  the  appellant's
    brother.  It is argued that the judge erred  in  her  analysis  of  the
    university stamp and of  the  letters  produced  in  evidence  and  had
    applied an excessively high standard  of  proof  by  expecting  further
    corroboration.  He submitted that when these  documents  were  properly
    analysed, there was a high degree of likelihood that they were reliable
    and genuine.

24.  Ground 9 deals with the judge's comments about the appellant's  husband
    at [70].  The grounds  argue  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the
    evidence in full, that in the light of her account  of  his  aggression
    and alcoholism and that she had been wrong to find that she  could  not
    accept that  the  appellant  or  her  mother  would  turn  to  him  for
    protection when coming to the UK.  The grounds argue that the rejection
    of this  evidence  amounts  to  inappropriate  reliance  on  subjective
    concepts of plausibility contrary to the guidance  from  the  Court  of
    Appeal in HK v Secretary of State [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.

25.  Ground 10 argues that the judge  erred  when  she  commented  that  the
    appellant  had  inadequate  knowledge  of  Anuradhapura  when  she  had
    provided detailed evidence about that city in her asylum interviews.

26.  In his submissions Mr Duffy adopted the respondent's rule 24  statement
    of 19 December 2016.  He submitted that the judge had made findings  of
    fact open to her on the evidence.  This was not a case  where  she  had
    fallen into the error identified in Mibanga v Secretary of State [2005]
    EWCA Civ 367 of compartmentalising the evidence.  She had not attempted
    to go behind the scarring or psychiatric evidence as such but had given
    reasons why she had  not  found  that  the  appellant  was  a  credible
    witness.  So far  as  the  evidence  from  the  GP  was  concerned,  he
    submitted that it was generally not for a GP to diagnose PTSD  and,  in
    any event, the GP had referred the appellant to a psychiatrist.

27.  The judge had given clear  reasons  for  her  findings.   She  had  not
    attempted a medical diagnosis but had explained why she  did  not  find
    the appellant's evidence to be credible.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant had burning injuries but the experts were not  able  nor  had
    they attempted to say who had  caused  the  injuries.   The  judge  was
    entitled to take account  of  other  matters  including  the  delay  in
    claiming asylum and the fact that the appellant had only sought medical
    advice after she had claimed asylum.  In substance, the grounds were an
    attempt to re-open issues of fact where the judge had reached  findings
    properly open to her.

Consideration of Whether the Judge Erred in Law

28.  The first issue raised in the grounds seeks to challenge  the  way  the
    judge dealt with the medical evidence and argues that she  went  beyond
    making findings on the credibility of the  appellant's  account  taking
    due account of the medical evidence and, in substance, made  a  medical
    diagnosis or a clinical judgment about medical evidence.

29.  Ground 1 focuses on the evidence from the GP which consisted  of  three
    letters dated 3 June 2015, 1  March  2016  and  22  March  2016.   When
    assessing that evidence the judge was entitled to consider the  content
    of that evidence and the extent to  which  it  reflected  the  doctor's
    opinion as opposed to recording what  information  he  had  been  given
    [49].  In this  context  the  judge  was  entitled  to  note  that  the
    substance of the information clearly came from the  appellant  or  from
    the doctor's understanding of what had been recorded by the  doctor  at
    Yarlswood.  When assessing this aspect of the evidence  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into account as she did at [51] that the GP  had  made
    no mention of the time the appellant had been in the UK  and  the  fact
    that she was not recorded as  being  a  victim  of  torture  or  having
    anxiety and depression until after her visa had expired and  after  she
    had made an appointment to claim asylum.

30.  The judge was also entitled to note that the appellant had delayed  for
    nearly a year between registering with the GP and claiming that she was
    a victim of torture and experiencing symptoms suggestive of PTSD and at
    [66] that the appellant had said at para 22 of  her  witness  statement
    that she had to leave Sri Lanka to save her life after being  detained,
    tortured and raped, but had not claimed asylum until  six  years  after
    entering the UK.  She had attended college with  student  services  and
    was in the country  with  free  medical  healthcare  but  she  had  not
    registered with a GP or sought treatment for PTSD.

31.  The judge was entitled to find that the appellant's claim that she  did
    not know she could claim asylum was not credible.  I am also  satisfied
    that the judge was entitled to comment that she did not accept that the
    appellant would not have sought specialist  professional  medical  help
    prior to 2014 if she had  the  difficulties  she  claimed.   I  am  not
    satisfied that this is a case where the judge made or attempted to make
    a medical diagnosis but where she has made adverse findings of fact  on
    the medical issues after considering the evidence as a whole.

32.  Ground 2 makes a similar  point  in  respect  of  the  findings  of  Dr
    Lawrence, arguing that the judge erred by  making  clinical  judgments.
    However, the judge had to assess Dr Lawrence's report and  opinions  in
    the context of the evidence as a  whole.   The  judge  highlighted  her
    concerns about this report in [52].  She noted that in  the  appendices
    it was stated that victims of PTSD could have a  delayed  reaction  but
    this was not addressed in the body of the report itself.  She also took
    into account the fact the appellant claimed in her screening  interview
    that she had depression in 2008 and her mother had sent  her  medicine.
    The judge was entitled to comment that she  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant would not have consulted a medical professional on this issue
    at an earlier stage.

33.  Dr  Lawrence  in  his  report  considered  whether  the  appellant  was
    simulating her symptoms and expressed the view  that  this  was  highly
    unlikely.  The judge dealt with this issue in [56] and was entitled  to
    take into account that the symptoms of PTSD were  widely  available  on
    the internet and  also,  importantly,  the  delay  in  seeking  medical
    attention until after claiming asylum.   The  judge  also  referred  to
    contradictions within the report and between the report  and  Professor
    Lingam's report [57].  These were also matters the judge  was  entitled
    to take into account when assessing the weight to be  attached  to  the
    report. Again, I am not satisfied that the judge was making a  clinical
    judgment as opposed to making an assessment of the evidence.

34.  So far as  the  question  of  discrepancies  raised  in  Ground  3  are
    concerned, there is no reason to believe that the judge was unaware  of
    the care  with  which  discrepancies  should  be  considered  in  cases
    relating to vulnerable appellants.   Indeed,  the  judge  had  reminded
    herself of this at the beginning of her conclusions in [42]  and  [43].
    The judge was also entitled to give weight to the concerns she set  out
    at [59]-[61] arising from the concern expressed by Dr Lawrence that the
    appellant found it impossible to concentrate on a simple course whereas
    she had undertaken a general English course and  proceeded  to  take  a
    health and social care course level 3 for two years.

35.  She also considered the contrast  in  Dr  Lawrence's  report  that  the
    appellant had experienced rape  and  had  subsequently  felt  helpless,
    hopeless and pointless whereas in the appellant's own witness statement
    referring to her current partner, she said that they were very much  in
    love and started living together very soon after  they  started  dating
    and that their lives were  with  each  other.   On  the  one  hand  the
    appellant was unable, according to the report, to experience joy  while
    on the other hand she was very much in love.  The judge commented  that
    the accounts to her mind appeared to conflict fundamentally.  She  also
    noted with regard  to  PTSD  that  Dr  Lawrence  had  made  generalised
    comments saying that the appellant had a  physical  reaction  when  she
    described her mistreatment in Sri Lanka but did not say what it was and
    that this was highly significant as it was very difficult to  simulate.
    The judge also commented that Dr Lawrence said that in  particular  the
    appellant's inability to study was a surprise to her  and  this  was  a
    classic symptom of PTSD but, as seen, the appellant was able  to  study
    and far from being unable to make decisions had decided to get married.



36.  The judge was also entitled to  take  into  account  at  [62]-[63]  the
    inherent difficulties for psychiatrists to treat what  he  observes  is
    objectively verified, than  it  is  for  the  description  of  physical
    conditions, because they are more readily feigned as set out in HE.  In
    summary, I am satisfied that the judge gave clear reasons  for  finding
    that Dr Lawrence's report only carried very limited weight.

37.  Grounds 4 and 5  deal  with  the  issue  of  scarring  as  set  out  in
    Professor  Lingam's  report.   This  issue  is  covered  at  [45]-[48].
    Professor  Lingam  accepted  that  the   medical   expert   could   not
    differentiate  between  deliberately  inflicted  wounds   from   wounds
    inflicted from any other  trauma.   The  judge  accepted  that  it  was
    Professor Lingam's opinion that the appellant could not have  inflicted
    the burn injuries herself as they were out of reach but the  point  the
    judge was making at [48] was that he did not  address  the  possibility
    that a third party was engaged.  The judge considered, bearing in  mind
    all the evidence, that this was a real possibility.  That was an  issue
    for the judge to assess and it was not  a  matter  on  which  Professor
    Lingam had sought to express an opinion.

38.  Ground 6 challenges the judge's decision to attach little or no  weight
    to the expert report of Dr Lawrence, the GP's letters and the  rule  35
    report to the extent that they rely  on  information  provided  by  the
    appellant.  I am not satisfied that the judge erred in this  way.   The
    judge  was  entitled  to  make  the  point  about  the  extent  of  the
    information given by the appellant and its relevance in the  weight  to
    be attached to the medical report.  The grounds contained an  extensive
    citation from R (on the application of AM) v Secretary of State  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 521 but I am not satisfied that the judge fell into the  error
    of rejecting the medical reports simply because they were based on  the
    appellant's own information.  The judge was obviously  aware  that  the
    authors were independent medical  practitioners  expressing  their  own
    views.  It was for her to assess those views and consider them  in  the
    context of assessing the appellant's credibility.

39.  In AM the Court of Appeal was considering the issue  of  whether  there
    was independent evidence of torture and at [30] made the point  that  a
    requirement of evidence was not the same as  a  requirement  of  proof,
    conclusive or otherwise, and that whether evidence amounted  to  proof,
    on any particular standard (and the burden and  standard  of  proof  in
    asylum cases was not high) was a matter of weight and assessment.  I am
    satisfied that when the judge was considering the medical evidence, she
    did not fall into the errors set out in the grounds  but  was  weighing
    and assessing the evidence.

40.  Ground 7 argues  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  country  evidence
    regarding torture  methodology.   I  am  not  satisfied  there  is  any
    substance in this ground.  There is no reason to believe the judge  was
    not  well  aware  of  the  torture  methods  used  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities and, in any event, she did not base  her  decision  on  any
    inconsistency with the background evidence.

41.  Ground 8 relates to the issue concerning the name  of  the  appellant's
    brother.  The judge commented in [67] that the witness  statement  from
    the brother was in one name and her representative had googled academic
    names from a university in Anuradhapura and found someone by that  name
    whereas in the screening interview a different name was used  and  that
    the name signed on the letter was without  explanation  different  from
    that of the stamp.  She  regarded  the  witness  statement  as  lacking
    credibility and serving to undermine the appellant's account.

42.  Mr Butterworth made submissions based on the documents he had  produced
    to the effect that  it  was  clear  that  the  academic  was  the  same
    individual as the appellant's brother.  However, in substance, this was
    a re-argument of an issue of fact  and  I  am  not  satisfied  that  it
    amounts to an error of law.  In any event, the judge  was  entitled  to
    comment that the witness statement made no  mention  of  the  brother's
    detention, merely that his address had been located as opposed  to  the
    appellant's account at interview that he had been taken in  two  and  a
    half years previously by the authorities and held for a  few  days  and
    questioned over her disappearance.

43.  Ground 9 relates to what the judge had to  say  about  the  appellant's
    husband in [70].  I am not satisfied that this ground raises any  issue
    of law but seeks to re-open an issue of fact.  It was for the judge  to
    assess what inferences should be drawn from the matters she had set out
    in [70].

44.  Similarly ground 10, referring to the fact that the appellant  provided
    detailed evidence of the city in Anuradhapura, simply raises issues  of
    fact and does not raise any properly arguable point of law.

45.  The grounds, therefore, do not satisfy me that the judge erred  in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.  I am  not  satisfied  that
    she fell into the error of making her own clinical diagnosis on medical
    matters. The judge was required to consider the medical evidence in the
    context of the evidence as a  whole.   The  appellant's  grounds  raise
    numerous challenges to the way the judge dealt with the evidence but in
    substance they are an attempt to re-open and re-argue issues of fact.

46.  In summary,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  reached  findings  and
    conclusions properly open to her for the reasons she gave.



Decision

47.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  its  decision  stands.
    The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal  remains  in  force
    until further order.



Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

