
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08916/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |               Decision and Reasons   |
|On 22nd July 2015                     |Promulgated                           |
|                                      |On 13th August 2015                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                                     E K
                             (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Mayman, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who has been assessed  as  born
   on or around the 24th April 1998. He appeals,  with  permission,  against
   the  decision  of  Judge  Shimmin  to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the
   respondent's decision to refuse him asylum and remove him from the United
   Kingdom.

2. Judge Shimmin outlined the basis of the appellant's claim for  asylum  at
   paragraphs 12 to 22 of his decision:

      12. An outline of his claim is that he is of Tajik ethnicity  and  the
          family moved to Kabul when he was aged 9.  He has 5 siblings.  His
          father is an administrator in  the  Education  Ministry  and  well
          known in political circles.  His father had  been  imprisoned  for
          his political activities when younger.  The appellant did not have
          any details of his father's political activities either now or  in
          the past.

      13. The appellant's  parents  were  involved  with  an  orphanage  and
          sometimes  he  would  reside  there.   He  enjoyed  playing  music
          particularly the ghichak and  violin.   He  was  enrolled  in  the
          Afghan National Institute of Music.

      14. The appellant  recorded  some  music  on  YouTube  and  people  in
          Afghanistan began to recognise who he was.  He  began  to  receive
          threats from people through telephone calls saying that because he
          played music he was un-Islamic.

      15. As the appellant's family was struggling financially he wanted  to
          help them and so he would play in a band and be invited to play at
          the parties given by influential people in Afghanistan.  At  first
          his family did not know he was doing this.

      16. People at the parties would also act inappropriately towards  him,
          touch him and this would end in fights.  Sometimes people threaten
          him and on one occasion he was hit in the face.

      17. The appellant first went abroad to play with the Institute when he
          was aged 10.  He went to play once in Oman and South Korea and  on
          three occasions in the USA, the last being in the winter of  2013.
          On 24 April 2014 an application was made  for  the  appellant  and
          several other musicians to play in the UK.   A  Tier  5  visa  was
          granted.  The appellant came to  the  UK  and  played  in  various
          locations including the Festival Hall in London.

      18. The appellant and a fellow child musician  decided  they  did  not
          want to return to Afghanistan and so on  the  last  day  of  their
          visit to the UK they ran away from the hotel where the school were
          staying.  After a few weeks later they both  informed  the  police
          that  they  could  not  return  to  Afghanistan.   The   appellant
          initially gave the police a false name before providing them  with
          the correct information.

      19. The appellant's headmaster attempted to get him to return but  the
          appellant refused.  The appellant's father spoke  to  him  on  the
          telephone and told him that his headmaster had tried to get him to
          blackmail the appellant to return to Afghanistan.   The  appellant
          refused to return and he stayed with a distant relative who  lives
          in the UK.  That relative could only accommodate the appellant for
          a limited period and he now lives with foster parents.

      20. The appellant last spoke to his father 21 days before the hearing.
           Because of problems the family  had  moved  to  another  area  of
          Kabul.  The appellant knows the name of  that  area  and  has  his
          father's telephone number although there  was  no  reply  when  he
          telephoned a few days ago.

      21. The appellant fears that if he returns to Afghanistan  the  people
          who made threats against him for playing music or  refusing  their
          sexual advances  will  kill  or  harm  him.   He  also  fears  the
          government because of his father's previous  political  activities
          and because, as a prominent musician, he has brought shame on  the
          country by claiming asylum.

      22. The appellant arrived in the UK on 14 May 2014 and claimed  asylum
          on 28 July, 2014.

3. Judge Shimmin's reasoned findings are set out at paragraphs 27 to  50  of
   his decision:

      27. The respondent accepts the appellant's identity and that he is  an
          Afghan national.  It is also accepted that he is  an  accomplished
          musician who has represented his country.

      28. The appellant's age is disputed but I do not find it necessary  to
          make a finding in that regard because at either age he  remains  a
          minor for some time to come.  Despite being an unaccompanied minor
          there is a decision to remove him.   This  is  because  he  is  in
          contact with his parents in Kabul and can return to them.

      29. Whether the appellant was 14 or 15 at the date of  his  claim  for
          asylum and at his asylum interview, he was a child and I take this
          fully into account when assessing his credibility.

      30. There is before me the expert report of Mr  Tim  Foxley  dated  11
          February, 2015.  The expertise of Mr Foxley is not  challenged  by
          the respondent and I accept, from his curriculum vitae, that he is
          well qualified to the report on matters relating to Afghanistan.

      31. Mr  Smith  acknowledged  in  his  submissions  that  much  of  the
          appellant's story is plausible in that it  is  in  line  with  the
          background evidence.  I am satisfied this is a correct analysis.

      32. It is accepted that the appellant is an accomplished musician  who
          has played in several countries with his fellow musicians from the
          Afghanistan National Institute of Music.

      33. In reaching my findings in this appeal I have considered section 8
          of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act
          2004 and behaviour by the appellant to which that section applies.
           When he surrendered himself to the police the  appellant  gave  a
          false name to the authorities of a country where  he  was  seeking
          international protection.  This is a breach of s.8 and I  find  it
          damages the appellant's credibility.  However, I take  fully  into
          account the appellant's lack of maturity find that his actions  in
          this regard do very limited damage to his credibility.

      34. I  find  the  appellant's  account  in  respect  of  his  father's
          imprisonment at the time of the Najibullah regime is credible.   I
          make the same positive finding in respect of his  claim  that  his
          father has a  low  level  administrative  role  in  the  Education
          Ministry.  The appellant has not attempted to bolster his claim in
          this regard by elevating his father's position.  Furthermore, what
          the appellant  states  is  regarded  as  plausible  by  Mr  Foxley
          (paragraph 18).

      35. With regard to the appellant's  claims  to  have  been  approached
          inappropriately at parties Mr Foxley states (paragraph 22):

          My biggest concern in relation to music and  your  client  is  the
          pervasive sexual abuse subculture known as "Bacha  Bazi"  which  I
          would describe as something between prostitution  and  paedophilia
          and which takes place in the context of music and  dance  parties.
          I think it highly plausible that this is the musical context  into
          which your client has been unwittingly inserted  and  is  now  the
          cause of the indirect threats being directed at him, as I describe
          below."

      36.  Mr  Foxley  says  the  appellant  has  described  very  plausibly
          attending parties where he has played music and has been asked  to
          dress as a girl and then been sexually  abused.   He  goes  on  to
          state (paragraph 23):

          ...  Traditionally, women are not allowed to dance  in  public  in
          Afghanistan.  Bacha Bazi  is  a  known,  documented,  practice  of
          dressing up young boys in women's clothing  and  forcing  them  to
          perform  at  adult  male  parties  -  dancing,   playing   musical
          instruments.


          ...  The most disturbing thing is what happens after the  parties.
          Often the boys are taken to hotels and sexually abused.


          The men behind the practice are often wealthy and powerful.   Some
          of them keep several bachas (boys) and use them as status  symbols
          - a display of their riches.  The boys, who can be as young as 12,
          are usually orphans or from very poor families.


          (Qobil, R., 'The sexually abused dancing boys of Afghanistan', BBC
          News, 8 Sep. 2010)


      37. It is reported by Mr Foxley that, although illegal, bacha bazi  is
          on the increase and tolerated by the authorities, even  encouraged
          within some important power groups and individuals.  At  paragraph
          25 he states:

          ...  I suggest that these reports add weight to Master K's  claims
          that government pressure (or at any rate, pressure from  committed
          officials currently within government circles)  might  be  brought
          onto himself and his family, directly or indirectly, and also that
          officials, including police, may be unable, or unwilling - or even
          complicit - to take steps to protect him.


      38. Bearing  in  mind  the  appellant's  musical  ability  I  find  it
          reasonably likely that he has played at such parties and that,  in
          the light of the objective evidence and Mr Foxley's opinion, I  am
          satisfied to the  lower  standard  that  the  appellant  has  been
          approached inappropriately.  I find it also reasonably likely that
          the appellant has been abused and threatened when he has  declined
          to cooperate and indicated that he would report the occurrences to
          the police.  Bearing in mind  the  background  evidence  that  the
          police are involved, or at least conniving, I find  it  reasonably
          likely that the appellant and his father would  not  receive  help
          from that quarter.

      39. The appellant's representatives asked Mr Foxley for his opinion on
          the  threat  to  the   appellant   from   the   government.    The
          representative's question and his reply are set out  at  paragraph
          26 as follows:

             Master  K  has  stated  that  his  headmaster's  brothers  are
             government  ministers.   Please  can  you   comment   on   the
             possibility of the  authorities  being  aware  of  Master  K's
             actions in claiming asylum in the UK and whether they would be
             interested in taking action against Master K  on  his  return?
             Please can  you  comment  on  whether  the  Afghan  government
             operates a  form  of  a  list  of  people  arriving  at  major
             airports?


               I note that the  Afghanistan  National  Institute  of  Music
               states on its website homepage that it is part of the Afghan
               Ministry of Education.  I find it highly plausible that your
               client's headmaster has family members also  in  government.
               If the headmaster is aware  of  your  client's  actions  and
               intentions regarding asylum, then any  relevant  authorities
               might quite  easily  be  made  aware,  particularly  if  the
               headmaster wishes  any  action  to  be  taken  against  your
               client. I cannot  specifically  comment  on  the  nature  of
               security and processing arrangements made at  Kabul,  but  I
               would be surprised if there was no form of vetting the names
               of people arriving in Kabul - particularly if  a  government
               body or  individual  had  a  keen  interest  in  a  specific
               individual.

      40. Mr Foxley is then asked to comment on how safe it may be  for  the
          appellant  to  return  to  Kabul  given  that  he  was  threatened
          previously while living there and has received no protection  from
          the police.  Mr Foxley stresses the corruption and poor record for
          efficiency and capability in the Afghan police.  He  accepts  that
          the appellant would receive no helpful response from  the  police.
          They would have no interest in protecting the appellant and  might
          even be complicit in the sexual abuse.

      41. The summary of conclusions in Mr Foxley's report are as follows:

          34. Your client provides highly convincing and unpleasant  details
              of sexual  abuse.   But  I  think  his  understanding  of  the
              "political" impact on his father might  be  slightly  confused
              because he might himself not understand  the  full  impact  of
              what may be going here.(sic)  At the risk  of  speculating,  I
              think that this case is about sexual abuse taking place within
              some official power networks within some aspects of the Afghan
              government.  In the time available to produce this report I am
              not resourced to go into further detail about governments  and
              the practice of 'bacha bazi'.  But bacha bazi should  be  seen
              in the same light as prostitution and paedophilia  rings.   If
              this is exposed it might  have  any  number  of  ramifications
              within the Afghan government.  I suspect this is the  sort  of
              practice that President Ashraf Ghani  would  have  no  problem
              with clamping down on.  This  would  put  a  lot  of  people's
              careers, reputations and incomes at stake.  If your client  is
              seeking asylum and is prepared to speak  clearly  about  bacha
              bazi, this is at least highly embarrassing for  your  client's
              headmaster, even if  he  is  not  directly  complicit  himself
              (which I would  actually  also  find  plausible).   All  these
              issues risk coming to light in the context  of  your  client's
              asylum case.  I find it plausible that  your  client  and  his
              family could be at some risk of persecution in Kabul.


          35. I feel the Home Office is unduly focusing on "inconsistencies"
              (passport dates, claiming asylum at the earliest moment,  etc)
              in your client's case,  in  fact  everything  other  than  the
              implications and import of the highly disturbing sexual  abuse
              aspect.  I am sure that the Afghan government as a whole  does
              not consider your client to have left the  country  illegally,
              but this is surely verging on irrelevant.


          36. This could  become  a  highly  sensitive  political  issue  in
              Afghanistan.  In addition, it might be a very difficult  issue
              for Master K and his family to speak about and come  to  terms
              with.   Although  in  Afghan  society,   certain   groups   or
              individuals are certainly inclined to "look the other way"  or
              even encourage it, there is much shame attached to bacha  bazi
              for the young participants and this could easily  transfer  to
              the family and to other individuals implicated.


      42. From the above I conclude that the appellant  is  really  only  at
          risk if:

       a) he continues to play at parties which could possibly be bacha bazi
          parties;

           b) he reports to the authorities and/or speak out to  the  media
              about those who have assaulted him at bacha bazi parties.

      43. I find that if on return  to  Afghanistan  the  appellant  remains
          silent about these matters he has at not established that he would
          be at real risk of serious harm.

      44. It is with some regret that I must make this  finding  because  it
          means the offenders will continue to go un-reported and punished.

      45. With  regard  to  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  has  received
          threatening telephone calls for simply playing  music  Mr  Davison
          was not able to direct me to any evidence  that  anyone  had  been
          persecuted for such activities.  If  the  problem  was  serious  I
          would have expected there to be reports of  attacks  on  musicians
          including the Institute and its adult musicians and teachers.

      46. In his report (paragraph 21) Mr Foxley states that music  is  much
          more widespread and accessible inside Afghanistan but the issue is
          not  straightforward  as  the  country's  culture  is  still  very
          conservative.  Attempts to bring versions of 'Pop Idol" to  Afghan
          TV lead to death threats to at least one female  Afghan  performer
          whom it was thought had danced too inappropriately.  I  find  that
          this is a far worse breach of the country's  conservative  culture
          and traditions than that perpetrated by the appellant.  The female
          performer was performing music to a very  wide  audience  and  the
          complaint  was  about  dancing  rather  than  the  music  she  was
          performing.  Furthermore, this  'offence'  was  perpetrated  by  a
          woman, which appears to be more serious than such activities by  a
          man.  Threats were made but they were not carried out.

      47. Having carefully considered all the  available  evidence  in  this
          regard  I  find  the  appellant,  particularly  as  he  approaches
          maturity, will not be at real risk of serious harm when performing
          in public in Afghanistan.  He will simply have to be careful about
          where he performs.

      48. I have considered these restrictions on the life of the  appellant
          in holding his tongue in respect of bacha bazi parties  and  where
          he plays his music in the light of the caselaw  on  homosexuality.
          Mr Davison acknowledged that he could not compare the  appellant's
          musical talent/activities to homosexuality but submitted  that  it
          was 'not far short'.  Requiring a person to act  contrary  to  his
          normal behaviour in order to avoid persecution has  been  examined
          by the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  I find  in  the
          appellant's case the discretion that the appellant would  have  to
          exercise   is   not   sufficiently,   unreasonable,   serious   or
          debilitating as to substantially hamper his way of life.   I  find
          he can reasonably be expected to tolerate this situation.  It will
          ease as he becomes an adult.

      49. Taking the above conclusions into account I find on the  facts  as
          established, that the appellant would not  face  a  real  risk  of
          persecution on return to  Afghanistan  for  a  Refugee  Convention
          reason and, especially given the high threshold of  conduct  which
          is necessary to find  that  he  would  face  torture,  inhuman  or
          degrading treatment, I find that rights  under  the  Human  Rights
          Convention with respect to Article 3 would not be infringed by his
          removal.

      50. For the same reasons I find  the  appellant  is  not  entitled  to
          humanitarian protection under Paragraph 339C of Cmnd 6918.

4. Two grounds of appeal are raised against the  above  reasoning.  I  shall
   take them in what I consider to be ascending order of merit.

5. It is argued that the judge erred in holding that it  was  reasonable  to
   expect the appellant to abandon his career as a musician so as  to  avoid
   "persecution" on account of  his  alleged  membership  of  "a  particular
   social group". However, I reject the premise upon which that argument  is
   based. Whilst apparently conceded by the respondent in the  'Reasons  for
   Refusal Letter', I do not accept that as a matter of law  a  professional
   musician is member of 'a particular social group'. Whilst it is debatable
   whether musical talent is the product  of  nature  (and  thus  an  innate
   characteristic) or of nurture,  the  decision  to  earn  a  living  as  a
   professional musician is  simply  a  career  choice.  Thus  it  was  that
   McCloskey J accepted  the  Secretary  of  State's  contention  that  "the
   Refugee Convention does not protect a right to  pursue  a  profession  of
   one's choice" [MSM v SSHD [2015] UKUT 00413 (IAC), at paragraph 50].  The
   distinguishing feature of that case was that the appellant  risked  being
   persecuted, not as the result of  his  chosen  career,  but  due  to  his
   imputed political opinion. The Tribunal thus concluded  that,  "the  fact
   that the imputation of political opinion arises in  the  context  of  the
   Appellant's chosen profession is immaterial and incidental".  That  is  a
   feature which in my view clearly distinguishes it from the facts  of  the
   instant case.

6. It is true that the appellant's case was in part put upon the basis  that
   public performances of music were considered by many in Afghanistan to be
   'un-Islamic'. However, this implies that such  performances  are  pursued
   professionally rather than for the private satisfaction and enjoyment  of
   the performer. The other basis upon which the appellant's  case  was  put
   was that he was at risk from those for whom he had performed in the past.
   However, that risk did not arise from the appellant being imputed with  a
   political opinion. Rather, it arose from a desire on the  part  of  those
   who might wish to harm him to prevent  their  sexual  abuse  of  children
   being exposed. That brings me neatly to  the  ground  of  appeal  that  I
   consider has rather more merit.

7. It will be recalled that  Judge  Shimmin  concluded  that  the  appellant
   would be at risk if he reported the abuse that he and others had suffered
   to the authorities. It follows from the fact that he thereafter dismissed
   the appeal that he must therefore have overlooked the  appellant's  claim
   to have already done so [see  paragraphs  6  and  9  of  the  appellant's
   statement dated the 26th November 2014]. Given that the judge found  that
   the appellant was a generally credible witness, Mrs  Mayman  argued  that
   there was no basis upon which he could or  would  have  disbelieved  this
   particular aspect of the appellant's account. I agree with that analysis.
   Indeed, Mrs Pettersen did not seek to  persuade  me  otherwise.  She  did
   however argue that the judge's error was immaterial given that it was the
   appellant's case that the police had not followed up his complaint.  That
   does not in my view provide a sufficient answer to  the  argument  of  Mr
   Foxley, upon whose evidence Judge Shimmin concluded  that  there  was  at
   least a  contingent  risk  of  harm  to  the  appellant  upon  return  to
   Afghanistan. Mr Foxley's evidence  was  to  the  effect  that  there  are
   powerful people in Afghanistan who would seek to silence the appellant if
   they considered that he was willing to place their careers,  incomes  and
   reputations at stake by reporting matters to the authorities. I therefore
   conclude that the judge made a material error of law and I set aside  his
   decision. In remaking that decision,  I  preserve  each  of  the  judge's
   factual findings save that I am satisfied that the appellant has  already
   placed himself at risk of "serious harm", for the purposes  of  paragraph
   339C of the Immigration Rules, by making a report to  the  Afghan  police
   about occurrences at the various bacha  bazi  parties  at  which  he  has
   performed. Moreover, in view of Mr Foxley's evidence that the police  may
   be complicit in such occurrences (which Judge Shimmin again  accepted)  I
   am satisfied that the appellant could not avoid that risk  by  relocating
   within Afghanistan.

Notice of Decision

8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  dismiss  the  appeal  is  set
   aside and is substituted by a decision to allow the appeal on the  ground
   that the decision is  not  in  accordance  with  paragraph  339C  of  the
   Immigration Rules in relation to the granting of humanitarian protection.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly



