
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08473/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 28 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     B K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie (counsel) instructed by Middlesex Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant. I do so on the basis of  the  minority  of
the appellant's children and to preserve the  anonymity  direction  made  in
the First-tier.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Farmer  dated  on  13  November  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 7  September  1979  and  is  a  national  of
India. On 22 May  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Farmer  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  9  December  2015  Judge  Andrew
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "In view of the guidance in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT
    418 (IAC) I am satisfied that there is an arguable error of law in this
    decision in that the appeal could not be  properly  determined  without
    the social services file  and  the  police  reports.  In  view  of  the
    existing country information in relation to India I do not consider  it
    to be an arguable error of law that the matter  was  not  adjourned  in
    order to obtain a country experts report. Further, it  is  an  arguable
    error of law that the Judge failed to take into  account  the  evidence
    produced by the respondent's representative on the day of the  hearing.
    Indeed this is not referred to in the documents taken into  account  by
    the Judge at paragraph 9 of the decision. Further, it is arguable  that
    the Judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant was not credible when she had successfully  obtained  a  non-
    molestation order and prohibited steps order against her husband."

The Hearing

6.    (a)   Ms Direi,  counsel  for  the  appellant  moved  the  grounds  of
appeal. The first ground of appeal relates to  an  adjournment  request  and
relies on the case of Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
(IAC).  At [5] of the decision, the Judge  records  an  adjournment  request
and gives her reasons for refusing the request. Ms Dirie told  me  that  the
Judge's refusal of the adjournment request deprived the appellant of a  fair
hearing. Ms Dirie focused on a social services report which, it  was  hoped,
would be available at the end of November 2015 (the case  was  heard  on  12
November 2015). She told me that  the  social  services  report  would  have
addressed a number of the Judge's (adverse) credibility findings, and  could
have confirmed that the appellant is a victim of domestic violence  who  has
pursued an extramarital affair. Ms Dirie told me that  the  social  services
report would disclose that there are  concerns  about  the  welfare  of  the
appellant's two children, and  that  the  production  of  that  evidence  is
likely to result in a different outcome to the appeal. She told me that  the
refusal of the request to adjourn  prevented  complete  evidence  about  the
core aspects of this case from being placed before the Judge.

    (b)    At [30] the Judge rejected the appellant's account of pursuit of
an adulterous relationship. Ms Dirie argued  that  the  Judge's  conclusions
amounted to a material  error of law because of a failure  to  take  account
of evidence which  was  placed  before  the  Judge  (the  second  ground  of
appeal).  Ms  Dirie  produced  an  "immigration  case  history"  which   the
respondent lodged (and relied on) at the hearing. The  second  page  of  the
"immigration case history" indicates that  the  appellant  was  living  with
Rajinder Singh in September 2013 when an immigration raid  was  carried  out
at his house, and that she was found to be pregnant when  encountered  there
by immigration officers.  At  [9]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  lists  the
documents before her. She does not mention the  "immigration  case  history"
document at all. The conclusions at [22] and [32] take no  account  of  what
was disclosed in the documentary evidence of immigration history.

    (c)    The third ground of appeal argues that there has been a  failure
to give adequate reasons at [20] and [31] for finding that the appellant  is
not a victim of domestic abuse, & for finding that  the  appellant  has  not
pursued an extramarital affair. She argued that at [31] the Judge  does  not
give reasons for  finding  that  orders  from  the  family  court  were  not
evidence of the appellant husband's violence towards the appellant  and  his
desire to abduct one of their children.

    (d)    Ms Dirie urged me to allow  the  appeal,  to  set  the  decision
aside, and to remit the case of the First-tier Tribunal - arguing  that  the
appellant has not yet had a fair hearing.

7.    For the respondent, Mr Avery  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law, material  or  otherwise.  He  reminded  me  that  the
adjournment request made at the start of the hearing of this  case  was  the
third adjournment request made - each one on the  same  basis.  He  told  me
that, from [22] onwards, the Judge finds that the  appellant  is  neither  a
credible nor a reliable witness, and told me that the Judge sets  out  clear
reasons for finding  that  there  are  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
evidence. He told me that the anti-molestation orders and protection  orders
from the family courts could only be taken  at  face  value,  and  that  the
Judge was correct not to make findings of fact about the  reasons  that  the
orders were granted. He reminded me that the social services report has  not
been submitted and it is not clear where it is today, and told me  that  the
Judge made clear findings of fact based on the evidence  before  her.  Those
findings of fact lead the Judge to an unassailable conclusion. He  asked  me
to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8.     Rule  4(3)(h)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  empowers  the  Tribunal  to
adjourn a hearing. Rule 2 sets  out  the  overriding  objectives  under  the
Rules which the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when  exercising  any
power under the Rules. The  overriding  objective  is  to  deal  with  cases
fairly and justly.  This is defined as  including   "(a)  dealing  with  the
case in ways which are proportionate to the  importance  of  the  case,  the
complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources  of  the
parties and of the Tribunal; (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and  seeking
flexibility in the proceedings; (c) ensuring,  so  far  as  is  practicable,
that the parties are able to  participate  fully  in  the  proceedings;  (d)
using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay
so far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues".

9.    When considering whether or not to adjourn, the issue  comes  down  to
fairness. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it  was
held that if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds  the  question  for
the Upper Tribunal is not whether the First-Tier acted reasonably.   Rather,
the test to be applied is that of fairness:  was there  any  deprivation  of
the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

10.   The appellant claims that she has a well-founded fear  of  persecution
because she is a member of a particular social group, as a single mother  in
India. The appellant has two children (one born in 2002, the second born  in
2011) both of whom are dependent upon her asylum claim

11.   The application to adjourn was made on four grounds, each of which  is
recorded by the Judge at [5] of the  decision.  The  second  ground  of  the
application is recorded as "... There is no evidence  from  social  services
and they have child protection concerns including concerns that  the  second
appellant might be forced into an arranged marriage by  her  father."  ("The
second appellant" is this appellant's child born in 2002).

12.   At [5] the Judge deals with the reasons for refusing  the  application
to adjourn. She sets out clear reasons  for  refusing  the  first,  third  &
fourth leg of the application  to  adjourn,  but  glosses  over  the  second
ground of the application stating simply "the  first  appellant  could  give
oral evidence about the assault and the consequences of it  and  any  social
services involvement."

13.   The Judge's findings and conclusions are  set  out  between  [15]  and
[36]. Between [15] and [30] there is no suggestion of any evidence heard  by
the Judge about, or any enquiry made by  the  Judge  into,  social  services
involvement. At [30] and [31] the Judge refers to family court  proceedings,
and appears to accept that the family court  has  made  a  prohibited  steps
order  against  the  appellant's  husband,  who  has   not   resisted   that
litigation.

14.   Even though the Judge did not  find  the  appellant  to  be  either  a
credible or a reliable witness, the Judge's findings indicate  that  one  of
the appellant's children  has  made,  and  then  withdrawn,  allegations  of
domestic abuse, and that the  difficulties  the  appellant  has  encountered
caused her to seek recourse to the family courts. In the  last  sentence  of
[32] the Judge summarises her rejection of the appellant's claim.

15.   Even though the Judge writes a careful and detailed  decision,  it  is
clear from the detail given by the Judge that the evidence she  heard  about
the circumstances of the appellant and her two children was  incomplete.  At
[5] the Judge records the need to secure some evidence  of  social  services
involvement. The Judge's findings and conclusions between [15] and [36]  say
nothing of social services involvement with this family.

16.   Counsel for the appellant sought an adjournment  (at  first  instance)
because of child protection concerns and because  it  is  alleged  that  the
appellant's husband wants to force her daughter into an  arranged  marriage.
There is no suggestion that the appellant is  simply  manipulating  counsel.
Counsel would not make statements in support of an  application  to  adjourn
unless there were grounds to make those statements.  I  take  guidance  from
the case of Nwaigwe. Although I do not have sight  of  the  social  services
report, it is realistically possible that the  evidence  contained  in  that
report could result in a different outcome to this appeal.

17.   I must therefore come to  the  conclusion  that  the  refusal  of  the
application  to  adjourn  on  the  basis  that  they  would  be  independent
documentary  evidence  from  the  social  services  department  about  child
protection concerns has prevented relevant matters, which go to the core  of
the appellant's  claim,  from  being  aired  in  court.  The  appellant  has
therefore been deprived of a fair hearing and it is likely  that  Judge  was
not able to consider all of the material evidence available.

18.   It is common ground that documentary  evidence  was  produced  by  the
respondent's representative on the morning of the appeal in this case.  That
documentary evidence was the "immigration case history" handed to me. It  is
evidence which quite clearly links the appellant to a man  who  is  not  her
husband. The Judge makes no reference at all to that evidence and, when  [9]
is read alongside the Judge's findings and conclusions, it appears that  the
Judge has failed to take account of material evidence.

19.   I therefore find that the decision is tainted by  material  errors  of
law. The Judge's determination cannot stand and must be  set  aside  in  its
entirety. All matters must be determined of new.

REMITTAL TO FT

20.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

21.   I find that this case should be remitted  because  the  Appellant  did
not have a fair  hearing  and  was  deprived  of  the  opportunity  to  lead
relevant evidence which may go to the core of her claim. In this  case  none
of the findings of fact are to stand.

22.   I remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton
Cross, before any First-tier Immigration Judge other than Judge Farmer.



CONCLUSION

Decision

23.   The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

24.   I set aside the decision. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed      Date 5 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
