
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08463/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 June 2013                                  |On 28th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and it is not in issue that  he
    was born on 22 January 1985.

 2. The appellant claimed asylum. That claim was refused on 30 August 2012.
     He appealed that decision.  In a decision dated 26  October  2012  the
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.  However, a Deputy Upper  Tribunal
    Judge found that the determination could  not  stand  and  it  was  set
    aside.  The appeal was then remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing on all issues.

 3. Following the rehearing and by a decision dated 18  March  2013  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lingard dismissed the appeal on all  grounds.   The
    appellant again sought permission to appeal and this was granted in the
    following terms:-

         "... The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appealed a decision  to
         refuse him asylum.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingard  (the  judge)
         dismissed the appeal because she found that the appellant  was  not
         truthful about the core of his claim and therefore was not at  risk
         on return.  It is arguable that the judge has not given  sufficient
         reasons for such a finding bearing in mind  that  she  acknowledged
         that the appellant gave a detailed  account  of  events  which  was
         supported by the medical evidence which said that  the  appellant's
         scars were highly consistent with his account  as  to  how  he  got
         them.  The judge's reasons were that the appellant was not a  blood
         relative of his witness as claimed, which does not go to  the  core
         of the appellant's account, and that he  delayed  in  applying  for
         asylum.  The judge also relied upon the way the appellant  answered
         questions at the hearing.  It is arguable  that  such  reasons  are
         insufficient  to  disbelieve  a  consistent  and  detailed  account
         supported by expert medical evidence".

 4. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response by letter  dated  8  May  2013.
    The contents of the letter are to the effect that the  judge  concluded
    for good reasons that the appellant did not give  a  credible  account.
    Where a judge is minded to reject an account for reasons that are  "not
    impinged upon" by the medical report the part that such report can play
    in establishing credibility is by its nature very limited.   The  judge
    was entitled to conclude that the appellant was  not  credible  and  by
    application of the relevant risk factors was not  at  risk  on  return.
    The grounds amount to a disagreement with the judge.

The Hearing before me

 5. Thus the  matter  came  before  me.   Both  representatives  made  oral
    submissions. Upon enquiry being made it was clear that if an  error  of
    law was found such that a fresh  hearing  was  required  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal it would not have been possible for the hearing to take  place
    on the same day as the error of law hearing, because  of  the  lack  of
    time available.  In the light of the history of this appeal I therefore
    decided to reserve my decision on the error of law point.

 6. The main thrust of Ms Jegarajah's  submissions  is  that  although  the
    determination of Judge Lingard looks as though she has  given  thorough
    reasons for coming to her decision in fact  the  judge  has  failed  to
    engage with the core of  the  claim.   Although  there  are  legitimate
    findings against the appellant they do not go to the crux of the claim.
     The appellant has been broadly  consistent  throughout  and  there  is
    expert  medical  evidence  in  support  of  the  claimed  history.   Ms
    Jegarajah made many other points. These I noted and have considered  in
    this determination.

 7. Ms Tanner  for  the  respondent  submitted  that  this  is  a  balanced
    determination.  The judge was clearly unimpressed with the  appellant's
    reasons for failing to claim asylum for the length of  time  before  he
    did.  At the screening interview no health concerns were claimed and as
    far as the expert medical evidence was concerned there were a number of
    explanations as to how the appellant may have acquired the  scars  that
    he has.  The judge was entitled to find that the medical report was  to
    an extent ambiguous.  The judge did not have a closed mind  to  any  of
    the evidence and was entitled to conclude as she did  for  the  reasons
    given.

My Deliberations

 8. The FTT Judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and the witness  -
    his  cousin.  The  judge  was  therefore  best  placed  to   make   the
    observations that she did concerning the manner in which the  appellant
    gave his evidence as recorded (particularly in  paragraph  84)  of  the
    determination. The appellant was found by  the  judge  to  be  a  well-
    presented young man who has been well educated and was  found  able  to
    articulate and express himself in a  coherent  way  through  the  court
    interpreter.  From paragraph 74  to  78  the  judge  finds  a  lack  of
    credibility that  the  appellant  and  the  second  witness  are  blood
    relatives and gives reasons for that finding.  However,  I  agree  with
    Counsel's submissions that this was not an issue that had been taken by
    the respondent or indeed mentioned at the hearing.  It was one taken up
    by the judge after the hearing and if clarification was  required,  for
    the first time, then this could have been dealt with at the hearing.

 9. Despite that error there is recognition by the judge  in  paragraph  78
    that these  matters  did  not  relate  to  the  core  or  crux  of  the
    appellant's claims.

10. In paragraphs 79 onwards  the  judge  refers  to  the  failure  of  the
    appellant to claim asylum  until  over  one  and  a  half  years  after
    arriving in the United Kingdom, this being shortly before  his  student
    visa was due to expire.  The judge recognises that this has to be taken
    into account in her deliberations but does not go to the centrepiece of
    the appellant's account regarding his  experiences  in  Sri  Lanka  and
    India.  The judge notes during  the  course  of  the  appellant's  main
    interview that he was asked why he did not claim asylum on arrival  and
    what prompted him to do so when he did.   The  appellant  said  he  was
    frightened of claiming asylum for fear of being deported. He  had  come
    to know just before he claimed asylum that his parents had been visited
    by representatives of the  authorities  asking  his  whereabouts.   The
    second witness confirmed that he had advised  the  appellant  to  claim
    asylum but the appellant had decided to  "take  the  risk".   When  the
    appellant made his statement he indicated that  he  was  frightened  of
    claiming asylum because he was scared of being returned  to  Sri  Lanka
    and was hoping, whilst he was here, that the  situation  would  improve
    there so he could return.

11. The judge would have none of it. At paragraph 80 she  does  not  accept
    the explanation and gave the reason that it  is  the  appellant's  case
    that he has lived with his sister  and  brother-in-law  since  arriving
    here.  He would have been well aware that a claim  for  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom would not prompt his departure until there  had  been  a
    thorough examination  of  the  asylum  claim  and  the  appeal  process
    finalised.  Although it took a long time for the appellant's brother-in-
    law to have his asylum application dealt with the appellant would  have
    been aware also that  although  his  brother-in-law's  claim  had  been
    refused by the respondent he had won his appeal against  that  decision
    and been granted refugee status during 2007.

12. The judge then went on to find in paragraph 81 that she did not  accept
    as credible the appellant's oral evidence, that  he  asserted  for  the
    first time at the appeal hearing, that because of his ill-treatment  he
    was not in the right mindset to deal with making an asylum  application
    before he did so.  The reason for coming to that credibility finding is
    given that whilst it is reasonable to think that someone who  had  been
    badly treated over a relatively lengthy period might be so affected  as
    to feel in no fit state to make an asylum application,  had  this  been
    the case the appellant would have referred to  this  much  earlier  on.
    The judge found it telling that the appellant did not make  this  point
    when making his statement for the previous hearing which was adopted as
    part of his evidence-in-chief before her.

13. The grounds seeking permission to appeal appear to assert at  paragraph
    6 that the judge considered the issue of delay as a peripheral  matter,
    yet it forms the heart of the judge's assessment of credibility.  It is
    argued that this approach reflects the application  of  a  standard  of
    proof too high in circumstances where the adverse effect of  the  delay
    is regarded as outweighing the probative value of evidence, such as the
    medical evidence, corroborative of the appellant's core claim of  being
    the victim of torture.

14. It is clear enough that the  judge  recognised  that  disbelieving  the
    appellant in relation to the explanations given for why  he  failed  to
    claim asylum at an earlier  date  did  not  of  itself  mean  that  the
    appellant did not experience what he said occurred to him in Sri  Lanka
    and India prior to coming to the  United  Kingdom.   Nevertheless  that
    delay and then the late assertion at the hearing as to why he  did  not
    claim asylum at an earlier date being found not credible by  the  judge
    weighed in the balance when assessing the truth  or  otherwise  of  the
    core of the claim.  I can see no error by the judge in her reasoning on
    those matters.

15. The judge also weighs in  the  balance  the  fact  that  the  appellant
    provided a relatively detailed account  of  his  movements  within  Sri
    Lanka during the pertinent periods leading up to his arrival in the UK.
     However, the judge adds the comment that she cannot entirely  discount
    that the appellant has committed to memory a set of  accounts  for  the
    sole purpose of obtaining refugee status in this  country.   She  notes
    that at various points of his oral evidence  "the  appellant  began  to
    provide answers to some questions in  a  way  that  came  across  as  a
    regurgitation  of  rehearsed  material  rather   than   a   spontaneous
    recollection of events". The judge then gives examples.

16. The judge benefited from having heard oral evidence from the appellant.
    The judge noted that when pressed to give  more  detail  during  cross-
    examination he became vague in his responses and she was  left  with  a
    certain impression.  Again the judge gives a balanced consideration  of
    that matter directing herself not  to  place  any  weight  against  the
    appellant in relation to credibility regarding any inability for him to
    be specific about the frequency of the ill-treatment meted out  over  a
    six month period of detention.  The judge commented that  although  the
    appellant did  not  say  so  "but  if  someone  is  ill-treated  in  an
    incarcerated state it may well be that the victim loses a sense of time
    although, interestingly, this is not what the appellant has stated".

17. In relation to the scarring the  judge  directs  herself  appropriately
    that she must approach medical evidence with appropriate care and  give
    good reasons for her decision.

18. It is said that the judge erred in not expressly approaching the report
    as being independent evidence of torture when in fact it  was.   It  is
    said that the judge obviously discounted the medical report's value and
    relevance  by  reference  to  the  view  taken   of   the   appellant's
    credibility.  It is argued that because  of  what  the  judge  said  at
    paragraphs 88 and  89,  namely  that  the  medical  evidence  was  only
    prompted by an instruction  given  to  Mr  Martin  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors as opposed to the appellant's  GP,  the  judge  treated  the
    report as though Mr Martin did not reach an independent view.

19. I do not read paragraph 88 in that way.  The judge states that although
    it is not at all damaging to the appellant's case Dr  Martin  does  not
    refer to having any knowledge about the appellant's GP or any  previous
    medical history that may be noted  with  that  GP  or  elsewhere.   The
    appellant has adduced no record of his dealings with his GP in  the  UK
    and has not adduced any medical evidence emanating from Sri  Lanka.   I
    do not find this is a reference  to  the  non-independent  view  of  Dr
    Martin but more a comment on the behaviour and health of the  appellant
    who as a fact had adduced no record of his dealings with his GP in  the
    UK.  At paragraph 82 the judge notes that the appellant refers  at  his
    screening interview to being in good health,  that  he  does  not  take
    medication, and when questioned more specifically in his main interview
    about having any health issues, the appellant answered in the negative.
     The judge was entitled to find that it was reasonable to think that if
    the appellant had any health concerns either mental or  physical  since
    arriving in the United Kingdom he would have referred  to  them  at  an
    earlier date.

20. The judge was entitled to find it surprising that there is no reference
    to Mr Martin having viewed  any  papers  relating  to  the  appellant's
    asylum claim or appeal. The report appears to rely solely on  what  the
    appellant told him during the examination and a physical examination of
    the appellant for which relevant photographs were taken and  form  part
    of the report.  The judge was entitled to comment also that  while  the
    appellant confirmed at the hearing that the report accurately  reflects
    what he told Mr Martin there is no reference to  an  interpreter  being
    used and no indication that the appellant would be able to  get  across
    what he wanted to say in English.

21. At paragraph 90 onwards  of  the  determination  the  judge  refers  to
    scarring in detail.  At paragraph 94 the judge refers to Mr Martin  not
    discounting in each case that there could  be  other  reasons  for  the
    scarring than  those  the  appellant  claims  were  caused  during  his
    detention. The scars were  found  to  be  highly  consistent  with  the
    mechanisms of injury described  by  the  appellant  of  being  tortured
    although Mr Martin noted that it is possible that they could have  been
    caused accidentally.

22. Having read the medical report scars 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7 are found  to  be
    "highly consistent" with the account put forward by  the  claimant  and
    scars 1 and 5 are found to be "consistent"  in  the  manner  described.
    However, although earlier in one paragraph the "scars 2" are said to be
    "highly consistent of being burned with a hot object such  as  the  one
    described by the claimant" this finding comes with the caveat that "the
    scars are not fully specific of intentionally caused injuries and  they
    could have been  caused  by  unrelated  accidental  injuries  or  other
    reasons such as a skin infection".

23. Scars 3 and 4 are referred to thus: - "However the larger  round  scar,
    also could have be (sic) part of a  vaccination  scars  and  the  other
    scars could have been caused by an accidental injury for  example  with
    hot oil while cooking".

24. In relation to scars 5 the characteristics of the scars are found to be
    non-specific of intentionally caused injuries and they could have  been
    caused accidentally after a fall, for example, during training".

25. With scars 6 and 7 "The characteristics of  the  scars  are  not  fully
    specific of intentionally caused injury and it  also  could  have  been
    caused by other mechanism of injury such  an  (sic)  accidental  fall".
    The scars are found to be mature and  their  appearance  is  consistent
    with the time span described by the "claimants" (appellant).  Mr Martin
    concluded as follows:-

        "Overall, following the recommendations in Chapter  V,  Section  D,
        paragraph 188 of the Istanbul Protocol were (sic)  it  states  that
        'ultimately it is the overall evaluation of all lesions and not the
        consistency of each lesion with a particular form of  torture  that
        is important in assessing the torture story'.  They are  not  fully
        specific of intentionally caused injuries but they did not show any
        inconsistencies with the description of events by the claimant; and
        in my opinion those scars are highly consistent with the mechanisms
        of injury described by the claimant  of  being  tortured,  although
        possible that they could have been caused accidentally".

26. The judge herself notes that none of the suggested  alternative  causes
    for scarring to the appellant's body, which, on the face of it,  appear
    to be relatively random and different in the case of each scar,  relate
    to the appellant having sustained in one way or another most if not all
    of his injuries as a  result  of  being  involved  in  a  shell  attack
    incident, which is where he states he obtained scarring to his face  in
    1990.  The scars are referred to as being mature and there has been  no
    assessment of whether those scars may have been as a  result  of  self-
    inflicted wounds in any way.

27. The judge directs herself that any alternatives she might  suggest  are
    purely speculative in nature.  She recognises that she is not medically
    trained and must give due and careful consideration to  the  report  of
    someone who is.

28. I find no misdirection by the judge in any of the  paragraphs  relating
    to scarring.  The judge recognises that she does  not  have  to  accept
    that the appellant is telling the truth about his  experiences  on  the
    basis of the medical report.   No  medical  report  can  speak  to  the
    circumstances in which scarring to the body could have occurred.  It is
    in the context of those assessments and  other  matters  to  which  the
    judge has referred that she has viewed Dr  Martin's  conclusions  about
    scars being "highly consistent" with the appellant's accounts.

29. The judge appears to be struck, although she states that she places  no
    weight on it, in paragraph 96,  that  no  reference  was  made  by  the
    appellant   to   Mr   Martin   of   having   been   the    victim    of
    mental/psychological torture or having any medical problems of any long-
    term nature (other than the physical effect of being  scarred)  due  to
    treatment meted out to him in Sri Lanka.  The  appellant  confirmed  at
    his initial interview and in answer to a specific question at his  main
    interview that he has no health issues and was fit and well.

30. The judge dealt with the second witness's evidence and was entitled  to
    conclude that she could give little if any  weight  to  that  witness's
    account  of  the  appellant  having  been  a  victim  of  human  rights
    violations in Sri Lanka since everything that he had to say about those
    matters related to hearsay evidence.  The judge was  entitled  to  view
    the evidence in that way despite  the  likelihood  that  she  erred  in
    finding  that  the  blood  relative  point   affected   the   witness's
    credibility.

31. With regard to returning to his home in Jaffna a very short time  after
    the appellant claims the authorities went there searching for  him  the
    judge is saying nothing more than that she does not find any reasonable
    explanation for him having taken that risk.  Clearly the judge does not
    accept  that  the  appellant  would  stay  at  his   home   under   any
    circumstances for two days when he was aware that the  authorities  had
    said that they would return to the house because they had not found him
    on the first occasion that they came.  The judge was perfectly entitled
    to make that point.

32. The judge  was  also  entitled  in  paragraph  100  to  disbelieve  the
    appellant when he said that the authorities had come  to  his  parents'
    home to look for him just before he claimed  asylum,  bearing  in  mind
    that they had not done so since 2006/2007 and he had been in  continual
    contact with his parents throughout.  On  the  appellant's  version  of
    events he was detained in Colombo and this had been in 2010 and he  did
    not claim asylum until approximately two years later.   The  judge  was
    also entitled to find that this was a concocted story made up  for  the
    purpose of giving a reason why he claimed asylum so long after  arrival
    in the United Kingdom.

33. The judge in paragraph 101 accepts  that  there  is  a  possibility  of
    someone of adverse interest being able  to  successfully  pass  through
    official immigration and emigration processes within Sri Lanka  without
    being questioned or stopped and can  do  so  by  using  an  agent  with
    relevant contacts. However, the judge finds that it is clear  from  the
    general background materials that security  has  always  remained  very
    tight on incoming and outgoing Sri Lankan citizens by  the  immigration
    authorities, police and army in Sri Lanka.  The  judge  found  and  was
    entitled to do so that it is of some significance  that  the  appellant
    was prepared to run the risk of travelling to and from Sri  Lanka  when
    visiting India then leaving  Sri  Lanka  again  bound  for  the  United
    Kingdom using his own passport.

34. The judge found some measure of significance to be placed on  the  fact
    that the appellant was prepared to take these risks on  more  than  one
    occasion using his own identity. This is so because the appellant  says
    that he was very  fearful  of  being  apprehended  by  the  authorities
    bearing in mind that latterly he was using official channels of travel,
    in light of having been a torture victim and fearful of apprehension by
    those who had tortured him.  The judge might well have added a sentence
    to the effect that she did not believe the appellant on the point.

35. Viewed overall the judge has engaged with all of the evidence that  was
    put before her, has made relevant findings and  has  engaged  with  the
    core of the claim.  The judge was entitled to find that the appellant's
    credibility was damaged but took  into  account  the  medical  evidence
    which formed part of her overall assessment in her findings of fact.

36. The medical evidence on any view although stating that the injuries are
    highly consistent with  the  mechanisms  of  injury  described  by  the
    appellant, nevertheless put forward other possible explanations so  the
    judge was not bound by the findings  of  the  report,  which  might  be
    described as non conclusive and equivocal.  Put another way, it was not
    perverse of the judge to come to the conclusions that she  did  on  the
    evidence that was before her.

37. The judge directed herself correctly as to the law, burden and standard
    of proof  and  although  there  are  certain  fair  criticisms  of  the
    determination, overall and for the reasons given the judge was entitled
    to dismiss this appeal for the reasons that she gave.

Conclusion

38. For the above reasons the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    stands.

39. I was not addressed in relation to the continuation  of  the  anonymity
    direction. I note that the  original  determination  gave  reasons  for
    making such a direction which direction has  continued  throughout.  In
    those circumstances and particularly in the absence of argument to  the
    contrary, the anonymity direction continues.




Signed                              Date 27th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


