
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08406/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14th October 2016                     |On 12th July 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    A S G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Eritrea, who was born  on  [  ]
    1990.  She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  of
    the Respondent dated 15th May 2015 refusing the Appellant's  protection
    claim under the Refugee Convention and the European Convention on Human
    Rights.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Meyer  at
    Sheldon Court and promulgated on 7th July 2016.

 3. It is a feature of this case that the Appellant is married to a man who
    has been granted refugee asylum status and they have  a  baby  daughter
    together, who was born on [ ] 2015,  and  both  appear  as  father  and
    mother on the birth certificate respectively.  At paragraph 34  of  the
    determination, the judge held that both of them "were married or  in  a
    genuine, subsisting and durable relationship akin  to  marriage  before
    entering the UK and remained together as such with their baby daughter"
    (paragraph 34).  The judge also found that the Appellant's partner  was
    at real risk of persecution if he returned to Eritrea  "on  account  of
    being identified and attacked as the son of an  ELF  commander,"  (this
    being the Eritrean Liberation Force), and that he had  been  persecuted
    on grounds of his imputed political opinion (paragraph 36).  The  judge
    went on to hold that, "this risk extends to the  Second  Appellant  and
    their child, because they too are part  of  the  same  family  and  are
    likely to be targeted for the same reasons that the First Appellant was
    targeted in the past" (paragraph 37).  The judge went on to hold  that,
    although it was not necessary for a decision to be made in this regard,
    the appeal would also be  allowed  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights because the First  Appellant  (the  husband)
    could not reasonably be expected to  join  the  Second  Appellant  (the
    Appellant herself) in Eritrea or Ethiopia, for that matter, "given that
    he was deported from Ethiopia with his family  after  the  border  war"
    (paragraph 39).

 4. The appeal was allowed.

 5. The Grounds of Appeal by the Secretary of State argue that the decision
    was irrational in the light of the fact that the  judge  had  concluded
    that the Appellant was not an Eritrean national, such  that  she  could
    not be considered at risk on return.  Permission to appeal was  granted
    on 28th July 2016.

 6. At the hearing before me on 14th October 2016, Ms Aboni,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent  relied  upon  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   She
    submitted that the Appellant had her appeal allowed on the  basis  that
    she was the wife of a recognised refugee (AA/11502/2015)  whose  appeal
    had been allowed on the finding that he was an  Eritrean  national  and
    had exited his country illegally.  The judge had considered this appeal
    to  be  parasitic  on  the   findings   made   in   relation   to   her
    partner/husband.  However, there was no independent claim for asylum in
    Ethiopia or Eritrea.  Ms Aboni also submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had initially doubted  that  the  Appellant  was  a  national  of
    Eritrea (see paragraphs 17 to 22 of the refusal letter dated  15th  May
    2015).  Judge Meyer had in fact adopted this reasoning (see  paragraphs
    24 to 33).  She also made a primary finding of fact that the  Appellant
    had not discharged the burden of proof of showing that she was Eritrean
    (at paragraph 34).  In these circumstances, it  was  perverse  for  the
    judge to go on to consider that the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  in
    Eritrea due to her husband's political opinion.  She had simply  failed
    to reconcile her own  findings  of  fact.   Furthermore,  even  if  the
    Appellant was not herself a citizen of Eritrea, it was unclear why  she
    could not live as a family with her partner/husband in Ethiopia, if she
    herself was a national of Ethiopia.

 7. In reply, Mr Howard submitted that the refusal letter itself had stated
    that the Appellant would be removed to Eritrea, so that the  assumption
    was not that she was a national of  Ethiopia  at  all,  which  remained
    unproven on the Respondent  Secretary  of  State's  own  premises,  and
    paragraph 22 of the refusal letter did not make rational  sense  if  it
    first claimed that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate that she was
    a national of Eritrea, but then went  on  to  say  that  she  would  be
    removed to Eritrea, "as this is the country of which you claim to be  a
    national."

 8. Second, there was now a dependent child, and there was  no  doubt  that
    the child's father, a refugee, was an Eritrean national, who  had  been
    granted asylum specifically on the basis that he had been  attacked  as
    the son  of  the  commander  of  the  Eritrean  Liberation  Front  (see
    paragraph 36 of the determination).  It is in these circumstances  that
    the judge had firmly concluded (at paragraph 34), that

         "I have found that the First Appellant is a refugee. I find that it
         would be appropriate for the Respondent to grant leave in  line  to
         the Second Appellant and their child, as the dependant  spouse  and
         child of a refugee."

    It was difficult to  see  how  such  a  conclusion  could  be  faulted.



 9. Mr Howard also made submissions on Article 8 and stated that given  the
    findings at paragraph 34 [just  stated  above]  it  followed  that  the
    conclusion at paragraph 39 with  respect  to  Article  8  could  be  no
    different, namely, that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  return  the
    Appellant either to Eritrea or to Ethiopia.  Mr Howard  submitted  that
    Ground 5 in the Respondent's Grounds of Appeal states that the  finding
    in relation to Article 8 (at paragraph 39) was no more than  a  passing
    comment concerning the application under Article 8 and it  was  unclear
    precisely why the family could not live in Ethiopia.  However, this was
    predicated on the assumption that the Appellant, if not a  national  of
    Eritrea as the refusal letter concluded, was a  national  of  Ethiopia,
    but this had never been proven by the Respondent  Secretary  of  State,
    and the removal directions were in any event to Eritrea itself.

10. At the end of the Hearing I proceeded to write up my  Determination  on
    the basis that I found there to be no error of law, as I set out below.

No error of law.

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of  law  (see  Section  12(1)
    TCEA [2007] such that I should set aside the decision).  My reasons are
    as follows.  This is a case where the judge has found as  a  fact  that
    the Appellant and her  partner/husband,  were  married  or  were  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship that was akin  to  marriage  before
    they entered the UK and they remained together,  "as  such  with  their
    baby daughter" who was born to them on 17th August 2015.

12. The Appellant's partner/husband, has been found to be a refugee,  as  a
    citizen of Eritrea, who cannot return to Eritrea because  he  has  been
    previously attacked as the son of  an  ELF  commander.   The  Appellant
    herself, who, as the judge found,  had  already  been  married  to  her
    husband or partner, or was in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship,
    prior to their entry to the UK, has also claimed to be  a  national  of
    Eritrea, although this has been rejected by the Respondent Secretary of
    State, as well as by the judge.

13. It has not, however, been proven that the Appellant is  a  national  of
    Ethiopia, and the burden for that rests not  upon  the  Appellant,  but
    upon the Respondent Secretary of State.  Notwithstanding  this  failure
    to show that the Appellant was a national  of  Ethiopia,  it  is  being
    maintained that she could return to Ethiopia, and  go  there  with  her
    husband and child.

14. This does not follow, and not least under Article 8 of the ECHR,  where
    the judge found that, even if the Appellant herself went  to  Ethiopia,
    (of which she was not a proven national), her partner/husband could not
    be expected to go there, "given that he was deported from Ethiopia with
    his family after the border war" (paragraph 39).

15. It is well-established that for the decision of a  First-tier  Tribunal
    to be set aside it must be shown that the decision  was  "perverse"  or
    "irrational" and this is "a very high hurdle" (see R (Iran)  [2005]  at
    paragraph 11).

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd January 2017





