
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08301/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 22 November 2016                           |On 20 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
  and The Hon Mrs Justice Whipple, sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                   Between

                                     xy
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr J Martin, instructed by Nag Law
Respondent:   Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. This is an asylum claim.   An  anonymity  order  has  been  made.   The
    Appellant is referred to in this judgment as XY and should be  referred
    to in that manner in all tribunal documents and correspondence.

 2. This is an appeal against the determination of the First Tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") promulgated on  23  August  2016,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  human
    rights grounds. This appeal proceeds  with  permission  granted  on  19
    September 2016.

 3. The background to this matter is set out in the first three  paragraphs
    of the FtT's determination, as follows:

         "1.  The Appellant was born on the 10th  October  1979,  and  is  a
             national of Sri Lanka. She entered the United Kingdom on  19th
             February 2011 with leave as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  until
             31st December 2012. On 31st  December  2012  she  applied  for
             further leave to  remain  in  the  same  category,  which  was
             granted until 15th March 2016. On 8th April 2014 her leave was
             curtailed, to end on 7th June 2014, on the basis that she  was
             no longer attending her course. The  Appellant  says  she  was
             never made aware of this curtailment. On  24th  November  2014
             she made an appointment to  attend  at  the  Asylum  Screening
             Unit, where on 3rd December 2014 she claimed asylum. She had a
             screening interview that day. She had a full asylum  interview
             on 22nd April 2015. The claim was refused by the respondent on
             13th May 2015.

         2.    The  Appellant  now  appeals,  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
             Nationality, immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  against  the
             refusal of her protection claim. In her appeal she  relies  on
             rights under the  Refugee  Convention  and  the  Human  Rights
             Convention Articles 2 and 3.

         3.   The Appellant's husband, Mr Sanath Arachchilage, born on  19th
             January 1984, and their  daughter,  Nethaya  Serasinghe,  born
             15th March 2012, have been with her in the United Kingdom  and
             were dependants on her asylum claim. Notices  of  appeal  were
             also lodged on their behalf, but as  dependants  they  do  not
             have a right of appeal and a Duty Judge has ruled  accordingly
             that those purported appeals were not valid."

 4. The Appellant argued before the FtT , and before  us,  that  she  falls
    within one of  the  categories  of  persons  identified  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in GJ and others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) as being at real risk of persecution or  at  real
    risk of serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, The particular  group,  to
    which the Applicant says she belongs, is identified at  paragraph  7(b)
    of the headnote to that case report, as follows:

           "Journalists (whether in print or other media) or  human  rights
           activists, who, in either case, have criticised the  Sri  Lankan
           Government, in particular its human rights record,  or  who  are
           associated  with  publications  critical  of  the   Sri   Lankan
           Government."

 5. The FtT rejected the Appellant's case that she came within that  group.
    The Judge said this:

           "I have considered all of this evidence with  care  and  in  the
           round. Some of the matters identified are of greater  importance
           than others. The overall effect is to leave me not satisfied, to
           the low standard required, that  the  Appellant  is  a  credible
           witness or her account one on which I can rely."

    This was, in effect, to reach an adverse  credibility  finding  against
    the Appellant and to conclude that she was not a human rights  activist
    within paragraph 7(b) of  GJ.    The  Appellant  appeals  against  that
    finding.

 6. At the hearing before us, the Appellant was represented by  Mr  Martin,
    and the Respondent was represented by Mr Bramble.  We were grateful  to
    them both for their helpful submissions.

Submissions

 7. The Appellant advances three grounds of appeal as follows:

          a. Ground 1, the Judge erred in law  in  his  assessment  of  the
             Respondent's verification report.

          b. Ground 2, the Judge erred in law  by  failing  to  make  clear
             findings of fact on central issues in the claim.

          c. Ground 3, the Judge erred in law in his consideration  of  the
             evidence.

 8. The Appellant argues that in the circumstances the Judge has materially
    erred in law in one or all of the ways listed, and that in  consequence
    the adverse credibility finding is  unsafe,  and  the  appeal  must  be
    allowed.

 9. The Respondent submitted a  Rule  24  response  dated  1  October  2016
    opposing  the  appeal,  contending  that  the  Judge  directed  himself
    appropriately and that there is no  merit  in  any  one  of  the  three
    grounds advanced.  Mr Bramble developed those submissions before us.

Ground 1- Treatment of Certain Material Evidence

10. The Appellant relied before the FtT on certain court  documents  and  a
    warrant for her arrest, said to have been issued against her by the Sri
    Lankan  Terrorist  Investigation   Division   (or   "TID"),   a   state
    organisation  responsible   for   investigating   suspected   terrorist
    activity.  We will refer to these documents as the  "legal  documents".
    These were central to the Appellant's case that she would  face  arrest
    and persecution if she returned to Sri Lanka.

11. The legal documents included what purported  to  be  a  report  to  the
    Magistrates Court in Colombo made by a  senior  inspector  of  the  TID
    dated 9 June 2012.  It concerned the Appellant's  suspected  activities
    in support of the rebel organisation LTTE and recorded what was said to
    be a court reference number.  The  report  referred  to  her  providing
    undercover activities and some legal assistance from 2007 and playing a
    leading role  in  relation  to  rescuing  charged  LTTE  members.  That
    document asserted that the TID believed  that  she  possessed  relevant
    information and for that reason the TID was seeking an arrest  warrant.



12. The Judge stated that the TID's purported request for the Appellant  to
    be arrested if she  tried  to  enter  the  country  strongly  suggested
    awareness that she was already abroad.  He noted that her activities in
    Sri Lanka, whatever they were, ceased in March 2009, on her own account
    and that she had remained in Sri Lanka, moving around,  until  February
    2011.  The Judge then said this:

             "it  seems  remarkable,  and  certainly   fortunate   for   the
             Appellant, that the authorities should have waited so long, and
             until she was safely out of  the  country,  before  taking  any
             official steps against her".

13. Mr Martin challenges this passage for its  implicit  criticism  of  the
    Appellant's case.  That criticism, he says, is misplaced.  There was an
    innocent and proper explanation for the sequence of events: the TID was
    seeking a warrant to ensure that the Appellant would indeed be arrested
    or stopped should  she  attempt  to  re-enter  the  country,  precisely
    because the TID was aware that she had already left;  this  explanation
    is supportive, not destructive, of the Appellant's case.

14. The FtT made no clear finding on this issue.  The relevant  passage  is
    dismissive in content and nature. The Judge  states  that  the  alleged
    sequence of events "seems remarkable", and we infer that  the  sequence
    of events - and his conclusions about it - contributed to his  eventual
    rejection of the Appellant's account.  But this  gives  rise  to  three
    problems.  First, if that is what he found, he did not say so in terms.
     Second, if the Judge was rejecting  this  aspect  of  the  Appellant's
    case, the rejection is unreasoned.  Third, there does seem to us to  be
    a possible alternative explanation, namely that advanced by Mr  Martin,
    and we are unsure whether this was considered by the Judge, and if  so,
    why it was rejected.

15. The Judge went on to make certain comments about the  legal  documents.
    He said that it was unclear whether the legal documents related to  any
    court proceedings at all, he noted  that  they  did  not  identify  any
    specific offence or provision of the criminal law or  set  a  date  for
    court attendance and he questioned why the  legal  documents  would  be
    made public especially when the suspect was  out  of  the  country  and
    knowledge of the legal documents would act as a disincentive to return.
     Mr Martin challenges these observations,  submitting  in  relation  to
    each that there is an innocent explanation: the documents did relate to
    court proceedings, there is nothing odd about them not identifying  any
    specific offence or provision of the criminal law and having no  return
    date noted and nothing unusual about them being  made  public.  We  are
    unable to take this debate further.

16. The Judge next recorded that the legal  documents  were  produced  just
    before the first scheduled hearing on 26  November  2015  and  that  on
    receipt the Respondent had asked for time to verify them, which led  to
    an adjournment to 29  June  2016.  By  that  latter  hearing  date  the
    Respondent had issued a verification request to the TID, which had been
    answered by the TID to the effect that the legal  documents,  including
    the arrest warrant, were not genuine and that there was no  case  under
    the reference given (this  was  the  "DVR",  or  detailed  verification
    report).

17. At the hearing below, the Respondent relied on the DVR as well  as  two
    associated letters:

          a. The first  was  dated  3  July  2015  from  the  British  High
             Commission in Colombo to the Home Office  Presenting  Officers
             Unit, headed "Abuse of Attorney Letters in  Sri  Lanka"  which
             stated that of the 30 cases where the British High  Commission
             had been involved in checking attorney  references,  the  vast
             majority were not credible; in consequence, the  British  High
             Commission suggested that caution was needed in accepting  the
             assertions in letters of Sri Lankan attorneys.

          b. The second was dated 2 November 2015, again from  the  British
             High Commission to the Home Office Presenting  Officers  Unit,
             to confirm that the High Commission's  practice  when  seeking
             verification was to ask about the document on the  basis  that
             personal information, including names, was always redacted  so
             that the subject could not be  identified.   All  checks  were
             subject to a "strict protocol, including redacting details, to
             ensure that personal details are not divulged."

18. At the hearing below and before us, the Appellant  complained  that  by
    making the verification request to the TID, the Respondent had in  fact
    alerted the TID to the Appellant's position.  This was said  to  be  in
    breach of the law (citing Art 30 of  Council  Directive  2013/32/EU  on
    Asylum Procedures), and was said to have aggravated  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant should she return.   In addressing that argument,  the  Judge
    said this:

         "Whether the authorities consulted might deduce  that  the  enquiry
         related to an asylum claim I do not know, but  if  these  documents
         are genuine the TID are clearly alerted to  the  Appellant  already
         and if they are false the reference number,  with  no  accompanying
         name, would not  be  connected  to  the  Appellant  and  could  not
         therefore generate suspicion directed at her."

19. In this passage, the Judge appears to consider that the legal documents
    had to be either genuine or false - there was no  middle  ground.   But
    here we encounter another problem: the Judge did not make  any  finding
    either way.

20. In a later part of the determination, dealing with a different argument
    raised by the Appellant to undermine the DVR, the Judge stated:

           "I consider that there are, in  the  circumstances,  reasons  to
           treat the verification report with some caution."

      What does this mean, we ask ourselves? On one view, it would  not  be
      possible to treat the verification report "with caution"  unless  that
      report had been accepted,  at  least  in  principle,  as  correct.  On
      another,  "caution"  betokens   that   the   Judge   had   significant
      reservations about the reliability of the report. But  was  either  of
      these the judicial finding? Again  we  find  ourselves  struggling  to
      identify a clear finding on  a  material  issue.   As  the  Judge  had
      earlier stated, the legal documents  were  either  genuine  or  false:
      there was no middle ground.  The DVR was  surely  either  reliable  or
      not.  If the Judge had insufficient evidence to come to  a  conclusion
      on that point, then he should have recorded that and explained how  he
      was proposing to deal with the DVR.   We  do  not  find  that  in  his
      determination.  One option open to him was to give the benefit of  the
      doubt to the Appellant: this was, after all, an asylum  claim.   There
      may have been other options open to him  and  it  is  not  for  us  to
      rewrite the Determination.

21. In summary, it is not the function of this Tribunal on appeal  to  make
    any finding as to the reliability of the DVR.  Nor does it fall to this
    Tribunal to adjudicate on the Appellant's complaint that the TID should
    not have been approached in the first  place.  These  are  not  matters
    falling within the permitted grounds of appeal and they do not properly
    fall to us to decide.  However, we do accept the  Appellant's  argument
    that the legal documents were an important part of her case  and  their
    reliability was critical to the judge's assessment of her  credibility.
    The FtT's treatment of this evidence is unsatisfactory for the  reasons
    explained above.

      Ground 2 - Treatment of the Human Rights Activism Issue

22. The Appellant's case was that she was  a  "human  rights  activist"  by
    reason of her activities  as  a  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka.  Her  case  is
    summarised at  paragraph  7  of  the  Determination,  noting  that  she
    qualified in Sri Lanka as a lawyer, she started to practice in 2007 and
    she specialised in human rights cases.  The Appellant produced evidence
    from various third parties to support her case.

23. The Appellant complains that nowhere in the FtT's decision is  there  a
    clear finding as to whether she was indeed a human rights activist  for
    the purposes of paragraph  7(b)  of  GJ.   We  reject  this  criticism.
    Although no express finding was made, it is clear that  the  Judge  did
    indeed reject the Appellant's case that she was a human rights activist
    (see [5] above).

24. However, on the specifics of  how  that  conclusion  was  reached,  the
    Appellant also pointed to two pieces of evidence put before  the  Judge
    to support her claim that she was a "human rights activist", which were
    not referred to by the Judge at all.  Those were:

          a. A letter from the Chief Executive Officer of the  Society  for
             Love and Understanding, dated 20 August  2015.   This  society
             describes  itself  as  a  "not   for   profit   human   rights
             organisation" registered as a  charity  in  Sri  Lanka.   That
             letter records that the Appellant was a volunteer and rendered
             pro bono services  to  the  users  of  the  organisation  from
             January 2008 to March 2009, mainly handling the  human  rights
             cases of  Tamil  political  detainees  who  were  detained  on
             suspicion of having links with the LTTE.

          b. A certificate demonstrating the Appellant's participation in a
             six month course on the theory and practice of human rights at
             the Centre for the Study of Human Rights of the University  of
             Colombo, dated 14 February 2007.

25. It seems likely that the Judge treated these  two  letters  as  falling
    into a similar category as "attorney's letters" (many of which were put
    before the judge), and that he rejected all this evidence on the  basis
    of the letters from the British High Commission,  to  the  effect  that
    attorney's letters were very frequently found  to  be  unreliable.   He
    said this:

         "The  significance  of  the  High  Commission  evidence   is   that
         apparently  reliable  but  actually  false  evidence   is   readily
         available from Sri Lanka, including from those who are or appear to
         be Sri Lankan attorneys, in support of asylum claims. I do not  see
         how the caution that requires can be restricted to  letters  making
         one particular type of claim."

26. However, again, we are not persuaded that this assessment  can  stretch
    to include the two pieces of evidence summarised above, one of which is
    from a charity and the other from an academic institution  -  not  from
    attorneys and therefore not addressed by the British High Commission in
    its letters referred to above.  The Appellant is right to point to  the
    absence of any explicit reference to these two pieces  of  evidence  in
    the determination.  Arguably, the second carries little weight: it is a
    2007 certificate showing that she attended a course in human rights  in
    Colombo: that is unlikely, in and of itself, to lead  to  her  being  a
    "human rights activist" and a target for the authorities.  However, the
    first document did require closer analysis because it stated  in  terms
    that the Appellant had acted for suspected LTTE activists, and this was
    capable of bringing her within category 2(b) of GJ, as an activist,  or
    perceived activist, in her own right.  We conclude  that  there  was  a
    failure by the FtT to consider both items of evidence.

      Ground 3 - The Risk on Return Issue

27. By this ground, the Appellant argues that the  FtT  reached  the  wrong
    conclusion in determining that the Appellant was not at risk on  return
     A number of other points were made under Ground 3, at least on  paper,
    but these were not strongly pressed by Mr Martin at  the  hearing.   He
    concentrated his attack on the matters we  have  addressed  above.   We
    will therefore say nothing further about Ground 3: it is not  necessary
    to do so.

Conclusion

28. We have to ask ourselves whether, taken as a whole, the decision of the
    FtT demonstrates an error of law (applying s  11(1)  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007).  Failures to make necessary findings  or  to
    give reasons or to  consider  relevant  evidence  are  all  capable  of
    amounting to an error of law.

29. We stand back and ask ourselves  whether  the  Judge's  conclusion  was
    properly open to him on the findings he had  made.   We  approach  this
    task applying the "anxious  scrutiny"  which  attaches  to  any  asylum
    claim.  For the reasons set out above, we conclude, with  regret,  that
    the FtT's Determination  must  be  set  aside.  We  conclude  that  the
    deficiencies we have identified, taken together, lead us to  doubt  the
    integrity of the ultimate  rejection  of  the  Appellant's  account  as
    false.  The deficiencies are "material", as it  is  at  least  possible
    that the outcome would have been different if they had been avoided.

30. We would add this: there were reasons for doubting the Appellant's case
    (the   Judge identified various problems with the Appellant's  account,
    besides those outlined above).  This was not an open and shut case,  at
    least on paper, either way.  That makes it even more important that the
    FtT's decision should encompass  all  necessary  findings  on  material
    issues, suitably reasoned.  It should  demonstrably  address  the  most
    important pieces of evidence.

    Conclusion and Directions

31. As to disposal, we remit this appeal  for  a  fresh  hearing  before  a
    different FtT. This is not a  case  where  the  Upper  Tribunal  should
    properly  re-make  the  decision,  given  the  nature  of  the   errors
    identified by us.

32. The parties should each file  skeleton  arguments  in  advance  of  the
    renewed hearing, at least 21 days (Appellant) and 14 days  (Respondent)
    in advance.  We do not believe any further directions are required  but
    the parties are responsible  for  ensuring  that  such  directions  are
    timeously sought and made, for the proper conduct of  this  re-hearing,
    if they consider them necessary.

Notice of Decision

We set aside the decision of the FtT and remit  the  appeal  for  re-hearing
and fresh decision by a differently constituted FtT.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Permission to appeal

Permission to appeal is refused.  There is no issue of law or  other  reason
to grant permission for a second appeal.  The case turns on its  own  facts.



Signed        Philippa Whipple      Date         15 December 2016

The Hon Mrs Justice Whipple, sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

