
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08882/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 August 2016                      |On 17 August 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     ET
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr David Chirico, Counsel, instructed by Wilsons
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Anonymity

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as a contempt of court.


1.   This is an appeal from a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Taylor
    promulgated on 21 June 2016. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, now
    aged 35. In 2006 she was granted leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    as a spouse. Shortly prior to the expiry of her leave in  August  2008,
    she returned to Albania, where her son was born in  October  2008.  She
    came back to the United Kingdom in December 2012  and  claimed  asylum.
    She made a number of  applications  for  leave  to  remain,  which  led
    ultimately to the respondent's Refusal Letter dated 1  June  2015.  The
    detailed reasons  which  accompanied  that  letter  rejected  both  the
    appellant's asylum claim and her claim for humanitarian protection.

2.   The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  dismissed.  The
    Judge did not consider her to be a credible witness  [21].  He  made  a
    positive finding that her husband was not Albanian (as she had claimed)
    but Kosovan [18], and rejected her claim to have  been  the  victim  of
    domestic abuse at his hands [20]. He concluded that the  appellant  had
    not demonstrated a well-founded fear of persecution  [25]  nor  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm [26], and dismissed her appeal on asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds respectively. He also rejected  her
    claim under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    finding no very significant obstacles to her integration on  return  to
    Albania.

3.   The appellant pursued three discrete grounds of appeal before us  which
    can be summarised as follows:

    (1)  that the Judge's  approach  to  the  appellant's  credibility  was
         irrational and, in particular,  he  failed  to  take  into  account
         relevant material;


    (2)  that the Judge's approach to s 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act was flawed in its assessment of the best  interests
         of the appellant's son;


    (3)  that the Judge's approach to Article 8 was also flawed.

4.   The written grounds, and the  oral  submissions  of  Mr  Chirico,  gave
    greatest prominence  to  the  Judge's  credibility  findings,  and  his
    treatment of the  evidence  overall  and  we  therefore  address  these
    matters first.

5.   In paragraphs [18] and [19] the Judge made findings with regard to  the
    appellant's husband.  Mr  Chirico  contends  that  those  findings  are
    flawed. Either they are based on a misapprehension as to the  evidence,
    or they fail to take into account significant elements of it.  He  took
    us to a raft of material which was before the Judge but which  did  not
    feature in the determination. Broadly  this  fell  into  the  following
    categories.

6.   First, there was material was to the effect that a number of  Albanians
    had pretended to be Kosovans in order to obtain status  in  the  United
    Kingdom. This, in Mr Chirico's submission related  to  a  'core  issue'
    which the Judge had to determine, and the Judge  failed  to  take  into
    account background material which, he says, tended to support both  the
    appellant's credibility and her assertion  that  her  husband  and  the
    father of her child (whatever his identity might be)  is  Albanian  and
    not Kosovan.  It included:

    i.   a report from the  Free  Movement  website  (Appeal  bundle:  P96)
         suggesting  that  in  2009  there  were  some  30  decisions  where
         Albanians had dishonestly asserted Kosovan citizenship;


    ii.  an extract from the Mail Online in 2007 (P95) reporting that  the
         Home Office  was  investigating  a  large  number  of  cases  where
         economic  migrants  from  Albania  were  deploying   fake   Kosovan
         identities in pursuit of claims for asylum;


    iii. the transcript of a decision of the Administrative  Court  in  The
         Queen (oao Rushiti and Laci) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014]  EWHC  3931  (Admin)  (P99-P114)  concerning  two
         Albanian   nationals   who   made   fraudulent   but   unsuccessful
         applications for asylum on the basis that they were Kosovars.

7.   Mr Chirico criticised the manner in which  the  Judge  dealt  with  the
    appellant's husband's passport at paragraph [18]:

         "A passport is a primary document  of  identity  and  the  Tribunal
         would require very significant  evidence  to  the  contrary  to  be
         satisfied that the holder of the passport was other than the person
         on the face of the document."

    Whilst recognising  that  there  is  a  presumption  of  regularity  in
    relation to a passport, Mr Chirico submitted that  the  Judge  elevated
    its status in  this  instance,  and  the  evidential  burden  which  he
    considered would be necessary to challenge it. The failure of the Judge
    to  make  any  reference  to  the  material  suggestive  of  widespread
    identification fraud in the  Albanian/Kosovan  context  (as  summarised
    above) indicates, he submits, that the Judge's findings are flawed  and
    irrational in relation to (i) the  appellant's  husband's  nationality;
    (ii) her credibility generally; and (iii)  her  narrative  of  domestic
    violence in the past.

8.   Second, in paragraph [18] the Judge states:

         "I consider that  it  is  significant  that  the  claim  that  [the
         husband's] passport is false  is  so  central  to  the  appellant's
         claim, yet she had been in the UK for three and a  half  years  but
         only reported the matter to the Home Office in the week before  the
         hearing."

    Mr Chirico accepts that a telephone call to the Home Office's reporting
    number was made as the Judge indicates, but the allegation had in  fact
    been expressly raised prior to this in a letter  from  the  appellant's
    solicitors to the UK Border Agency dated 5 February 2014 (P325-335)  at
    paragraph 15 of the letter (P327).

9.   Third, Mr Chirico submitted that the Judge failed to take into  account
    the  psychological  assessment  of  Jocelyn  Blumberg  (P123-183),  the
    evidence of the appellant's psychotherapist, Anita Campbell (P185-193),
    and that of her  social  worker  Angeline  Seymour  (P194-195).  Whilst
    acknowledging that  these  documents  are  referenced  in  the  Judge's
    decision (notably at [16]) Mr Chirico's primary submission was that the
    Judge failed to afford them any or any  adequate  weight  in  his  fact
    finding. The judge stated at [20],

         "the only supporting evidence that the appellant suffered  domestic
         violence was gathered after the event and is the opinion of  social
         workers and a psychologist who base their opinions  solely  in  the
         evidence of the appellant"


         [and later in the same paragraph]


         "the  reports  of  the  Women's  Aid  worker,  social  worker   and
         psychologist all rely entirely on the unsupported evidence  of  the
         appellant."

10.  Mr Chirico submitted that the Judge's view that these matters  amounted
    to no more than the repetition of claims made by the  appellant  as  to
    what may have happened in the past is not  supported  by  the  evidence
    itself. In particular, Jocelyn Blumberg (whose expertise and experience
    is set out as a lengthy appendix to  her  report:  P172-175)  expressly
    considered whether the appellant's symptoms were  consistent  with  her
    reported history of domestic violence (paras 277-280) and whether  such
    symptoms could be accounted for by other factors (paras  281-289).  She
    also expressed her professional opinion as  to  whether  the  appellant
    could be feigning or exaggerating her  symptoms  (paras  290-303).   Mr
    Chirico accepted that findings of fact are  for  the  Tribunal  and  an
    expert cannot usurp the judicial function. However, the expert evidence
    was relevant and credible and should have been considered. If the Judge
    chose to reject it (as was his entitlement) then, submits  Mr  Chirico,
    he should have given reasons for so doing.

11.  Fourth,  in  relation  to  the  Judge's  findings  on  the  appellant's
    credibility, Mr Chirico referred us to the Court of  Appeal's  judgment
    in Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ
    367, which outlined the potential pitfalls of the fact-finder  reaching
    a conclusion by reference only to the appellant's evidence and then, if
    the finding is  one  of  adverse  credibility,  to  ask  whether  their
    provisional conclusion would be affected  by expert evidence.

12.  The judge at [20] states,

         'I find that the appellant has not been a credible  witness  and  I
         have found that her claimed husband is a national of Kosovo'.

    Then comes the passage we have quoted above regarding the  evidence  of
    the social workers and psychologist which the Judge  regards  as  self-
    serving as it  is  based  solely  on  the  appellant's  own  narrative.
    Although judicial writing styles vary, Mr Chirico's submission  was  to
    the effect that the discussion of the  appellant's  credibility  is  so
    divorced from the references to the expert evidence,  that  the  reader
    cannot be confident that the  Judge's  assessment  of  credibility  was
    carried out in the thorough and holistic manner required.

13.  Mr Melvin, on behalf  of  the  respondent,  relied  upon  the  rule  24
    statement. He submitted that the findings made by the Judge  were  open
    to him, and submitted that the extent of identity  fraud  by  Albanians
    was not as prevalent as the  appellant  suggests.  He  pointed  to  the
    absence of contemporaneous general practitioner records supporting  the
    allegation of domestic violence and that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
    reject a purported diagnosis of Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  since
    Jocelyn Blumberg, being a psychologist, was not  qualified  to  express
    such opinion as an expert.

14.  There is, understandably, a  degree  of  overlap  between  the  various
    components of ground one by which the appellant seeks to categorise the
    Judge's credibility findings  as  irrational.  We  have  examined  them
    individually and cumulatively  both  in  the  manner  advanced  in  the
    written grounds settled by other counsel and in the oral submissions of
    Mr Chirico. The Judge's assessment of the credibility of the  appellant
    informs all consequential fact finding. If the  credibility  assessment
    is predicated on a less than complete appraisal of  all  the  available
    evidence, the totality of the decision may be infected.

15.   We  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Judge's  reasoning  is
    insufficiently  explicit  and,  in   certain   key   particulars,   his
    conclusions on credibility are irrational. In particular:

    i.   the Judge effectively treated the appellant's  husband's  passport
         as  determinative   of   his   nationality   without   giving   any
         consideration to the material which was before  him  indicative  of
         large numbers of Albanians fraudulently obtaining Kosovan identity.
         At the very least the Judge ought to have considered  whether,  and
         if so to what extent, such evidence might have lent support to  the
         appellant's narrative and to her overall credibility.


    ii.  the Judge drew an adverse inference, which became central  to  his
         credibility findings, that was based on a mistaken understanding as
         to when the appellant had first reported her  husband's  use  of  a
         false passport. A report was in fact made in  February  2014,  thus
         significantly earlier than the telephone notification of  the  week
         before the hearing (as the Judge had  understood  the  position  to
         be).


    iii. the Judge failed to into take  account  the  evidence  of  Jocelyn
         Blumberg, Anita Campbell and Angeline  Seymour.  Where  a  Tribunal
         departs from the  opinion  expressed  by  an  expert,  the  Judge's
         reasons - howsoever briefly expressed - should be given.

16.  The other matters raised by Mr Chirico might not of  themselves  amount
    to irrationality, but taken  together  with  those  identified  in  the
    preceding paragraph,  they  reinforce  the  impression  of  flawed  (or
    insufficiently explained)  reasoning.  In  the  circumstances,  we  are
    satisfied that a material error of law has been made out. We  therefore
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Chirico  and  Mr
    Melvin were agreed that if we found an error of law we should remit the
    matter  to  be  considered  afresh.   Having  regard  to  the  Practice
    Direction,  since  the  error  we  have  found  concerns  the   Judge's
    credibility findings, it is appropriate that the appeal be remitted. It
    may be that the same conclusions are reached, but  justice  requires  a
    process whereby all  material  evidence  is  expressly  considered  and
    reasons are given which are sufficient for the parties to be  confident
    that anxious scrutiny has been given to the matter.

17.  Whilst we do not wish to usurp the First-tier  Tribunal's  function  to
    manage the appeal hereafter in accordance with its own procedures,  the
    Tribunal (and the appellant) may be assisted by information as  to  the
    respondent's investigations concerning the alleged  identity  deception
    practised by the  appellant's  husband.  This  is  clearly  a  relevant
    consideration and the First-tier Tribunal may wish to  consider  making
    such a direction.

18.  Since we are allowing this appeal on the first  ground,  setting  aside
    the decision and ordering a rehearing, it  is  unnecessary  for  us  to
    consider the second and third grounds advanced by  the  appellant.  The
    matter will be heard afresh when sustainable findings of  fact  can  be
    made taking into account the totality of the evidence. The  application
    of section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009,  and
    of Article 8 ECHR, will fall to be considered in  the  light  of  those
    findings based on the circumstances as  at  the  date  of  the  further
    hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  21  June  2016
contains an error of law and is therefore set aside. The matter is  remitted
for a rehearing by a Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Taylor.  No
findings of fact are preserved.


Signed   Mark Hill                               Date      17 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
