

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/08640/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2016                         |  On 7 April 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                    MR AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Lemer, Counsel, instructed by Thompson *& Co
Solicitors (Morden)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan and is of the Ahmadi  faith.
      In a determination sent on 26 November 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Chana dismissed his appeal against a decision by the respondent  dated
      15 May 2015 refusing to grant him asylum or humanitarian protection in
      the UK.  The appellant entered the UK in September 2010 as  a  student
      with leave valid until 31 December  2014.  On  10  November  2014  the
      appellant claimed asylum on the basis that he had  been  targeted  for
      his Ahmadi faith by extremists in 2010 and they had also targeted  his
      mother who had been charged with blasphemy. The police  were  said  to
      have visited the appellant's house again  in  December  2014  and  his
      servant was said to have told the police that his mother was in the UK
      and had claimed asylum. The appellant's father was said to  have  been
      in hiding in Quetta since. The police were said to have visited  again
      in January 2015.


   2.   The judge accepted that the appellant was  an  Ahmadi  but  did  not
      accept he would be at risk because:


         "33. The core of the appellant's claim is that he  is  at  risk  in
         Pakistan not because of his  own  actions  as  an  Ahmadi  but  his
         mother's actions. He claims that his mother has  been  charged  for
         blasphemy  because  her  non-Ahmadi  client  in  her  beauty  salon
         reported her to the authorities for preaching the Ahmadi faith  and
         this puts him at risk. Therefore the appellant's claim is based  on
         his mother's conduct in Pakistan and not his own".


   3.   The judge went on to find that the appellant  had  not  demonstrated
      that he had preached to anyone outside his faith in Pakistan  or  that
      he had a specific profile for Ahmadi activities. She  disbelieved  the
      appellant's  evidence  about  his  father  and   sister   because   of
      inconsistencies in his account of whether they continued  to  practice
      the Ahmadi faith. As a result she  said  that  she  did  not  find  it
      credible that the appellant  had  to  flee  Pakistan  because  of  his
      mother's alleged blasphemy "but not his father or sister who were also
      Ahmadis" and who she considered had not been shown to be at risk.  The
      judge also found not credible the appellant's account that his  mother
      would preach to non-Ahmadis at a beauty salon in Lahore and  risk  her
      business being reported to  the  authorities.  Despite  the  appellant
      adducing evidence from a Russell Gerard Wilcox, a UK barrister who had
      visited Lahore and made inquiries about this beauty parlour  (as  well
      as of the police records), the judge concluded that she preferred  the
      respondent's evidence that no beauty parlour exists in the names given
      by the appellant. She also found that the complaint lodged against the
      appellant's mother was  unreliable  as  it  was  consistent  with  the
      "appellant  having  planted  this  evidence  by  making  sure  that  a
      complaint is lodged against his mother, to bolster his asylum  claim".
      The judge also considered that the evidence regarding  the  attack  on
      the appellant in in May 2010 was not specifically directed at him  and
      so this evidence "does not take the appellant's case any further".


   4.   Turning to the appellant's claimed sur place activities in  the  UK,
      the judge found that this showed that it was only in the last 6 months
      that the appellant's activities had "escalated" and was at  odds  with
      the appellant's evidence in his asylum interview when he said that  he
      did not have time to participate in preaching and leaflet  activities.
      She concluded that the appellant's "flurry of activity with the Ahmadi
      Muslim Association UK is an opportunistic attempt to claim that he  is
      a diligent Ahmadi to try and strengthen his asylum claim".  She  found
      he had not told the truth about his commitment to the Ahmadi faith  or
      about his mother's activities.


   5.  The appellant's grounds of appeal included an  application  to  amend
      the grounds which I granted. The grounds as amended contend  that  the
      judge erred in failing to consider  or  rule  on  an  application  for
      adjournment based on the fact that  the  appellant's  mother's  asylum
      appeal was pending and a  direct  witness  to  core  elements  of  her
      account had not received a response to his request  that  he  be  told
      whether the respondent intended  to  cross-examine  him.  Despite  not
      hearing from the mother and despite noting that  his  mother's  appeal
      was pending at [20], the judge deemed fit to reject her evidence.  The
      grounds also contend that the judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  the
      evidence of Mr Wilcox who  had  written  to  the  respondent  and  the
      Tribunal prior to the hearing offering to attend to give evidence  and
      specifically asking the respondent whether she wished to cross-examine
      him. Her error was thus said to be twofold. First she wrongly  decided
      to refuse to adjourn to ensure Mr Wilcox  could  attend  the  hearing.
      Second, given her view that she had enough  information  to  determine
      the appeal without Mr Wilcox's evidence, she was wrong to  reject  his
      evidence as not credible, especially since  on  her  own  account  the
      appellant's case was entirely dependent on his mother's asylum  claim.



   6. During submissions I heard  submissions  from  the  parties  regarding
      whether or not the judge had been asked to adjourn so that  Mr  Wilcox
      could attend to give evidence. Mr Lemer produced a  statement  from  a
      solicitor at Thompson & Co who had attended  the  hearing  before  the
      judge on  17  November  2015  which  attested  that  the  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer had himself asked the judge to consider  adjourning
      so that the respondent could  consider  further  the  evidence  of  Mr
      Wilcox. This application was said in this statement not to  have  been
      opposed by the appellant's representative,  Mr  Yeo  of  Counsel.  The
      statement said that the judge had ruled that  she  would  refuse  this
      application as she did not consider it necessary. Mr Tufan  said  that
      the note he held from the POU regarding the hearing of this appeal did
      not mention such an application to adjourn, but he  did  not  seek  to
      argue that the record of the appellant's solicitor was incorrect.


   7.  With  the  agreement  of  the  parties  I  consulted  the  record  of
      proceedings, but informed them I could not sufficiently decipher their
      contents so as to establish whether or not  such  an  application  was
      made. Having considered the  matter,  I  am  satisfied  that  such  an
      application was made. Mr Tufan quite rightly did  not  seek  to  argue
      that the cursory HOU note can be taken  to  negative  the  claim  made
      regarding the adjournment issue. Further, on the given facts, it would
      indeed have been very surprising if such an  application  it  had  not
      been made given the late production of the statement  from  Mr  Wilcox
      dated 27 April 2015 and the fact that the appellant's mother's  asylum
      appeal was pending. Mr Wilcox's evidence was highly  material  to  the
      core of her claim which centred on  what  had  occurred  at  a  beauty
      parlour in Lahore.


   8. Having ruled on this matter, it is unnecessary to set out the parties'
      respective arguments otherwise because I  consider  that  the  judge's
      failure to adjourn or to give reasons for refusing to adjourn amounted
      to an error of law.


   9. . In considering the matter of whether  the judge did or did not apply
      a procedurally fair approach, I am  guided  by  the  judgment  in   SH
      (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA
      Civ 1284 wherein at [14]-[15] Moses LJ stated:


          "14.In relation to both the two issues I have identified,  whether
         the Immigration judge erred in law in refusing an  adjournment  and
         as to whether he would have reached  the  same  conclusion,  in  my
         judgement  Judge  King  fell  into  serious  error.   First,   when
         considering whether the immigration judge ought to have granted  an
         adjournment, the test was  not  irrationality.  The  test  was  not
         whether his decision was properly open to  him  or  was  Wednesbury
         unreasonable or perverse. The test and sole test was whether it was
         unfair. In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department  ex-parte
         the Kingdom of Belgium and Others [CO/236/2000  15  February  2000]
         the  issue  was  whether  a  requesting  state  and  Human   Rights
         organisations were entitled to see a  medical  report  relevant  to
         Pinochet's extradition. Simon Brown LJ took the view that the  sole
         question was whether fairness required  disclosure  of  the  report
         (page 24). He concluded that the procedure was not a matter for the
         Secretary of State but for the court. He endorsed a passage in  the
         fifth edition of Smith Woolf and Jowell at pages 406-7:-
         "Whether fairness is required and what  is  involved  in  order  to
         achieve fairness is for the decision of the courts as a  matter  of
         law. The issue is not one for the discretion of the decision-maker.
         The test is not whether no reasonable body would  have  thought  it
         proper to dispense with a fair hearing. The Wednesbury reserve  has
         no place in relation to procedural propriety." (page 24)
         15. The question for Judge King was whether it was unfair to refuse
         the appellant the opportunity to obtain an  independent  assessment
         of his age; the question was not whether it was reasonably open  to
         the Immigration judge to take the view  that  no  such  opportunity
         should be afforded to the appellant. Where an appellant seeks to be
         allowed to establish by contrary evidence that the case against him
         is  wrong,  the  question  will  always  be,  whatever  stage   the
         proceedings have reached, what does fairness demand?  It  is  plain
         from reading his decision as a whole that that  was  not  the  test
         applied by Judge King.  His  failure  to  apply  that  test  was  a
         significant error."
  10.  As  I  observed  at  the  hearing  before  me,  it  is  not  entirely
      satisfactory that  the  appellant's  representatives  decided  not  to
      arrange for Mr Wilcox to attend the hearing  notwithstanding  that  he
      had written to request whether his attendance was  necessary.  He  had
      received no reply and was not entitled to assume his request had  been
      considered. Nevertheless, given that Mr  Wilcox  is  a  barrister,  it
      would  have  accorded  with  convention  and  best  practice  for  the
      respondent to have responded to his request  rather  than  leave  that
      request unanswered. There was sufficient time for her to have done so.
       Further, it should have been evident to the judge  that  Mr  Wilcox's
      evidence was absolutely central to the appellant's case. Indeed on her
      own account it was entirely dependent on his  evidence  regarding  the
      appellant's mother's claim to have had a blasphemy complaint taken out
      against her. Not  only  did  the  judge  not  state  any  reasons  for
      proceeding to assess Mr Wilcox's evidence  without  oral  examination,
      but the judge proceeded  to  reject  certain  aspects  of  it  as  not
      credible for reasons which at their highest were somewhat speculative,
      turning largely on whether  it  was  plausible  that  a  person  in  a
      neighbouring property would grant access to  Mr  Wilcox  to  view  the
      beauty parlour. In the  context  of  what  is  known  from  background
      country information regarding the way life is organised in big  cities
      such as Lahore, it cannot be said that this was to be rejected as  not
      plausible simply because Mr Wilcox had not provided an explanation for
      it. The very fact that the judge at [41] pinpointed Mr  Wilcox's  lack
      of explanation for it as so important, underlines  her  error  in  not
      affording Mr Wilcox an opportunity to provide such an  explanation  in
      person.


  11. I also have serious concerns in any event that the judge was justified
      in regarding the  appellant's  claim  as  entirely  dependent  on  his
      mother. On his own account he had been attacked in 2010. Although  the
      attack on the mosque he was attending at the time may  not  have  been
      directed at him personally, the attack on a group  of  worshippers  in
      the main Ahmadi mosque in the city, is capable of being regarded as an
      attack on all those present individually as well as collectively;  or,
      put another way, in such a context it is not necessarily incumbent  on
      an appellant to show that he was singled out.


  12.  In any event, even if the judge was  right  that  the  only  targeted
      attacks then and subsequently was directed at his mother,  recital  27
      of the original Qualification Directive states that: "Family  members,
      merely due  to  their  relation  to  the  refugee,  will  normally  be
      vulnerable to acts of persecution in such a manner that could  be  the
      basis  for  a  refugee  claim".  The  judge  appears  to  have  wholly
      overlooked this consideration.


  13. A further difficulty afflicts the judge's reliance on  the  fact  that
      the appellant's father and sister were not at risk in Pakistan. Whilst
      it was open to her to reject the appellant's evidence  about  this  if
      she took all of it into account,  it  appears  that  in  reaching  her
      conclusions on this matter she simply ignored the appellant's evidence
      that his father had gone into hiding in Quetta.


  14. A  further  flaw  concerns  the  judge's  reliance  in  rejecting  the
      appellant's claim  on  the  opportunistic  nature  of  his  sur  place
      activities. Whilst she was fully entitled to  treat  such  (perceived)
      opportunism as  a  relevant  factor,  this  did  not  relieve  of  her
      obligation to consider whether nevertheless such  activities  put  the
      appellant at risk. This last observation points up a further  flaw  on
      the part of the judge, in that whilst Article 4(3)(d) of the Directive
      requires a  judge  to  take  into  account  "whether  the  applicant's
      activities since leaving the country of origin were engaged in for the
      sole or main purpose of creating the necessary conditions for applying
      for international protection", the same  subparagraph  continues  that
      this exercise is necessary "so as to assess whether  these  activities
      will expose the applicant to persecution or serious harm  if  returned
      to that country", a wording that clearly requires  (consistently  with
      established UK case law) that even opportunistic sur place  activities
      must be examined as to whether in fact  they  place  an  applicant  at
      risk. This the First tier Tribunal judge did not do in the appellant's
      case.


  15. For the above reasons the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  and  her
      decision must be set aside. Both parties were  in  agreement  with  me
      that this is an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier  Tribunal,
      the only finding of fact to be preserved is that the appellant  is  an
      Ahmadi (a fact not disputed by the respondent in any event). From  the
      terms of my decision on error lf aw it follows that Mr  Wilcox  should
      attend ready to give evidence as a witness.


  16. It will also be necessary for the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  this
      case to take into account the findings of fact made by the  First-tier
      Tribunal following a hearing made on 23  December  2015  allowing  the
      asylum appeal of the  appellant's  mother,  QA  (AA/01283/2015).  This
      tribunal heard evidence from Mr Wilcox  and  found  that  it  had  "no
      reason to doubt the evidence given by Mr Wilcox" ([98]) and  expressly
      rejected the respondent's  contrary  evidence  that  no  such  parlour
      existed at the relevant time ([102]). It will be entirely a matter for
      the First tier Tribunal re-hearing this appeal to  decide  whether  to
      apply Devaseelan principles, although my  own  initial  view  is  that
      there being a heavy overlap in the factual matrix of both appeals,  it
      would be correct to treat the judicial determination in  the  mother's
      case (not appealed by the respondent) as a starting-point.


  17. To summarise:




The First-tier Tribunal judge materially erred in law and  her  decision  is
set aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to  be  re-
made there in accordance with directions set out above.









                               Signed   [pic]
                                   Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
