
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08659/2013
     AA/08660/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Sent         |
|On 11th April 2014                              |On 16th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                            M F (FIRST APPELLANT)
                           S A (SECOND APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss Sachdev of Bury Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are both citizens of India and are mother and child. The
    First Appellant now has a second child, a daughter. The first Appellant
    claims that she is no longer in a relationship with the father  of  the
    daughter.  She has failed to give details with regard to the father  of
    the daughter.  However it is not  contended  that  the  daughter  is  a
    citizen of the United Kingdom nor has any other right to remain in  the
    UK by reason of the child's status been asserted.

 2. As this appeal impinges upon  the  rights  of  two  minors  and  as  an
    anonymity direction was made previously I make an  anonymity  direction
    in the present proceedings.

 3. It is accepted that the rights of all parties are  dependent  upon  the
    case in respect of the First Appellant.

 4. This is the Appellants' appeal against the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cruthers promulgated on 5th February  2014.   The  judge
    dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the decisions to remove  them
    from the UK  after  rejecting  their  claims  to  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection or other relief under the  ECHR.   By  a  decision  made  on
    25th February 2014 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  gave
    permission to appeal.

 5. In the leave Judge Grant-Hutchinson noted the mental health problems of
    the first Appellant and that it had been conceded before Judge Cruthers
    that it could not be argued that the Appellants should not be  returned
    to India by reason thereof.

 6. In granting permission to appeal the judge gave the following reasons:-



         "3.  However it is submitted that the judge has arguably  erred  in
             law by not giving any or any adequate reasons for:-

              (a) the husband's use of local  authority  to  intimidate  and
                  harass the First Appellant's parents to disclose  her  and
                  her son's whereabouts;

              (b) the letter submitted by the police  in  the  UK  that  the
                  Appellants would be at risk on return;

              (c) the Appellant's husband breaches his restraining order  in
                  the UK to show his determination to go and get her;

              (d) considering the birth of the Appellant's second child  who
                  was born out of wedlock in the UK;

              (e) assessing  the  First  Appellant's  ability  to  work  and
                  accommodate herself with a 3 month old baby  and  a  young
                  child to look after on her own in a different area or  the
                  cultural attitudes and her personal safety by  having  her
                  second child out of wedlock and assessing  the  background
                  evidence accordingly;  and

              (f) taking into account the best interests of the first  child
                  who is 7."







         Basic factual background

 7. The Appellants came to the  United  Kingdom  in  or  about  2010.   The
    Appellants came to join the First Appellant's husband and the father of
    the Second Appellant, who was in the United Kingdom  on  a  work  visa.
    The appellants entered the UK in November 2010.  By January 2011  there
    was significant domestic violence and the  Appellants  were  housed  in
    accommodation for victims of domestic violence.

 8. There had been a history of domestic violence in India  going  back  to
    2004. For the violence in the UK  the  first  Appellant's  husband  was
    prosecuted, convicted  and  sentenced  to  26  weeks  imprisonment  for
    assault. After the completion of his sentence he returned to India.

 9. The Appellants claimed asylum on 31st January 2011.  At that stage  the
    Appellant did not have a relationship with anybody  else  nor  did  she
    have the second child.  Clearly the First Appellant  now  does  have  a
    second child. There is no evidence as to who the father of the child is
    or as to his status in the UK.

10. The first Appellant claimed that on return to India  she  would  be  at
    risk because of her husband would trace her and she would be  subjected
    to further mistreatment. Further she claimed that the circumstances  to
    which she would be returning as a single woman with children  would  be
    such as to expose her to a risk of serious mistreatment. There  was  no
    prospect of relocation and there was an inadequacy of protection.   The
    Appellants also seek to claim that their rights under Article  8  would
    be breached if they were returned to India.

11. The judge found that the first Appellant's husband and family would not
    be able to trace the Appellant and that she would not  be  at  risk  of
    mistreatment. The judge dismissed the  claim  to  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and relief  on  grounds  of  Article  2  and  3.  The  judge
    dismissed the Appellants' claims on Article 8 grounds.

Issues and consideration

12. The first challenge is on the basis that the judge has failed  to  take
    into account the fact that the  Appellant's  former  husband  would  be
    using the  local  police  and  authorities  to  ascertain  whether  the
    Appellant was back in India and as such she would be at risk  from  her
    husband.  The judge noted that  the  appellant  had  claimed  that  her
    husband was already looking for her in India.  It is further  submitted
    that there was evidence from the UK police [see Tab A page  C1  of  the
    bundle letter dated January 2011] that the Appellant would be  at  risk
    if sent back to India. It is asserted  there  is  a  restraining  order
    relating to the Appellant's husband in the UK, which  appears  to  have
    been breached.  It is suggested that there have been no findings by the
    judge in respect of the evidence referred to.

13. Before me the  Appellant's  representative  referred  to  the  evidence
    indicating that the Appellant's former husband was  still  seeking  the
    Appellant and the evidence that there were concerns  if  the  Appellant
    returned to India. The references were made to sections of  the  bundle
    submitted including Tab C  pages  149-150  and  Tab  D  of  the  bundle
    relating to the continued interest in the Appellant. Reference was also
    made to the background evidence as to relocation  and  availability  of
    protection in India. [Tab A C1 , F3].

14.  It was asserted that police forces and the authorities can be used  to
    trace individuals on return to India and  that  the  first  Appellant's
    husband would be able to use such means to trace the Appellants. It  is
    asserted that the change of name of itself would have to be notified to
    the authorities and would expose the Appellants to the  risk  of  being
    traced.

15. References were also made to the treatment of single and divorced women
    with children. It was asserted that there was no support and assistance
    that would be available especially as one of the children was male  and
    aged over 5.

16. In essence it was being asserted that the  judge  had  failed  to  take
    account of evidence that was before him.

17. The representative for the Respondent submitted that the judge was  not
    required to refer to all the evidence but to give reasons based on  the
    evidence for coming to the conclusions that he did. As per the case  of
    R (Iran) v SSHD 2005 EWCA Civ 982 there was no requirement for a  judge
    to deal with every piece of evidence.

18. The judge in the main has accepted the Appellant's historic account  of
    mistreatment in the past and mistreatment leading up to  the  Appellant
    being placed in protected accommodation.  However  the  judge  has  not
    accepted the risk that the Appellants face if they were to relocate  on
    return to India.

19. At paragraph  54 the judge has specifically considered  the  likelihood
    and risk that the Appellant's former husband and  family  represent  to
    the Appellant.  The judge has specifically  noted  that  there  was  no
    suggestion that the Appellant's husband had  any  particular  power  or
    influence in his home area much less across the  rest  of  India.   The
    judge noted that India was a  large  democratic  country  with  a  huge
    population.  It  had  been  suggested  that  the  husband  could  place
    advertisements within local newspapers to seek to find  out  where  the
    Appellant was.  The judge noted the claims the Appellant's husband  was
    already seeking to find her in India, the judge clearly found that such
    a suggestion was not realistic or credible.

20. The judge has thereafter referred to the  background  information  with
    regard to India, its size and population.  The judge has found  on  the
    basis of the evidence that he did  not  believe  that  the  Appellant's
    husband or family could find the Appellant.  Having  taken  account  of
    the evidence the judge has come to the conclusion that  the  Appellants
    could safely relocate without there being any risk that them. In coming
    to that conclusion the judge  took  account  of  the  claims  that  the
    Appellants could be traced by their names and would have to give notice
    of name changes to the authorities.

21. The judge has clearly considered all the background evidence in respect
    of India and was satisfied that the Appellant would not  be  traced  if
    she were to relocate to another of India.

22. With regard to the letter from the police [Tab A  C1]  that  letter  is
    dated January 2011 when the criminal  offences  were  originally  being
    pursued and investigated. The judge has considered the position  as  at
    the date of the hearing in 2014. The judge was  entitled  to  make  the
    findings that he did on the evidence and there was no requirements  for
    the judge to deal with every piece of evidence  as  is  made  clear  in
    judgment of  LJ Brookes in the case of  R (Iran) v SSHD 2005  EWCA  Civ
    982 and the cases referred to therein.

23. The judge has considered whether it would be unduly harsh to expect the
    Appellant to relocate. In so  doing  the  judge  has  referred  to  the
    current country guidance and  background  information  with  regard  to
    India and was satisfied in the circumstances that the  Appellant  could
    relocate.  The judge took  account  of  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    herself allegedly spoke three languages  and  had  a  BSc  in  computer
    science in India.  The Appellant has worked for British Telecom in  her
    home city of Chennai and had also worked for Tata Consultancy Services.
     The judge was satisfied on the basis of the  Appellant's  skills  that
    the Appellant would be able to find employment  sufficient  to  support
    herself and her children. The judge considered the position with regard
    to accommodation and was satisfied otherwise that the  Appellant  could
    accommodation and employment for herself.

24. Taking all the evidence into account the judge  was  entitled  to  find
    that the Appellant would be able to relocate and that it would  not  be
    unduly harsh for them to do so. The judge concluded that the Appellants
    could relocate back to India, the country of their  nationality.   That
    was a finding of fact that the judge was entitled to make on the  basis
    of the evidence presented. The judge has given valid reasons for coming
    to the conclusions that he did on the risk to the Appellants on  return
    to India.

25. In coming to the conclusions that he did  the  judge  has  gone  on  to
    consider the issues with regard to Article 8 and the best interests  of
    the children.  Clearly there was reference to  the  distress  that  the
    elder child felt with regard to his father.  However as the  judge  has
    found that there was no likelihood of the father finding the family out
    and as the family would be able to relocate  the  judge  has  concluded
    that such a risk does not arise.

26. The judge has gone on to consider the circumstances of the children  in
    respect of Article 8.  The Appellants had entered in 2010 and had  been
    in the UK less than five  years.  The  judge  has  taken  all  relevant
    factors into account and was entitled to make the decision that he did.
     The Appellants do not meet the requirements of the Rules to be allowed
    to  remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  decision  was  found
    otherwise to be proportionately justified.  Those were findings of fact
    that the judge was entitled to  make  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    presented.

27. Accordingly I find that there is no material error of  law  within  the
    determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers and  I  uphold  the
    decision to dismiss this  on  all  grounds.   The  appeal  against  the
    decision is dismissed.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



