
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08781/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd November 2016                |On 24th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     K S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim (instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant in relation to a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Mil promulgated on 19th July 2016 by which he dismissed the Appellant's
    asylum appeal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who, as a result  of  an  age
    assessment carried out by Kent social services has been given a date of
    birth of 1st January 1999. He therefore is remains a minor.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on four grounds.
    Firstly, that the Judge arguably erred in law by failing  to  determine
    the Appellant's asylum claim as at the date of the hearing when he  was
    still a minor; secondly, that the Judge arguably erred  in  failing  to
    consider  all  material  relevant  factors  as  to   whether   internal
    relocation  was  reasonable  for  the  Appellant;  thirdly,  the  Judge
    arguably failed to take into account relevant background  evidence  and
    finally, that the Judge arguably failed to follow country guidance.

 4. Having read the grounds and the Decision and Reasons I found  that  the
    Judge had erred in finding that the Appellant would be an adult by  the
    time of his return and considering the risk on that basis.  That  is  a
    clear error of law as the relevant date for the Judge's  assessment  is
    the date of hearing at which time the Appellant  was  just  17,  as  he
    remains today. Mr Avery did not argue otherwise. For that reason I  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision but, there being no  challenge
    to the findings of fact in relation to the asylum  claim  generally,  I
    preserved those findings.

 5. The Judge in the Decision and Reasons set out the undisputed  facts  in
    this case which were as follows:-

 6. The Appellant is an Afghan National. He was brought up and  was  living
    within  Kapisa  province  in  Afghanistan,   which   is   substantially
    controlled by the Taliban.

 7. The Appellant had three brothers, all of whom fought  for  the  Taliban
    and all of whom were killed in conflict.

 8. The Taliban attempted to recruit the Appellant forcibly  prior  to  his
    departure from Afghanistan.

 9. The Judge also recorded at paragraph 20 of  the  Decision  and  Reasons
    that the Secretary of State did not suggest that  the  Appellant  could
    return at his home area and be accommodated  by  his  family.  He  also
    recorded at paragraph 21 that regardless of his views about any lack of
    effort on the part of the Appellant to contact his family, he  accepted
    that he had not in fact made contact with them and, given the risks  to
    him in Kapisa province, which the Secretary of State accepts,  did  not
    think it reasonable to expect him to seek to make contact with them  if
    returned to Kabul.

10. The case thus became one about internal relocation. The  Appellant,  on
    the basis of the  Secretary  of  State's  concession  and  the  Judge's
    findings would be at risk of persecution in  his  home  area  from  the
    Taliban. The issue then is whether it would be unduly harsh  to  expect
    him to relocate to Kabul.

11. Mr Halim relied upon AA (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00016 (IAC). The head note to that case reads as follows:-

               1) The evidence  before  the  Tribunal  does  not  alter  the
                  position  as  described  in  HK  and  Others   (minors   -
                  indiscriminate violence - forced recruitment by Taliban  -
                  contact with family members) Afghanistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT
                  378 (IAC), namely that when considering  the  question  of
                  whether children are disproportionately  affected  by  the
                  consequences of  the  armed  conflict  in  Afghanistan,  a
                  distinction has to be  drawn  between  children  who  were
                  living  with  a  family  and  those  who  are  not.   That
                  distinction has been reinforced by the additional material
                  before this Tribunal. Whilst it is recognised  that  there
                  are some  risks  to  which  children  who  will  have  the
                  protection of the  family  are  nevertheless  subject,  in
                  particular the ris[2010k of landmines  and  the  risks  of
                  being trafficked, they are not of such a level as to  lead
                  to the conclusion that  all  children  would  qualify  for
                  international protection. In arriving at this  conclusion,
                  account has been taken of the necessity to have regard  to
                  the best interests of children.

               2)  However,  the  background  evidence   demonstrates   that
                  unattached children  returned  to  Afghanistan,  depending
                  upon their individual circumstances and  the  location  to
                  which they are returned, may be exposed to risk of serious
                  harm, inter  alia  from  indiscriminate  violence,  forced
                  recruitment, sexual violence, trafficking and  a  lack  of
                  adequate arrangements for  child  protection.  Such  risks
                  will have to be taken into  account  when  addressing  the
                  question of whether  a  return  is  in  the  child's  best
                  interests, a  primary  consideration  when  determining  a
                  claim to humanitarian protection.

  12. Examining then the individual circumstances of this  Appellant;  they
      are that he is from an area controlled  by  the  Taliban  and  cannot
      return due to  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  It  has  been
      accepted that it would be unreasonable for him to make  contact  with
      his family in this area on return and he will therefore be  returning
      to Kabul without any support whatsoever. It was accepted by Mr  Avery
      that there is no evidence that the situation in Afghanistan generally
      and  Kabul  in  particular  has  improved  from  the  situation  that
      prevailed at the time of the country guidance case. Mr Avery made the
      point that although the Appellant is a minor, he is on  the  cusp  of
      attaining his majority. However, the fact remains that he is a  minor
      and would be in an extremely dangerous city, alone  and  unsupported.
      He would effectively be on the streets. It cannot be said  to  be  in
      his best interests to return to Kabul and I  have  no  hesitation  in
      finding that it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him,  under  the
      circumstances, to relocate and live there. He would have no means  of
      support or of obtaining accommodation.  He  would  be  vulnerable  to
      exploitation and abuse. While he may be on the cusp of adulthood,  he
      is not a young man of large stature and I  find  it  likely  that  he
      would be perceived to be a minor and not an adult. As I indicated  at
      the hearing, it would be unreasonable to expect an unaccompanied  and
      unsupported 17 year to live in London; the dangers for an  unattended
      minor in London pale to insignificance when compared to the situation
      in Kabul.

  13. It being accepted that the Appellant would be at risk of  persecution
      in his home area I find internal relocation is not an option and  the
      Appellant is thus entitled to refugee status.

  14. Having found, for the reasons indicated above,  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal made a material law and having set aside that  Decision  and
      Reasons I redecide the appeal and allow it on asylum grounds.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The Appellant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  such  that  his
appeal against the refusal of asylum is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23rd November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

