
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/08194/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                         |                                  |
|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 March 2016                         |  On 7 April 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    S T T
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, I shall refer to the parties as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  therefore  the
    Respondent and S T T is once more the Appellant.

 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fisher (the judge), promulgated on 18 September 2015, in
    which he allowed the Appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds only. That
    appeal was against the Respondent's decision of 11 May  2015,  refusing
    the protection claim made on 8 December 2014.

 3. Although legally  represented  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  this
    ceased at some point thereafter.

 4. The Appellant did not attend the hearing before me. There had  been  no
    communications from her. I waited until shortly before 1pm to start her
    case, but to no avail. I was satisfied that the notice of  hearing  had
    been sent out to the last known address. Having regard to rules  2  and
    38 of the Upper Tribunal's Procedure Rules,  I  decided  that  I  could
    fairly proceed in the Appellant's absence.

The judge's decision

 5. In essence, the Appellant's claim was based upon her  marriage  to  her
    former husband and the problems arising therefrom.

 6. The judge accepted that the Appellant had been  subjected  to  domestic
    violence  in  this  country  and  that  there  was  no  sufficiency  of
    protection in Bangladesh. However, he found that  the  Appellant  could
    internally relocate. On this basis the protection claim failed.

 7. There has been no cross-appeal in relation to the protection claim.

 8. In respect of Article 8, the judge accepted that the  Appellant  was  a
    prosecution witness in a forthcoming criminal trial involving  her  ex-
    husband and mother-in-law as defendants. They were  both  charged  with
    violent offences against the Appellant. The trial was due to take place
    in November 2015. The judge found that this aspect of  the  Appellant's
    case engaged Article 8 (outside of the  Immigration  Rules).  He  found
    that it was in the  public  interest  that  those  who  commit  violent
    offences  were  brought  to  trial  and  punished  if   found   guilty.
    Ultimately, the judge concluded that the public  interest  in  removing
    the Appellant was outweighed  by  the  need  for  her  to  give  direct
    evidence in the trial, particularly as  this  was  due  to  take  place
    shortly after the appeal hearing.

 9. At the hearing the Presenting  Officer  had  given  an  undertaking  on
    behalf of the Respondent not to remove  the  Appellant  until  she  had
    given her evidence at the trial.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. The grounds are in essence threefold: the judge failed to say  why  the
    Appellant could not give  her  evidence  from  outside  of  the  United
    Kingdom; the facts of this case did not engage  Article  8;  the  judge
    failed to consider how the benefits of any Discretionary Leave  granted
    to the Appellant would impinge on the public interest.

11. Permission to appeal was granted,  with  some  reservations,  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins on 20 November 2015.



Decision on error of law

12. There are no material errors of law in the judge's decision.

13. He was perfectly entitled to find that the ability of the Appellant  to
    give live evidence at the criminal trial  of  two  defendants  who  had
    allegedly used violence against her person  engaged  the  private  life
    limb of Article 8. Frankly, it would be surprising if the judge had not
    found this to be the  case.  The  Appellant's  physical  integrity  had
    allegedly been violated by others, and she had the opportunity (through
    the criminal justice system) to seek redress  of  sorts.  That  set  of
    facts clearly falls within the ambit of Article  8.  To  my  mind,  the
    Respondent's assertion that  private  life  was  not  even  engaged  is
    entirely misconceived.

14. The suggestion in the grounds  that  the  Appellant  could/should  have
    given  her  evidence  from  outside  the  United  Kingdom  is   equally
    misconceived. It takes only a little  knowledge  of  criminal  law  and
    procedure to appreciate that such a course of  action  would  have  had
    very serious implications for the prosecution's chances of success. The
    judge did not expressly deal with this point in his decision, but it is
    of such little merit that the failure is immaterial.

15. The judge's application of Article 8 to the Appellant's case was not  a
    case of using this  provision  as  a  "general  dispensing  power",  as
    alleged in the grounds. He quite properly  found  that  Article  8  was
    engaged, and correctly went  onto  consider  the  rest  of  the  Razgar
    questions. This case is far removed from the scenario in  Nasim  [2014]
    UKUT 25 (IAC).

16. The judge was fully  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  prosecution  of
    violent offenders was in the public  interest.  It  would  be  somewhat
    bizarre for  the  Respondent  to  suggest  otherwise.  The  Appellant's
    presence in this country pending her evidence  at  the  trial  was,  as
    implicitly held by the judge, in furtherance of that public interest.

17. The Respondent's contention that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    benefits of obtaining Discretionary Leave is  flawed  on  three  bases.
    First, the period of any such leave  was  entirely  a  matter  for  the
    Respondent. Quite properly, the judge did not direct  any  period.  The
    Respondent's own guidance on Discretionary Leave states that  a  period
    of less than thirty months can be  made  in  appropriate  cases.  Thus,
    given the very particular facts of the  present  case,  any  period  of
    leave could/would have been very short. The benefits  accruing  to  the
    Appellant (and the consequent impact on the economic wellbeing  of  the
    United Kingdom) would have been negligible. Second, the grounds fail to
    take any account  of  the  benefits  to  the  public  interest  by  the
    Appellant being able to give evidence at the criminal trial. Third,  in
    any event, the grant  of  Discretionary  Leave  on  Article  8  grounds
    following  a  successful  appeal  is  simply  a  'by-product'  of   the
    availability of recourse to the ECHR by individuals. Absent evidence of
    likely reliance on public funds, for example (of which there  was  none
    before the judge), it is difficult to see how the  benefits  consequent
    upon obtaining leave as a result of winning one's case should  have  an
    adverse impact on the ability to succeed in the first place.

18. Finally, although the Respondent's undertaking  was  in  place  at  the
    hearing before the judge, and whilst he does not address this point  in
    his decision, the grounds do not take the  point.  Mr  Dewison,  whilst
    confirming that the undertaking remained in place to date, did not seek
    to try and amend the grounds.

19. The decision of the judge stands.

20. I was informed by Mr Dewison that the criminal trial is now due to take
    place   in   the   week   beginning   [                    ]    at    [
        ] (reference - ???). Any leave to be granted to the Appellant as  a
    result of my decision and the new  trial  date  is  a  matter  for  the
    Respondent.



Anonymity

21. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant from serious harm, having regard to the interests of  justice
    and the principle of proportionality.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                       Date:  30 March 2016
H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date:  30 March 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


