
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/08786/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 July 2016                           |On 20 July 2016                  |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                            MR RAHMATULLAH REZAEI
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, counsel instructed by J McCarthy
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Nicholls promulgated on  29  March  2016.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on 23 May 2016.



Anonymity

 2. No direction was made by the previous judge, none was requested  before
    me and there is no reason for one now.

Background

 3. The appellant, who claims to be a national of Afghanistan,  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom clandestinely, having come  into  contact  with  the
    authorities in Italy and France en route to this country. On arrival he
    put forward a different identity, one he  had  used  in  Italy  and  in
    France. The appellant's asylum claim was based  on  his  father  having
    been killed by the Taleban owing to his role as a police officer. On 19
    February 2012, the respondent  was  informed  that  the  appellant  had
    disappeared from social services. By the time  the  appellant  came  to
    light he was living with a partner with whom he had a child.

 4. The Secretary  of  State  refused  the  application  on  22  May  2015,
    concluding, essentially, that the appellant had failed to establish his
    identity or that he was a national of Afghanistan. The remainder of his
    claim was rejected owing to  inconsistencies  and  the  fact  that  his
    immigration history further damaged  his  credibility.  The  respondent
    considered the appellant's family life but concluded that the appellant
    had not provided any documentary evidence that he was residing with his
    partner and it was considered that his partner could look  after  their
    child after he had  left  the  United  Kingdom.  The  position  of  the
    partner's other six children was also considered however the respondent
    did not accept that the appellant's removal would disrupt the social or
    education provision of any of the children.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant and his partner gave evidence.  The  judge  rejected  the
    asylum claim on the basis that the appellant had "not demonstrated that
    is a credible witness about his nationality, ethnic background and  the
    history he gives of his life in Afghanistan." It was not argued on  the
    appellant's behalf that he  could  meet  any  of  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM, however the judge considered this issue  for  himself  and
    decided that the appellant could not meet the suitability  requirements
    owing, principally, to his conduct. Considering Article 8 ECHR, outside
    the Rules, the judge accepted that the appellant's child,  aged  around
    two at the time of the hearing, was "probably" a British citizen,  that
    the appellant enjoyed a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with that child and that it would not be reasonable to expect the child
    to leave the United Kingdom in order "to live in Afghanistan,  assuming
    that is a country to which the Appellant can  be  removed."  The  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's  conduct
    outweighed any concerns as to the best interests of the children of the
    relationship.





The grounds of appeal

 7. The six grounds of appeal argued that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    treat  paragraph  117B(6)  as  determinative  of  the  public  interest
    question,  with   reference   to   Treebhawon   and   others   (section
    117B(6)[2015] UKUT 674 (IAC).  The judge was also said to have erred in
    failing  to  consider   the   appellant's   freestanding   humanitarian
    protection and asylum claims under the ECHR adequately or at all;  that
    he failed to give adequate reasons for dismissing those claims; that he
    misdirected himself by failing to apply or consider the  provisions  of
    EX.1.(a) and (b); that he misapplied paragraph 276ADE(vi) and  that  he
    made a mistake as to material fact. The renewed grounds  amplified  the
    same points.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge's conclusions on Article 8,  either  inside  or  outside  the
    Rules was open to debate. In  relation  to  the  other  grounds,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Macleman considered there was  nothing  in  the  grounds
    based on general country conditions and no realistic argument that  the
    appellant  ought  to  have  been  found  entitled  to   any   form   of
    international protection or entitlement to remain on the basis  of  his
    private life alone.

 9. The Secretary  of  State's  response  indicated  that  the  appeal  was
    opposed, albeit without sight of the original  grounds.  It  was  noted
    that there was no challenge to the appellant's  asylum  claim  and  his
    credibility was already impugned.  The  respondent  remarked  that  the
    grant of permission specifically declined to find any arguable error of
    law in relation to country conditions or  the  claim  for  humanitarian
    protection and  her  view  was  that  this  constituted  a  refusal  of
    permission to appeal on that ground. The respondent considered it clear
    that permission was only granted in relation to Article 8 and her  view
    was the judge dealt with it comprehensively and gave  adequate  reasons
    for his conclusions. The Secretary of State contended that the ratio of
    Treebhawon was incorrect and that section 117B (6) was not a trump card
    over the other public interest considerations.

The error of law hearing

10. Mr Collins did not seek to resurrect the other grounds  of  appeal.  He
    relied solely on the issue which had resulted in a grant of  permission
    to appeal. He firstly stated that it  was  clear  that  the  child  was
    British, in that the mother was a British citizen. Mr  Melvin  conceded
    that was the case.

11. Mr Collins relied on Treebhowan at [14] and [21] and  argued  that  the
    fact that the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  with  his  child  coupled  with  the  judge's
    findings that it was not reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom was determinative of the issue with  regard  to  section
    117B(6). He argued that the decision in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ
    705 made no difference given the judge's findings  and  submitted  that
    the appeal should be remade by being allowed under  Article  8  outside
    the Rules, albeit not under the Rules.

12. Mr Melvin drew my attention to  the  fact  that  the  judge  looked  at
    whether the Rules were met and concluded that the appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements under Appendix  FM  because  of  the  suitability
    requirements. While the judge accepted  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his child, this was not determinative of the appeal.  The
    appellant could not "go straight to 117B(6) and expect DLR." He  argued
    that  the  judge  looked  at  all  aspects  including  eligibility  and
    suitability and found the appellant wanting.  It was not enough to have
    a qualifying child as this would make a mockery  of  Rules.  Mr  Melvin
    stressed that the judge's finding was that it was unreasonable for  the
    child to live in Afghanistan specifically.

13. In reply, Mr Collins argued that the judge had  erred  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 24 in stating "that conclusion, however, is not  the  end  of
    the matter."

Decision on error of law

  14. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the judge made no material
      error of law and that I upheld his decision in its entirety. My
      reasons are as follows.

15. In MA  (Pakistan),  it  was  established  that  the  reasonableness  of
    expecting a child to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  as  referred  to  in
    EX.1(a) of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules,  paragraph  276ADE(iv)
    of the Rules and section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act should  be  approached
    in the same way. Elias LJ was persuaded to follow the approach taken in
    MM (Uganda) as follows;


    "But the critical point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a free-
    standing provision in the same way as section 117B(6) and even  so  the
    court in MM (Uganda) held that  wider  public  interest  considerations
    must be taken into account when applying the "unduly harsh"  criterion.
    It seems to me  that  it  must  be  equally  so  with  respect  to  the
    reasonableness criterion in section 117B(6)."


  16. Mr Collins made much of what the judge said at [24] that "it would not
      be reasonable to expect (the appellant's child) to leave the UK." That
      submission  overlooks  the  fact  that  the  judge  was  clearly   not
      considering  the  overall   question   of   reasonableness   but   the
      reasonableness  of  leaving  the  United  Kingdom   for   Afghanistan,
      specifically, with the caveat, "assuming that is a  country  to  which
      the Appellant can be  removed."  The  judge  was  plainly  correct  in
      stating that was not the end of the matter  in  view  of  his  earlier
      finding that the appellant had failed to  establish  his  nationality,
      ethnicity or any other aspect of his circumstances prior to coming  to
      the United Kingdom.  Mr Collins did not attempt to  challenge  any  of
      these findings during the hearing and indeed they went unchallenged in
      the grounds.

  17. The judge rightly went on to consider public  interest  considerations
      in relation to considering the reasonableness of expecting  the  child
      in question to leave the United Kingdom. At [25]  the  judge  examines
      the Article 8  claim  through  the  lens  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
      remarking that the appellant did not meet the requirements  of  S-LTRP
      2.2(b) owing to his failure to disclose material facts relating to his
      earlier asylum claim in Italy and the acquisition  of  a  passport  in
      2011 which was not produced until the day of the hearing.
  18. The judge also notes that the appellant did not meet the  requirements
      of E-LTRP 2.2(b) because he was  unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      There was no evidence before the judge to show that the income  levels
      required by E-LTRP 3.3 were of the required amount.  He also  provided
      several reasons for concluding that the appellant  could  not  succeed
      under paragraph  276ADE  including  that  the  appellant  was  "not  a
      credible witness and has not established even to the lower standard of
      proof the likelihood that  his  claimed  nationality  and  account  of
      events are true."


19. Returning to MA (Pakistan), I  note  that  a  period  of  seven  years'
    residence would need to be given "significant weight". I consider  that
    British citizenship is equally, if not more, deserving  of  weight.  In
    the said case, the starting point was said to be that leave  should  be
    granted unless there are "powerful" reasons to the contrary.


20. Throughout the decision, the judge reaches a number of adverse findings
    regarding the appellant's account. Between [13]  and  [18],  the  judge
    notes that the appellant knew very little about the part of Afghanistan
    he claimed to come from; that he provided a different name and date  of
    birth to the authorities in Italy; that he told the respondent that  he
    did not have a birth certificate  while  telling  social  services  the
    opposite; that he failed to mention having been fingerprinted in Italy;
    that he produced for the first time a  document  purporting  to  be  an
    Afghani passport issued in 2011 at the hearing and which the respondent
    had not had an opportunity to verify and that he deliberately absconded
    from immigration control  for  over  a  year  and  a  half.  The  judge
    considered the appellant's age and various explanations put forward for
    his behaviour but concluded that they did not counter the damage to his
    credibility.


  21. It is apparent from [27] of the decision  that  the  judge  considered
      that the appellant's "clear breaches of the Immigration Rules and  his
      obligations in the United Kingdom and a clear possibility that he  has
      equipped himself with a  false  passport  substantially  outweigh  any
      concerns about the best interests of  the  children."  The  judge  was
      correct in finding that there were numerous reasons why the  appellant
      could not succeed by relying on section 117B(6). Those reasons  amount
      to the powerful reasons referred to in  MA  (Pakistan).   This  was  a
      conclusion the judge was entitled to reach on the facts before him.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld, in its entirety.



Signed                                       Date: 19 July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
