
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08243/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th January 2014 , 14th March 2014          |On 13th June 2014          |
|and 16th May 2014                               |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     o j
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M Chaggar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Deavin promulgated on 11th October 2013, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 1st October 2013.  In  the  determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal of O.J.  The Respondent Secretary of State
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a 31 year old citizen of Sierra Leone.  She  was  born
    on 23rd November 1983.  She  claimed  asylum  on  5th  April  2013.   A
    decision of 13th  August  2013  refused  her  application  for  asylum.
    Directions were given for her removal.  It was noted that the Appellant
    had come to the UK on 4th April 2011, on a  student  visa,  until  11th
    June 2012.  Her Sponsor's licence was then revoked.   She  was  granted
    further leave to remain.  At its end on 5th April 2013, she applied for
    asylum.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that in the  UK  she  began  living  with  her
    partner, E S, and their daughter, E.  One day she heard E S talking  on
    the phone, saying that he  wanted  to  take  E  back  home  for  female
    circumcision.  The Appellant left the house where she was living with E
    S.  He, however, subsequently returned to Sierra Leone.  The  Appellant
    herself does not believe in female circumcision.  She  belongs  to  the
    Christian faith.  She is a Krio Christian.  Although  her,  now  former
    partner, E S, was also a Krio Christian, his mother was mixed Krio  and
    she practised female circumcision.  The threat of  FGM  came  from  her
    former partner's mother, if the Appellant was returned back  to  Sierra
    Leone with her daughter, E.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge found the Appellant "to  be  an  honest  and  straightforward
    witness" (paragraph 107).  He took  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's sole reason for not  returning  to  Sierra  Leone  "is  the
    safety of herself and, perhaps more importantly,  her  young  daughter"
    (paragraph 108).  The Appellant's tribe, the Christian Krio tribe,  are
    a minority in Sierra Leone and they do not practise FGM.  Indeed,  "nor
    is her ex-partner in favour of it" (paragraph 109).

 5. What the judge, however, was particularly impressed with, was the  fact
    that, "on the evidence before me, ..... E S's mother is a woman who was
    circumcised and wishes her granddaughter  to  be  similarly  mutilated"
    (paragraph 110).  The  judge  held  that,  given  that  he  had  to  be
    satisfied only on the lower standard, the Appellant had discharged  the
    burden of proof that was upon her  (paragraph  115)  and  that  if  the
    Appellant were to return to Sierra  Leone  with  her  daughter,  "there
    would be a very real risk that her daughter, in  particular,  would  be
    seized and taken by E S's mother, or people acting on her  behalf,  and
    that the child would be subject to FGM" (paragraph  116).   The  appeal
    was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6.  The  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  applied  for  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal on the basis that  the  material  upon  which  the
    judge could have concluded as he did, whether to rely  upon  it  or  to
    rebut the decision  in  the  refusal  letter,  was  not  identified  or
    evaluated by the Tribunal judge.  Further, internal relocation was  not
    considered by the judge, although it was acknowledged to be in issue.

 7. On 11th November 2013, permission to appeal was granted.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing  before  me  on  10th  January  2014,  that  there  were
    submissions made before the judge that  "the  State  Department  Report
    said that there had been no prosecutions" of people who  practised  FGM
    and that "women want to be initiated into a society and Krio are now  a
    minority group", but they no longer had positions of power, and  "there
    was no realistic chance of the Appellant's daughter being able to avoid
    such persecution" (paragraph 105).  Yet, the US State Department Report
    was not before the judge.  Nor does the  judge  identify  this  report.
    Therefore, it is not clear what the judge is referring to in describing
    the "State Department Report".

 9. Second, although it is accepted that the Krio  are  a  minority  group,
    this is not the issue, because the real issue is that the Appellant had
    a relationship with her ex-partner before they both came to the  UK  in
    2003, and then they had separated again, and there was no evidence that
    there would be pressure from the Appellant's ex-partner now  for  their
    child to undergo FGM.  The Appellant had come to the UK.   Her  partner
    joined her.  They had lived together.  Then they had  separated  again.
    The Appellant did not know where the ex-partner  was.   She  only  knew
    that he had returned to Sierra Leone.  She had no contact with him  and
    she had no contact with his mother.  Therefore, it was not  enough  for
    the judge to record that, "she had tried  to  explain  E  S's  mother's
    past" (paragraph 106).

10. For her part, Mrs Chaggar submitted that while she could see  that  the
    internal relocation point had not been considered  by  the  judge,  she
    could not concede that this led him into a material error of law.  That
    was the more easier point to deal with.  As to the  whole  question  of
    where the risk emanated from, Mrs Chaggar submitted that the judge  had
    made enough references in the background to how the risk arose.

11. For example, the judge explained how, in  relation  to  the  Appellant,
    "she had never spoken to E S or his mother  about  her  background,  as
    this would be considered rude" (paragraph 44).  She had explained that,
    "It would not be possible for her to live elsewhere in Sierra Leone, as
    there would be language problems and she would  have  to  make  herself
    known to the chief in the area" (paragraph 45).  These were all matters
    relevant to whether the Appellant could relocate  to  another  part  of
    Sierra Leone.  This was why she could not concede the issue of IFA.

12. At this stage, Mr Smart interjected to  say  that  the  refusal  letter
    makes it quite clear that the Appellant  is  of  the  Krio  tribe,  her
    parents are of the Krio tribe, and the parents live in Freetown,  which
    is the capital city of Sierra  Leone,  to  which  the  Appellant  could
    easily relocate.  There would be no undue hardship in that.

13. Mrs Chaggar continued to say that the most important  feature  of  this
    case was that the Appellant had been found to be credible.  Given  that
    the judge had found the Appellant to be an honest  and  straightforward
    witness (paragraph 107) it had to be accepted that  what  she  said  in
    relation to the risk to her daughter was a very real risk.  The rest of
    the judge's conclusion falls into place once it is accepted that he had
    found the Appellant to be credible.

14. In reply, Mr  Smart  submitted  that  the  judge  may  have  found  the
    Appellant to be credible, but what the judge has to consider is whether
    protection is available to the Appellant, because  this  is  the  basis
    upon  which  the  refusal  letter  is  predicated,  failing  which  the
    Appellant could not have succeeded.  It is not enough to say  that,  "I
    am satisfied to the required standard that E S's mother is a woman  who
    was circumcised and wishes her granddaughter to be similarly mutilated"
    (paragraph 110).  He asked me to allow the appeal.

15. I invited both representatives to indicate how,  in  the  event  of  my
    finding an error of law, they wished this matter to be determined.   Mr
    Smart submitted that credibility was not challenged, and the only issue
    was whether the Appellant could relocate  to  another  part  of  Sierra
    Leone, and whether the risk was a real risk, in circumstances where the
    Appellant's ex-husband had disappeared.  Mrs Chaggar submitted that  if
    an error of law is found, and the determination is set aside, a country
    expert would be instructed, so that the matter could be re-heard.  Both
    submitted that I should reserve the matter to myself to be heard for  a
    second stage hearing.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should  set  aside  that  decision.   There  are  two
    reasons for this.

17. First, whilst accepting, as the judge did, that the Appellant may  have
    come across as a "honest and straightforward witness" (paragraph  107),
    there is still the question whether,  there  is  a  real  risk  to  the
    Appellant and in particular, her child.  That risk is not made  out  in
    circumstances where the Appellant has separated from her ex-partner, Mr
    E S, who has not only returned back to Sierra Leone, as we are asked to
    believe, but  with  whom  the  Appellant  maintains  no  contact.   He,
    however, does not believe  in  FGM.   That  is  significant.   This  is
    because the risk that it is said attaches from the mother of E  S.   If
    the Appellant has no contact with E S, it is difficult to see  how  she
    has any reason to fear his mother, who can only act through the conduit
    of E S.  Therefore, even on a lower standard, the risk is not made out.



18. Second, and  not  unrelated  to  the  first  point,  the  Appellant  is
    returnable to Freetown in Sierra Leone.  Not only is this  the  capital
    city, with a  large  bustling  population  of  a  metropolis,  but  the
    Appellant's own mother and father are situated in that  town,  and  the
    Appellant can readily find a home there.  There has  been  no  evidence
    that this is not the case.  Had it existed, the  Appellant  would  have
    been in a position to present it.  It was not  presented  before  Judge
    Deavin.

19. Given this, I make a finding of an error of  law,  and  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Deavin.  For the matter to be re-heard, as  a  second
    stage reconsideration hearing, it is  important  for  there  to  be  in
    evidence some objective evidence relating to the Appellant's relocation
    to Freetown.  I accordingly, issue the following directions.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.

21. This matter to be listed at the first available date for one and a half
    hours before me and reserved to myself.

22. Not later than seven days before the day listed for the hearing of this
    appeal, each party shall  serve  on  the  other,  and  the  Tribunal  a
    paginated bundle, containing all documents on which the party seeks  to
    rely, including statements from any witness that the party  intends  to
    call, drawn to a standard as evidence-in-chief, without  the  need  for
    additional questions.

Anonymity

23. Anonymity order made.

Hearing on 14th March 2013

24. At the reconvened substantive hearing of 14th  March  2014,  when  this
    matter was next heard, Mrs Chaggar, appearing for  the  Appellant  was,
    once again in attendance.  Mr Smart appeared for  the  Respondent.   Mr
    Smart, however, indicated that  there  was  an  initial  difficulty  in
    proceeding with his appeal.  He had been informed by Mrs  Chaggar  that
    there was a expert report, contained in a bundle dated 11th March 2014,
    from the Coventry Law Centre,  prepared  by  Dr  Barbara  Harrell-Bond,
    which had not been served upon him,  as  the  directions  had  required
    previously, seven days before the hearing.

25. This was a hefty 100 page report, which Mr Smart stated,  quite  simply
    could not be read and prepared for, in time for this morning's hearing.
     Mr Smart said that had it not been for Mrs Chaggar alerting him to the
    existence of this report, and had it not been for her  to  have  handed
    him a copy of this report only this morning, he  would  not  even  have
    known that it existed.  I pointed out that my file contained a copy  of
    the bundle of documents dated 11th March 2014.  However,  it  had  been
    received by the Tribunal only on 12th March 2014.  This again, was  not
    in compliance with the directions, because it was not seven days before
    the hearing.

26. Mrs Chaggar could only apologise profusely.  She undertook  to  contact
    the Coventry Law  Centre.   She  spoke  to  Mr  Bircumshaw,  who  quite
    properly  admitted  to  the  fault  of  the  centre.   He  offered   no
    explanation as to why there had been a delay in the submission of  this
    document.  He made up no excuses.  This is very much to the  credit  of
    Mr Bircumshaw.  It is, if I may say so, entirely  consistent  with  the
    character and reputation of Mr Bircumshaw in these Tribunals, which  is
    that  of  an  upright,  and  entirely  straight  practitioner  in  this
    jurisdiction.   Sadly,  however,  matters  have  gone  wrong,  as  they
    sometimes do in these tribunals.

27. That is not to say that not an inconsiderable degree of  administrative
    inconvenience has been caused to the  Tribunal.   I  accepted  that  Dr
    Harrell-Bond, the expert, was in  attendance  today,  having  travelled
    from Oxford, who was waiting outside the courtroom  to  give  evidence.
    The witness herself was here.  Mrs Chaggar was in turn also prepared to
    proceed.  The problem however was that, through no fault of his own, Mr
    Smart was in no position to himself continue with this hearing.

28. Indeed, this hearing could not continue if Mr Smart indicated  that  he
    needed more than today's time, to read the report, and then revert back
    to the country specific experts in the Home Office, with their view  in
    relation to this report.  This is indeed what Mr Smart did say.

29. In the circumstances, bearing in mind  the  "overriding  objective",  I
    reluctantly decided to adjourn this hearing.  I made it  clear  that  I
    did so  against  my  better  judgment,  and  not  without  considerable
    misgivings, because, quite frankly, with directions having  been  given
    by myself in no uncertain terms, the appropriate course of action would
    otherwise have been for me to refuse to accept this report, because  it
    arrived late.

30. However, given that the issue was that of IFA, and the ability  of  the
    Appellant to find relocation, and not the Appellant's own  credibility,
    everything hanged upon the objective evidence.  I should make it  clear
    that no further quarter would be given to the Appellant's  side.   This
    matter was adjourned with the following directions.

Directions

 i. The Tribunal directed that this matter was to be relisted before Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Juss, at  the  first  available  opportunity,  but
    subject to the availability of the expert, Dr Barbara Harrell-Bond,  in
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court.

ii. The Respondent, Secretary of State, was to indicate to the Coventry Law
    Centre, if they wanted the attendance of the expert, Dr Barbara Harrell-
    Bond, in court when this matter was set to be relisted.

iii. The twenty page report of Dr Barbara Harrell-Bond, which was  dated  by
    her 2nd March 2014, was to be filed and served again upon this Tribunal
    and upon the Respondent Home Office, so as to ensure that it did indeed
    arrive seven days before the hearing, as the expert report that was  to
    be relied upon for the substantive hearing which was to take  place  in
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court.

iv. The Respondent Secretary of State was to reply to  the  report  of  the
    expert, Dr Barbara Harrell-Bond, seven days before  the  next  hearing,
    should that be deemed appropriate by the Respondent Secretary of State.



 v. The Appellant was to serve a typed version of her  handwritten  witness
    statement of 1 4th March 2014, which was handwritten on the same day as
    this hearing, and simply handed up, so that a  typed  version  of  that
    same witness statement  was to be  ready for consideration  before  the
    Upper Tribunal in Birmingham when this matter was again relisted.

vi. No further evidence was to be adduced.



Hearing on 16th May 2014

31. At the substantive hearing on 16th May 2014, which was  a  continuation
    of the previous hearing of 14th March 2014, I had the assistance  of  a
    well-compiled Appellant's bundle from the Coventry  Law  Centre,  dated
    1st May 2014, together with the Appellant's witness statement  of  23rd
    April 2014.  I also had in attendance the expert, Dr  Barbara  Harrell-
    Bond, whose report appeared at pages 1 to 20, together with an addendum
    at pages 20A to 20D, as well as three cases that were also in the  same
    bundle, for the assistance of the Tribunal.  Ms Chaggar,  who  appeared
    on behalf of the Appellant on 16th May 2014, got the Appellant to adopt
    her witness statement and there were no further questions asked of her.

32. In cross-examination by Mr Smart, the Appellant was asked  whether  she
    knew the expert, Dr Barbara Harrell-Bond.  The witness  said  that  she
    did not.  Mr Smart submitted that this was important because the expert
    did not explain in the report how she got the  information  upon  which
    she based  her  conclusions.   The  witness  said  that  she  had  been
    interviewed once by Dr Harrell-Bond and this is how the information was
    given.

33. There was no re-examination by Ms Chaggar.

34. The second witness on 16th May 2014 was the expert herself, Dr  Barbara
    Harrell-Bond, and she adopted her report dated 30th March 2014 as  well
    as her addendum of 16th March 2014.  No further questions were asked by
    Ms Chaggar of this witness in evidence-in-chief.

35. In cross-examination by Mr Smart, the expert was asked how she had come
    across the information that she had included in  her  report,  and  the
    witness replied that she had interviewed the Appellant.  She  confirmed
    she had  seen  the  refusal  letter  and  had  seen  all  the  relevant
    documents.  The witness was asked by Mr Smart  whether  she  was  aware
    that FGM as a whole was in decline in Sierra Leone and other  countries
    of Africa.

36. The expert replied that this fact had to be placed in  the  context  of
    the increasing power of the "Bondo" society in  Africa  (see  page  7).
    Although the reference to the "Bondo" was not explicitly  explained  in
    the expert report, Dr Harrell-Bond explained in evidence, that this was
    a society of women, for women, set up to propagate and  perpetuate  the
    particular status of women in society as a whole.

37. Mr Smart asked the witness about the section in her report (at page  2)
    headed "the prevalence of FGM in Sierra Leone" where she explains  that
    88% of girls and women in Sierra Leone are mutilated.   She  was  asked
    about the "Sowei", who are women who specialise in cutting  girls,  and
    make their living by cutting girls, and the witness explained that they
    do very well out of this vocation because they can charge  up  to  $200
    per cutting.

38. She was asked who would pay a Sowei to cut a girl, and the expert  said
    that it would be either the father, or the mother normally,  but  there
    was a high degree of enthusiasm for this practice, and so  money  could
    be collected.  In this  case  the  influence  of  the  grandmother  was
    significant as she would pay for it.

39. The witness was then asked why it was implicit in her report  that  the
    grandmother was a Sowei.  The witness said that she  had  assumed  that
    the grandmother was a Sowei.  She herself had undergone FGM and she was
    in favour of inflicting the same on the Appellant's child.

40. Mr Smart asked the witness why she thought, in a  patriarchal  society,
    where the men control the purse strings, women would have access to pay
    $300 for an FGM cutting.   The  expert  witness  explained  that  women
    retained control over all the household income, because  they  have  to
    buy grain, and given the high importance attached to FGM, they would be
    able to find the money for the FGM mutilation.

41. She was asked why FGM would not be decided by the men in a  patriarchal
    society.  The expert  explained  that  the  reason  for  this  was  the
    influence  of  "Bondo  society"  where  the  women  handled  everything
    relating to women.

42. There was no re-examination.

43. In his closing speech, Mr Smart directed my attention to the  US  Human
    Rights Report at page 20 (referring to paragraph 3) and to page 25  and
    26, which demonstrated that FGM was in decline.  He submitted that  the
    important fact here was that Sierra Leone was  a  patriarchal  society.
    Therefore the attitude of the father was everything.   The  father  was
    against FGM.  Moreover, the family belong to the Krios  tribe,  and  as
    such, of the sixteen tribes in Sierra Leone, this was the only one that
    did not practice FGM, so that the chances of this  being  inflicted  on
    the Appellant's child were remote.

44. Furthermore, no-one had taken evidence from the father  and  found  out
    what his wishes were.  He was against it.  In fact,  Dr  Harrell-Bond's
    report was based upon the  assumption  that  the  father's  mother  was
    herself a "Sowei".

45. However, there was no evidence of this.  Even though  she  herself  may
    wish the child to go through FGM, this could  be  vetoed  by  the  male
    members, especially the father who was against it.

46. Finally, guidance was set down by the Tribunal in K & Others (FGM)  The
    Gambia CG [2013] UKUT 00062, which could be followed in this case.

47. For her part, Ms  Chaggar,  in  her  closing  speech  referred  to  her
    skeleton argument.  She said that an error of  law  was  found  on  the
    issue of  internal  flight  relocation.   She  read  out  her  skeleton
    argument at paragraph 11 which was to the effect that,

         "Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Juss  has  in  the   determination
         preserved the findings of  credibility,  the  only  question  which
         remains to be determined is risk on return (given the Appellant and
         the father of her  baby  are  no  longer  in  a  relationship)  and
         internal relocation" (paragraph 11).

48. In this context, the findings of the  original  judge  were  important.
    The grandmother of the Appellant's child  had  undergone  FGM,  was  in
    favour of it, and intended to inflict the same on the Appellant's child
    as well.  The Appellant's witness statement (which appears at C1 to C2,
    at paragraph 6) confirms that the Appellant walked into a room and  saw
    her ex-husband speaking with his mother on the telephone confirming his
    intention to hand over his child to his mother  so  her  FGM  could  be
    performed.

49. In these circumstances, submitted  Ms  Chaggar,  IFA  is  going  to  be
    difficult for the Appellant and the child.

Remaking the Decision

50. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the following reasons.

51. First, the Krios are the  only  tribe  in  Sierra  Leone  that  do  not
    practice FGM.  The Appellant is opposed to it.  Her former  partner,  E
    S, is opposed to it.   The  evidence  before  the  original  judge  was
    ambivalent in that, although E S was opposed to it, the judge had  gone
    on to find that he would have surrendered up his own  daughter  to  his
    mother so her FGM could be performed.  This was  the  evidence  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement.  It was accepted by the original  judge.
    That being so, it must be accepted by this Tribunal.  Even so, the fact
    is that the Appellant now claims to  have  been  separated  from  E  S.
    Indeed, as has been stated above in the findings on the error  of  law,
    she does not even know where he  is.   Therefore,  the  Appellant  will
    return back into Krios society.  If not, she would return  to  Freetown
    in Sierra Leone.  It is simply not  plausible  to  suggest  that  there
    would not be any possibility of internal  relocation  in  that  capital
    city free from the risk of FGM.

52. Second, the expert report of Dr Barbara Harrell-Bond is  predicated  on
    the child's grandmother being a "Sowei".  The original judge did not so
    find.  This was not the substantiated claim of  the  Appellant  in  the
    evidence below.  There is no reason to believe that is the case even if
    the grandmother herself had undergone FGM.   Therefore,  even  assuming
    that the Appellant could  not  find  IFA  elsewhere  in  Freetown,  the
    grandmother would just be a person who herself had  undergone  FGM  and
    wanted the same for her grandchild.

53. Third, and still more importantly, the "Sowei"  make  their  living  by
    cutting, on a remunerative basis, and are paid up to $200 per  cutting,
    a sum of money which would have to be found, and there is  no  evidence
    that, in circumstances where the Appellant's ex-partner is against  the
    practice, he would provide such monies.

54. Fourth, and in any event, Sierra Leone is a patriarchal society, as  Mr
    Smart submitted.  The men control the purse  strings.   The  women  may
    have monies for the purposes of buying grain, as  Dr  Barbara  Harrell-
    Bond stated, but money for grain is not the same as money for FGM,  and
    that would be an additional expense.  The practice, as  the  COI  makes
    clear is in any event in decline.

55. Importantly, one must not overlook the  fact  that  the  Krios  do  not
    practice it.  There may be the  increasing  importance  of  the  "Bondo
    society" as the expert  stated  in  evidence,  but  the  Krios  do  not
    practice FGM.

56. It is in this respect, that the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in
    K & Others (FGM) The Gambia CG [2013] UKUT 00062, is  invaluable.   The
    following points are relevant.  First, the assessment of risk of FGM is
    fact-sensitive, and as it is likely to involve  an  ethnic  group,  the
    attitudes of parents, husband and wider family are important.   Second,
    there are significant variables, which include the practice of the  kin
    group of birth, the ethnic background, the education of the individual,
    whether she lived in an urban or rural area, and so forth.   Third,  in
    assessing the risk facing an individual such as the Appellant's  child,
    the starting point is to  consider  the  statistical  information  with
    respect to the prevalence of the practice within the  ethnic  group  in
    question,  namely,  in  this  case   the   Creole.    None   of   these
    considerations suggest that the Appellant and her child are at risk  in
    the manner suggested.

57. All of them point to a conclusion that return back into  their  kinship
    group is  a  feasible  proposition,  and  if  that  is  not  the  case,
    certainly, return back to Freetown is entirely reasonable and feasible.



58. In the circumstances, and bearing in mind the objective  evidence  that
    Mr Smart brought to my attention,  when  balanced  against  the  expert
    report of  Dr  Barbara  Harrell-Bond,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant discharges the burden of proof that is upon her.

59. The report  of  Dr  Barbara  Harrell-Bond  is  useful  in  showing  the
    prevalence of FGM in Sierra Leone, and  the  context  in  which  it  is
    carried out.  It does not, however, persuade me that the Appellant  and
    her child, who come from the only tribe  which  do  not  practice  FGM,
    cannot find safe and reasonable relocation in Freetown in Sierra Leone.

Decision

60. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    dismissed.

61. Anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th June 2014
