
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08690/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6 November 2014                         |On 13 January 2015              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                        Thushanthan Karunakaralingam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, instructed by Birnberg Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Thushanthan Karunakaralingam, was born  on  24  December
    1987 and is a male citizen of Sri Lanka.  By an order of the  Court  of
    Appeal dated 19 September 2014, the determination of the Upper Tribunal
    dated 6 July 2013 was set aside and an order made for the appeal to  be
    remitted to the Upper Tribunal to be heard de  novo  by  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal.

 2. The appeal came before me on 6 November 2014.  There was  a  discussion
    between the representatives and myself as to the exact meaning  of  the
    consent order and the accompanying statement  of  reasons.   The  Upper
    Tribunal's determination had, in turn, addressed errors of law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Amin)  which  had  been
    promulgated on 15 November 2012.

 3. Mr Wilding, for the  Secretary  of  State,  argued  that  a  number  of
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal should be preserved,  namely  those
    relating to the appellant's claim of persecution prior to his return to
    Sri Lanka in 2012.  He submitted that the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal had made  no  reference  to  the  appellant's  historic
    claims of persecution (which the First-tier Tribunal had rejected)  but
    had concentrated solely upon what had happened to the  appellant  after
    he returned to Sri Lanka in 2012.  He acknowledged,  however,  that  as
    regards the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (and  Judge  Davey)
    regarding the events in 2012, it was clear that the findings  were  put
    in doubt by the determination of the Upper Tribunal in GJ  [2013]  UKUT
    319; indeed, on the basis of GJ that Laws LJ had granted permission  to
    the Court of Appeal.

 4. The appellant did not attend the hearing at Field House on  6  November
    2014.  No explanation was given.  However, Mr Yeo, for  the  appellant,
    told me that his instructing solicitors wished to adduce  new  evidence
    in the appeal.  He also submitted that the Court of Appeal had  ordered
    that all the facts  in  the  case  needed  to  be  established  by  the
    Tribunal.  The court had directed that the matter be "heard de novo".

 5. I have prepared this determination in order  to  clarify  the  position
    following the making of the consent order in the Court of Appeal.   For
    the avoidance of any doubt, I confirm that the determination  of  Judge
    Davey in the Upper Tribunal and the error of  law  decision  of  Judges
    Davey and Taylor have been set aside.  In the  light  of  Mr  Wilding's
    comments, I confirm that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Amin) was also set aside.

 6. I informed the representatives that I intended to direct that  none  of
    the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal  (or,  indeed,  of  the
    Upper Tribunal) should stand.  Mr Wilding is right to  point  out  that
    the challenge which succeeded in the Court of Appeal  concerned  events
    in Sri Lanka in 2012.  However, Judge Amin (quite  properly)  made  his
    findings of fact having considered all the evidence in the round and it
    is, put simply, impossible to know whether his findings  regarding  the
    appellant's account of pre-2012 events was influenced by  his  findings
    regarding the events in 2012.

 7. I do not consider it appropriate to pick apart the  findings  of  Judge
    Amin in the manner proposed by Mr Wilding.   This  does  not,  however,
    mean that a subsequent Tribunal may not reach similar findings  on  the
    evidence.  In the light of the need for a fresh fact-finding hearing to
    look at all the evidence (including new expert evidence,  according  to
    Mr Yeo) I consider that it is appropriate to remit this appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

 8. I therefore direct as follows:

      i)  The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  15
         November 2012 is set aside.  None of findings of fact shall stand.

     ii) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Amin)
         for that Tribunal to remake  the  decision.   The  appeal  will  be
         listed at Hatton Cross, if possible, before a  salaried  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge.  The  time  estimate  will  be  two  hours.   Tamil
         interpreter.

    iii) The parties shall send to the Tribunal and to each other  no  later
         than five working days prior to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
         copies of any documentary evidence  upon  which  they  respectively
         intend to rely.  Original documents should be brought to the First-
         tier Tribunal hearing.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that  Tribunal  to
remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 19 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

