
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08466/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 24 April 2015                     |On 6 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                     V L
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins instructed by Sentinel Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as 9 March 1984.  On 12 January 2014 she arrived in the United Kingdom.
    The following day she claimed international protection as a refugee. On
    2 October 2014 a decision was made to refuse  the  application  and  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom by way of directions.

 2. The Appellant's claim was based, in summary, as follows.  In  2003  she
    entered an arranged marriage subsequent to which she went to live  with
    her husband's family in Tirana.  Her husband spent most of time working
    in Greece, though he would return to Albania every five or six  months.
    After about one year of marriage the Appellant asked her husband if she
    could join him in Greece but, in accordance with tradition, he told her
    to remain with his parents and to look after them.  In about  2005  the
    Appellant's parents-in-law suggested that it was time for her to have a
    child. Unfortunately for her she was unable to conceive  which  led  to
    deterioration in her relationship with her husband and  in-laws.   They
    began to treat her as a servant. She  was  denied  help  from  her  own
    family because in their view such was her fate.  There came a time when
    the Appellant was shopping. She met a man by the name of P.  They would
    meet in secret. He told the Appellant that he would  "make  her  happy"
    and marry her.  Eventually, travelling with P  the  Appellant  flew  to
    Belgium where she arrived on the 1 November 2013.  She travelled on her
    own passport.  She was then taken to a run-down house where she learned
    that she had been sold into prostitution. She was threatened,  sexually
    abused and only allowed out of the room in which she was kept in  order
    to go to the bathroom or eat in the communal area.   There  were  other
    young women in the house whom the  Appellant  believed  may  have  been
    Russian.  One of the Appellant's "clients" was  Turkish.   He  had  had
    sexual intercourse with the Appellant on several occasions but he  took
    pity on her and wanted to help her escape.   On  the  day  in  question
    there was no one in the house and so the Appellant was able to walk out
    with that Turkish man.  He drove her to the  United  Kingdom  with  her
    hidden behind his seat.  On 12 January 2014 she arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom. She was taken to London  where  she  was  told  to  disembark.
    About one hour  later  she  heard  a  couple  speaking  Albanian.   She
    approached them and told them her story.  They took her in.

 3. The Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    was heard on 5 January 2015 by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Prior
    sitting at Hatton Cross.  He made various adverse credibility  findings
    and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 4. Not content with the decision  of  Judge  Prior,  by  Notice  dated  30
    January 2015 the Appellant made application for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 5. The grounds run  to  ten  paragraphs  but  essentially  focus  on  some
    generalised observations which appear to have  informed  Judge  Prior's
    decision making. In summary the grounds submit that the judge erred  in
    law by failing to make a finding on the inherent  plausibility  of  the
    Appellant's account but rather having regard to his own views, with the
    grounds  specifically  suggesting  that  Judge  Prior,   "indulges   in
    speculation and conjecture rather than an  objective  analysis  of  the
    evidence."

 6. On 11 February 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  P  J  G  White
    granted permission.  His reasons included the following:

         "Having had regard to the grounds for permission to appeal and  the
         decision and reasons, I am satisfied that in reaching his  decision
         the judge arguably made an error of law for the following reasons:

         a)   The judge found that the Appellant was  not  credible  in  her
             account of being trafficked for sexual exploitation.

         b)   It is arguable that the judge in forming an  adverse  view  of
             the Appellant's credibility engaged in speculation as to  what
             was improbable  rather  than  by  objective  analysis  of  the
             evidence.

         c)   It is also arguable that in considering the credibility of the
             Appellant's account the judge has failed to  engage  with  the
             background country information.

         d)   In considering whether the judge has given "Anxious  scrutiny"
             to the Appellant's claim, it is  of  concern  that  the  judge
             concludes his decision at paragraph 26  by  stating  that  the
             Appellant (who is a female Albanian national) would not be  at
             risk, "On his return to Iran (sic)."

 7. I heard submissions from  both  parties.   It  is  convenient  for  the
    purposes of this Statement  of  Reasons  to  begin  with  those  of  Ms
    Isherwood.  She began with the following submission, "It is not a  good
    determination but it is sustainable."  She urged me to find that  there
    was no material error of law.

 8. Mr Collins had made much of the fact that in the Secretary  of  State's
    initial assessment  as  to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  had  been
    trafficked, it had been accepted that there were reasonable grounds  to
    believe that she had.  Under cover of letter dated 19 January 2014, the
    Secretary of State had written to the Appellant in  those  terms.   The
    letter explained that because it was accepted  that  there  were  those
    reasonable grounds, the Appellant would be granted  45  days  temporary
    admission in  order  to  help  her  to  recover  from  her  trafficking
    experience and to allow her time to consider what  to  do  next.   That
    letter did say however that at the end of  the  reflection  period  the
    "Competent Authority" which is in fact the  Secretary  of  State  would
    make a "Conclusive Decision" on whether or  not  the  Appellant  was  a
    victim of trafficking.  However, when, on or about 25  July  2014,  the
    Secretary of State came to make  that  conclusive  decision  she  found
    against the Appellant. In doing so  she  recognised  that  whereas  the
    lower standard  of  reasonable  grounds  had  applied  to  the  initial
    decision, the Conclusive Decision was based on a higher threshold  test
    being the civil standard or balance of probabilities.  In  making  that
    decision, the Secretary of State noted the Appellant's account that she
    had met P on five or six occasions but considered it to be inconsistent
    with her claim that she did not know any significant detail  about  him
    despite agreeing to run away  with  him.   It  was  further  considered
    inconsistent with the Appellant's claim that despite being  so  tightly
    controlled she was able to walk out of the house and room where she was
    being  held.   Still  further  because  the  person  who  assisted  the
    Appellant in her escape was said to be Turkish, it  was  considered  by
    the Secretary of State to be  inconsistent  that,  absent  any  ability
    properly to communicate, and  he  having  raped  her  on  a  number  of
    occasions, having paid to do so,  he  would  then  assist  her  in  her
    escape.

 9. The Reasons for Refusal Letter rejecting the asylum claim  is  dated  2
    October 2014.  As Mr Collins submitted, in considering the account with
    respect to the application for international protection as a refugee it
    was the lower standard that was to be applied yet for substantially the
    same reasons as  the  claim  to  have  been  trafficked  was  initially
    accepted, the asylum claim was rejected.  Mr  Collins  submitted  there
    was an inconsistency of approach by the Secretary of  State  submitting
    that the Reasons for Refusal Letter  pointed  to  the  higher  standard
    wrongly being applied, given the two decisions that had gone before.

10. Ms Isherwood's submission on that point,  going  to  the  issue  as  to
    whether there was inherent implausibility in the  account  advanced  by
    the Appellant, was that the Secretary of State was not obliged to  find
    in the Conclusive Grounds that the Appellant had been  trafficked  even
    if on the lower standard she had been found to have been  so  when  the
    case was first considered with the same applying to  the  consideration
    of the asylum claim because different evidence was taken into  account,
    namely the record of interview. Still further the  Secretary  of  State
    was entitled to withdraw a concession, if concession  it  was,  in  the
    initial consideration.

11. Certainly having regard to the guidance in the case of NR  (Jamaica)  v
    SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  856,  the  Secretary  of  State  is  entitled  to
    withdraw a concession. Further, in  the  ordinary  case,  there  is  no
    reason why the Secretary of State should not put an Appellant to proof,
    if she chooses to do so, subject to all the proper safeguards  relating
    to fairness.

12. Mr Collins took a different point namely that the  Secretary  of  State
    had not, in the first finding, found  the  Appellant's  account  to  be
    inherently implausible; a point to which I shall return.

13. Ms Isherwood went on to submit that the witness statements supplied  by
    the Appellant did not adequately address the  concerns  raised  by  the
    Secretary of State in  the  refusal  letter.   In  those  circumstances
    whilst the Appellant had been put to proof she had not met  the  burden
    that was upon her.  She drew my attention to  certain  aspects  of  the
    decision of  Judge  Prior.   Referring  to  the  manner  in  which  the
    Appellant had communicated  with  her  Turkish  customer  and  come  to
    escape, Judge Prior said of her evidence that it was,  "highly  muddled
    and unsatisfactory".  Further on Judge Prior had noted, "In the brothel
    according to the Appellant's asylum interview, she was  locked  in  her
    room and even when she went to the bathroom she  was  escorted..."   Ms
    Isherwood submitted that it was clear therefore that  Judge  Prior  had
    had regard to the interview, so this was not a case where the judge had
    ignored the evidence. On the contrary had taken it into account though,
    she accepted, in a limited way.

14. As to the background material, Ms Isherwood pointed to  the  references
    made by Judge  Prior  to  the  country  guidance  case  of  AM  and  BM
    (Trafficked Women) Albania CG [2010] UK UT 80 to  which  reference  was
    made twice in the Statement of Reasons.  Still further  the  submission
    was made that  the  judge  had  compared  the  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant to answers given to questions in  the  asylum  interview  and
    noted certain inconsistencies in the account.

15. For the Appellant Mr Collins submitted that Judge  Prior  had  rejected
    the core of the account when it was essentially  typical  of  what  one
    might expect in a case of a trafficked woman.  The  approach  of  Judge
    Prior was flawed, he submitted, because the judge should  have  made  a
    finding as to whether the claim was  inherently  plausible,  so  as  to
    provide a context and then look to the evidence more generally to  make
    findings.  Still further, and importantly in his submission, there were
    irrelevant considerations and examples of pure speculation.

16. At paragraph 20 of the statement of reasons, Judge Prior said,

         "I found many major aspects  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  to  be
         wholly implausible and, in my judgment, two major coincidences that
         the Appellant relied upon in her evidence  stretched  credulity  to
         breaking point.  Both those coincidences occurred on a  single  day
         namely 12 January 2014 and turned on the highly  improbable  manner
         in which the Appellant both affected her escape  from  the  brothel
         and so happily encountered such an  accommodating  Albanian  couple
         within a very short time of her arrival in London."

17. Mr Collins submitted that in making the observations  that  he  did  in
    respect of the two events upon which there was focus on 12 January 2014
    the judge had essentially substituted his own view  without  sufficient
    regard to the evidence and, in using the word "happily",  had  shown  a
    degree of inappropriate cynicism.

18. Then  focusing  on  the  two  events,  the  first  being  the  apparent
    willingness of the Turkish client to assist the Appellant,  Mr  Collins
    submitted, as set out in the grounds that the judge appeared to  be  of
    the view that no customer in  a  brothel  would  have  the  decency  or
    humanity to assist  a  prostitute  who  on  her  account  was  severely
    distressed.

19. The Appellant had been asked in interview how she knew the client to be
    Turkish.  She had said that he had told her and she had also said  that
    he, that is to say the Turkish client, thought  that  she  was  Turkish
    also.  In considering that evidence the judge said:

         "My study of the Appellant during the hearing revealed  her  to  be
         very white skinned and it  was  her  evidence  that  she  spoke  no
         Turkish at all.   It  seemed  to  me  highly  improbable  that  the
         customer could, even for a moment, be misled into thinking that she
         was Turkish."

20. The suggestion which clearly forms part of the judge's reasoning that a
    person with very white skin  could  not  be  Turkish  was  specifically
    objected to  in  the  grounds.  I  have  to  say,  for  my  part,  that
    observation, making reference to skin type as a factor  in  determining
    nationality was wholly inappropriate. I leave to one  side  whether  in
    fact the Appellant might, in fact, have meant Muslim,  since  that  was
    not explored and so the following  observation  forms  no  part  of  my
    reasoning in my determination of this appeal.  However,  I  have  heard
    evidence in other cases that one legacy of the Ottoman Empire  is  that
    in many parts of Eastern Europe, Muslims living there, including Serbs,
    Slavs and Albanians, are referred to as "Turks".

21. The second "coincidence" which Judge Prior  found  stretched  credulity
    was the willingness of the Albanian couple whom the  Appellant  met  in
    London to assist her.  Quite  why  that  would  be  incredible  is  not
    entirely clear.  The grounds rightly  point  to  the  guidance  of  the
    Supreme Court in the case of Ahmed Mahad and others v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer [2009] UKSC 16 in which Lord Collins at paragraph 49 observed.

         "The overall point in these appeals is that the arguments  for  the
         Secretary of State were founded on the  model  of  a  nuclear  self
         supporting family, which is far removed from  the  reality  of  the
         situation of a  typical  immigration  case.   This  is  not  a  new
         phenomenon.  Members of immigrant communities have always supported
         each other."

22. In other words what Judge Prior should have done was  to  consider  the
    Appellant's account in the context of the cultural norms of  the  types
    of people whom the Appellant said  that  she  had  encountered  in  the
    circumstances  in  which  she  had  encountered  them.   There  is   no
    sufficient consideration of those norms.

23. The dangers of rejecting an account  as  implausible  and  particularly
    rejecting an  account  for  lack  of  inherent  plausibility  has  been
    cautioned against by superior courts on numerous occasions and  I  cite
    as an example MS (DRC) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2009] EWCA Civ 744.  As it happens in that particular case  the  judge
    was found not to have rejected the inherent plausibility of the account
    but had in fact rejected the account for other reasons, but  the  point
    remains.

24. In the instant case I accept the submissions of Mr Collins.  It is true
    that Judge Prior made reference to the country guidance case  but  only
    in a limited way.  Findings of fact cannot be made in  a  vacuum.   The
    only part of the country guidance case to which the  judge  appears  to
    have had any regard is the head note at letter (f).  He does not appear
    to have used the country guidance to assist in providing the  objective
    backdrop against which the Appellant's account was  to  be  considered.
    Had that been done Judge Prior  would  have  observed,  as  Mr  Collins
    pointed out, that the circumstances in which the Appellant, AM came  to
    make a claim was not dissimilar from the Appellant's own account. Judge
    Prior should have started with the background material.  Had he done so
    he would have been driven to finding that women from Albania can be  at
    risk of being trafficked, and  that  an  introduction,  leading  to  an
    individual being taken out of Albania and then sold into  prostitution,
    appears to be a set of circumstances consistent  with  a  person  being
    trafficked.  Indeed as Mr Collins pointed out, the Secretary of  State,
    at least in her first analysis, had accepted that  there  was  inherent
    plausibility in the account. I find that Judge  Prior,  as  Mr  Collins
    submitted, should have begun with that at the forefront of his mind.

25. Judge Prior was entitled, of course, to look to inconsistencies but the
    balance of his  Decision  is  wrong  because  there  is  no  sufficient
    consideration of the positive aspects of the Appellant's  account.   He
    has not looked adequately at the core of the  claim.   Unlikely  things
    happen.  It is not unknown for a person to win the pools  twice.   More
    latterly as reported in the news three young women in the United States
    who had been held in a house against  their  will  as  sex  slaves  had
    managed to  effect  their  escape  because  of  a  momentary  lapse  in
    attention by their captor.   The  notion  that  an  account  is  to  be
    rejected as implausible is clearly dangerous because unusual things  do
    happen.

26. If the view of a judge is that something is implausible then that judge
    risks challenge on the basis that the particular  fact  contended  for,
    and so found, was prejudged.  A judge may take the view, in  the  light
    of all of the evidence, that what is contended for does  not  meet  the
    required standard of proof but as I have said  such  findings  must  be
    made in the context of all of the evidence. In this case  there  is  no
    sufficient  consideration  of  the  account  in  the  context  of   the
    background  material  contained  within  the   country   guidance,   or
    otherwise, which in large measure supports the Appellant's  account  as
    to how she came to find herself sold into prostitution.

27. In any event, I am, extremely concerned by  the  observations  made  by
    Judge Prior concerning the colour of the Appellant's skin.  That was in
    my judgment an entirely irrelevant consideration.  There is the  danger
    that  such  an  observation  may  be  thought  to  reflect   unfairness
    ("...justice must be seen to done") and is a  significant  contributory
    factor to my overall judgment that the Decision simply cannot stand.

28. I have considered whether it is possible for me to remake the  decision
    but I am of the view that this is a decision beyond repair and needs to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.  Both Ms Isherwood
    and Mr Collins agreed that in the event of my finding that the Decision
    contained an error of law it  should  be  remitted  which,  as  I  have
    already said, is what should happen in this case.  For the avoidance of
    doubt Judge Prior has made no sufficient findings about  the  substance
    of the  Appellant's  account,  the  marriage  or  indeed  the  grooming
    leading, on her case, to being sold into prostitution.   Judge  Prior's
    very narrow focus is inadequate.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.  Save  for  the  Anonymity
Direction, the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The  matter
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a  judge  other
than Judge Prior.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 24 April 2015

Judge Zucker
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
