
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08639/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th May 2015                              |On 22nd May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                ARSHAD ALWAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Marshall, Solicitor, of NBS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Fox  made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 4th December 2014.

 2. Thie Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who claimed to have left there with
    his family in 2006 and fled to  Syria.   He  left  Syria  in  2010  and
    thereafter, until October 2013, spent time in  a  number  of  different
    European countries.

 3. Although the Respondent  put  in  a  Rule  24  response  defending  the
    determination Mr Diwnycz sensibly accepted that it cannot stand.

 4. The judge uses a series of unfortunate and inappropriate expressions in
    his determination including "travels around Europe to gain entry by way
    of a shopping exercise" and "the family having achieved the Holy  Grail
    of refugee status" and "the Appellant left  his  family  in  Syria  for
    purely mercenary and personal reasons to travel around Europe to secure
    the best deal that he could find for himself".

 5. His language gives the impression that the totality of the evidence may
    not have been impartially considered.

 6. There is a further point in that the Respondent's case was put  on  the
    basis that the  Appellant could relocate to Basra.  The judge said that
    he was satisfied that relocation to Basra or Baghdad was not viable and
    if relocation is to be considered it should be  to  the  north  of  the
    country.  This was never argued by the Secretary of State either in the
    refusal letter or at the hearing and Mr Marshall reasonably argued that
    he was deprived  of  an  opportunity  of  arguing  that  relocation  to
    Northern Iraq would be unduly harsh.

 7. Both parties agreed that the appeal would have to be reheard de novo.

 8. The decision of Judge Fox is set aside.  The appeal  will  have  to  be
    heard again at Bradford before a First-tier Judge other than Judge  Fox
    with all issues at large.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


