
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/08695/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2016                 |On 8 December 2016                |



                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                MILAD HAMIDI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant: Mr G Brown instructed by Broudie Jackson and Cantor
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant, a national of  Iran  was  born  on  10  August  1992.  The
   Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated
   21 May 2015 to refuse to grant  an  application  for  asylum.  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Wedderspoon  and  Designated  Judge  Baird  dismissed  the
   appeal and the Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.
3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant  entered  the  United
   Kingdom on 4 December 2014 and claimed to be at risk on return  while  he
   was in Iran he was politically active as a  supporter  of  the  Kurdistan
   branch of the Communist Party in Iran called Komala.
4. The Respondent refused the application because they did not  accept  that
   he had been detained by the Iranian authorities because of his  political
   activities and they found that his activities with Komala were low level.
   They did not find he was at risk on return.
5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from the  Appellant  in
   which he repeated the account that he had  given  in  his  interview  and
   additionally stated that he was actively involved with Komala in  the  UK
   and had attended demonstrations and meetings promoting  his  support  and
   activism for Komala which he confirmed with internet  activities.   There
   were letters from Ahmad Azizpour of Komal Abroad in support of his  claim
   and from Almas Farzi a branch representative of Komala living in London.
6. The Judges concluded that the Appellant was not a credible witness.  They
   found inconsistencies in his account and concluded that  he  was  not  of
   interest to the Iranian authorities. They found his sur place  activities
   was a cynical effort to bolster his asylum claim.
7. Grounds of Appeal were lodged arguing  that  the  Judges  had  failed  to
   properly engage with his sur place activities in that  they  appeared  to
   find his motivation determinative  of  risk;  they  failed  to  make  any
   findings in relation to the twp witnesses from Komala; failed to consider
   the risk on return as a failed asylum seeker who  had  exited  illegally.
   Permission was granted
8. At the hearing before me Mr Brown argued that the Judges  had  failed  to
   deal with the evidence of Mr Azizpour or Mr Farzi other than  summarising
   it. There is no indication of what weight  they  gave  the  evidence;  He
   argued that motive was determinative of the weight to  be  given  to  sur
   place activities particularly when  that  evidence  was  taken  with  the
   evidence of the Komala representatives.
9. Mr Harrison conceded that there had been no proper consideration  of  the
   evidence of the representatives of Komala and he accepted that it was not
   enough to summarise it.
Error of Law
10. The grounds of appeal to the Upper tribunal content that the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge erred in three respects.
11. It is contended that the  Judges  failed  in  their  assessment  of  the
   Appellants sur place activities both because  they  appeared  to  suggest
   motive was determinative of risk and their finding that the Appellant was
   not genuine in such activities failed to take account of the evidence  of
   the two  representatives  of  Komala  who  clearly  potentially  provided
   relevant evidence on that issue. I am satisfied that Mr Harrison properly
   conceded that they made no assessment of the evidence  of  witnesses  who
   gave evidence that was relevant to the core  of  the  account.  I  remind
   myself of what was said in MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
   00641 (IAC), that (i) It was axiomatic  that  a  determination  disclosed
   clearly the reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a  tribunal  found
   oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or  a  document
   to be worth no weight whatsoever, it was  necessary  to  say  so  in  the
   determination and for such findings to be supported by  reasons.  A  bare
   statement that a witness was not believed or that a document was afforded
   no weight was unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons. It may
   well be that  the  tribunal  rejected  the  evidence  of  the  two  Komal
   representatives but reasons had to be given.
12. Given this goes to the core of the Appellants  account  risk  on  return
   would have to be assessed based on any new factual findings.
13. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be redetermined afresh.

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should  be  remitted  as  I
   have found there was an error of law going to the core of the  Appellants
   claim. In this case none of the findings of fact are  to  stand  and  the
   matter will be a complete re hearing.

16. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.

CONCLUSION

17. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should be set aside and the matter remitted for
   a rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                                              Date
7.12.2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

