
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08456/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2015                  |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     II
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Muquit instructed by Kanaga Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    respondent. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

 2. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka
    born on 9 April 1977.

 3. On 12 September 2014  the  appellant  (hereinafter  "the  Secretary  of
    State")  refused  to  grant  the  claimant   asylum   or   humanitarian
    protection. The claimant appealed and his appeal was  heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Tipping who, in a decision  promulgated  on
    30 July 2015, allowed the appeal.

 4. The claimant's claim is that he suffered persecution at  the  hands  of
    the Sri Lankan authorities  because  of  his  political  beliefs  as  a
    supporter (or perceived supporter) of the LTTE.  In summary, his  claim
    is that:

          a. He worked for the LTTE as a driver until May 2009.

          b.  He  did  not  experience  significant   problems   with   the
             authorities until 29 August 2013 when an army patrol  observed
             him looking for items stored in a bunker where his family used
             to live. The army patrol found LTTE uniforms and ammunition in
             an adjoining bunker. Although he denied any knowledge of these
             items he was arrested and spent two months in captivity.

          c.  Whilst  in  captivity  he  was  subjected  to  torture  which
             including being burnt repeatedly with  an  iron  rod.  He  was
             forced to sign a confession of being an LTTE activist and  was
             charged with attempting to regroup the LTTE.

          d. He left Sri Lanka clandestinely by boat on  10  November  2013
             and travelled to India. Thereafter  he  came  to  the  UK  via
             unknown countries.

 5. The FtT stated that it was not in dispute that the claimant's  account,
    if true, would engage the Refugee Convention and that the appeal turned
    on the credibility of the  appellant's  core  account  of  having  been
    arrested,  detained,  interrogated  and  tortured.   Although  the  FtT
    attached little weight to parts of the claimant's  evidence  -  stating
    that there were some indications  of  embellishment  of  the  claim  by
    manufacturing evidence - he accepted the  core  account.  At  paragraph
    [21] the judge concluded: "notwithstanding the flawed elements  in  the
    [claimant's] evidence, the core elements of his  claim  are  credible."
    The judge added that the claimant bears very  significant  and  obvious
    scarring that would come  to  light  on  even  a  perfunctory  personal
    search.

 6. With respect to the claim of torture, an expert report was obtained  by
    a  consultant  in  emergency  medicine  with  experience  in  assessing
    injuries where torture is alleged. The  expert,  following  a  physical
    examination of the claimant, stated that he considered it possible, but
    only a remote possibility,  that  the  injury  was  a  result  of  self
    infliction of injuries by proxy and his conclusion was that "there is a
    high likelihood that the injuries were  caused  by  a  third  party  as
    described by the claimant."

 7. The grounds of appeal submit that given the concerns raised by the  FtT
    about credibility, the claimant's  core  claims  about  being  tortured
    should  not  have  been  accepted  when  the  medical  report's  author
    recognised the possibility of self infliction  by  proxy.  The  grounds
    also argue that the claimant would not be at risk  on  return  and  the
    judge failed to follow the relevant  country  guidance  GJ  and  Others
    (post civil war returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

Submissions

 8. Mr Bramble submitted that the FtT had raised serious concerns about the
    claimant's credibility and the evidence in  support  of  his  case.  At
    paragraph [16] letters in support of  the  claimant  are  described  as
    "self serving" and of little weight. At paragraph [17] the FtT attached
    little significance to the claimant's attendance at a demonstration  in
    the  UK.  At  paragraph  [19]  the  judge  referred  to  the   claimant
    embellishing his claim by manufacturing  evidence.  Mr  Bramble  argued
    that having raised these issues the judge  failed  to  properly  engage
    with them and give a considered opinion that took them into account. Mr
    Bramble also submitted that the FtT failed to engage with GJ and others
    and explain why the claimant would be of interest to the authorities.

 9. Mr Muquit argued that the FtT's fact finding exercise was without  flaw
    and the findings against the claimant's credibility demonstrate that  a
    careful and rounded view was taken. He maintained that  the  judge  was
    entitled to rely on and attach  weight  to  the  medical  report  which
    strongly supports the credibility of the  claimant's  core  account  of
    being subjected to torture.

10. Mr Muquit submitted that the  respondent  had  made  a  concession,  as
    recorded at paragraph [10] of the FtT decision, where it states: "It is
    not in dispute that, if the appellant's account of events is  credible,
    it would engage the Refugee Convention."  Mr Bramble did not agree  and
    stressed that it was the Secretary of State's case  that  even  if  the
    claimant had been truthful about the torture he  would  in  any  event,
    under GJ and others, not be at risk on return. Mr Muquit countered that
    the claimant's core case is that he was detained, tortured,  forced  to
    sign a confession, and his release was not sanctioned. As such, if  the
    core account is accepted, the Refugee Convention would be engaged.

Consideration

11. For the reasons set out below, I find that that the FtT has not made an
    error of law and that the Secretary of State's  grounds  amount  to  no
    more than a disagreement with the conclusion the FtT has reached  about
    the claimant's credibility.

12. This is a case which turns on the claimant's credibility. The FtT found
    the claimant to be credible with respect to his core account of  having
    been detained, interrogated and  tortured.  Several  reasons  for  this
    finding were given. The primary reasons given were  that  the  claimant
    had throughout given a consistent account and that the medical evidence
    in relation to torture was consistent with this account.  The  view  of
    the medical expert was that there was  a  "high  likelihood"  that  the
    injuries to the claimant were caused by a third party as  described  by
    the claimant.  Further reasons given were that the background  evidence
    of the Sri Lankan authority's  concern  about  a  resurgence  of  Tamil
    separatism made the apparent over-reaction to the claimant being  found
    in proximity to buried weapons, which was a key part of the  claimant's
    account, credible.  The FtT found that certain evidence was flawed  and
    self serving, but looked at in the round, taking  account  all  of  the
    evidence, the  FtT's  conclusion  was  that  the  account  of  torture,
    interrogation and detention (which included signing  a  confession  and
    escape by payment of a bribe by his father in law) was credible.

13. The  Secretary  of  State  seeks  to  argue  against  this  finding  of
    credibility on the basis that it is possible  the  injuries  were  self
    inflicted by proxy and that some evidence was rejected as self serving.
    However, it is clear from the decision that the FtT  did  not  fail  to
    have regard to these matters. On the contrary, they were considered and
    dealt with explicitly. At paragraph [13] the FtT  discussed  in  detail
    the medical report on the injuries and the possibility recorded therein
    that they  were  self  inflicted  to  enhance  the  asylum  claim.   At
    paragraphs [15] and [16] the FtT explained  why  certain  evidence  was
    treated as being of little weight and self serving.

14. The FtT, having heard oral evidence from the  claimant  and  considered
    the  medical  reports  and  other  evidence  before  it,  reached   the
    conclusion that the claimant's account was credible. The  Secretary  of
    State may disagree with this conclusion - and another judge might  have
    taken a different view - but it was a finding that was clearly open  to
    the FtT based on the evidence before it.

15. The Secretary of State contends that even if the claimant's account  is
    credible, the Refugee Convention would not be engaged. I do not  accept
    this argument for two reasons. Firstly, it is  apparent  from  the  FtT
    decision that the Secretary of State conceded this point. At  paragraph
    [10] the FtT states:

         "It is not in dispute that, if the appellant's account of events is
         credible, it would engage the Refugee Convention."

    This is a carefully written decision and I am satisfied  that  the  FtT
    would not have stated an issue was "not in dispute" unless that in fact
    was the case.

16. Secondly, and in any event, it was not inconsistent with GJ and  others
    to find that the claimant would be at risk on return to Sri  Lanka.  GJ
    and others considers people who would be at risk to include  those  (a)
    who are perceived to be a threat because they are perceived to  have  a
    significant role in respect of renewal of  hostilities  and  (b)  whose
    name appears on a computerised stop list, comprising of  those  against
    whom there is an extant order or arrest warrant.

17. Based on the claimant's account, which was accepted, it was open to the
    FtT to find  that  either  of  these  possibilities  was  a  reasonable
    likelihood. The claimant had been in prison for  two  months  where  he
    signed a  confession.  He  had  not  been  released.  As  such,  it  is
    reasonable to reach the view that, on return, he would  have  a  raised
    profile because of his perceived threat and could fall into  the  above
    described risk categories identified in GJ and others.



Decision

      a. The appeal is dismissed.

      b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and shall stand.

      c. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 19 November 2015              |

