
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08704/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th July 2015                    |On 24th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR H A
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondents:   Ms A Smith (instructed by Bindmans LLP)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State with regard to a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Metzer)  dated  4th  February  2015  by  which  it  allowed  the
    Respondent's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
    him asylum and remove him to Afghanistan.

 2. Although this is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
    I will in this determination, for the sake of continuity  and  clarity,
    refer to Mr H A as the Appellant and to the Secretary of State  as  the
    Respondent.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.  The
    grounds seeking permission to appeal assert that the  Judge  failed  to
    cite or apply  the  country  guidance  case  of  AK  (article  15  (C))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC). The grounds assert that the judge
    was bound  to  find  on  the  particular  facts  that  return  of  this
    Appellant, either to Kabul or his home area, is reasonable and that the
    Judge departed significantly from the position set out in  AK,  without
    adequate reference to recent objective evidence and such amounts  to  a
    material error of law.

 4. Secondly it is submitted that the Judge also erred in failing  to  give
    adequate weight to the previous determination and did  not  follow  the
    guidance in Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1.

 5. It is also asserted that the judge failed to give any adequate  reasons
    for his findings that it would not be reasonable for the  Appellant  to
    relocate to Kabul or that there is an insufficiency of  protection  for
    him in Afghanistan.

 6. The first ground in relation to the Judge's alleged departure  from  AK
    is misconceived.  AK was about humanitarian protection and Article 15C.
    The First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  not
    humanitarian protection; indeed the two are mutually exclusive.

 7. The Appellant's solicitors submitted a Rule  24  notice  defending  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  particular  in  relation  to  its
    treatment of Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1, arguing  that  the  Judge  did
    give reasons why, in the light  of  further  evidence,  he  came  to  a
    different conclusion from the original Tribunal and that on that  basis
    the Appellant would be at risk as a refugee. It also asserted that  the
    Judge  had  given  adequate  reasons  for  his  finding  that  internal
    relocation was unreasonable in the circumstances and that even  if  the
    Judge had erred in failing to refer to the country  guidance  case,  on
    the facts as he found the error was immaterial.

 8. The Decision and Reasons, is quite brief. It sets out  the  Appellant's
    evidence in paragraphs 3 to 15.  At paragraph 3  the  Judge  summarises
    the Appellant's claim as being that his father was a senior  member  of
    the Taliban who disappeared in 2004 after the collapse of the  Taliban.
    He has an older brother who is also in the United Kingdom and a younger
    sister in Iran. His older brother left Afghanistan in around 2006.

 9. The Appellant's mother had told him that because his father had been  a
    commander in the Taliban the authorities searched their home  in  2007.
    His father having disappeared, he believed him to be dead. The  Taliban
    harassed the Appellant's family trying to discover the  whereabouts  of
    his father and that was the reason his brother left the country.

10. His brother claimed asylum on arrival in the UK in 2006 but  his  claim
    was refused. He was eventually granted Indefinite Leave to Remain under
    the legacy scheme in November 2010.

11. The Appellant, along with his mother and  sister  left  Afghanistan  in
    2006 for  Iran  but  were  returned  to  Afghanistan  by  the  Iranians
    authorities after only one month.

12. When the Appellant was aged 13 or 14 the Taliban started to request him
    to join them and also asked about the whereabouts  of  his  father  and
    Taliban weapons and ammunition that had gone missing at the  same  time
    as his father. The Taliban did not come across the Appellant because he
    was out when  they  visited.  They  also  searched  the  house  on  one
    occasion.

13. Shortly before the Appellant left Afghanistan in 2011, the Taliban came
    to the house asking for him. His mother  told  them  that  he  was  not
    there, although in fact he was hiding. The  Taliban  became  angry  and
    threatened to bomb and demolish the family home. Four days  after  that
    happened the Appellant travelled to Iran with his mother, sister and  a
    maternal  uncle  with  the  assistance  of  an  agent.  The  uncle  had
    previously lived in Iran  for  10  years  and  his  mother  and  sister
    remained with him there.  However he arranged for the Appellant  travel
    on to the UK as he feared he would be sent back to Afghanistan.

14. The Appellant's fear is that if he is returned to Afghanistan  he  will
    have no one to return to, he will be caught by the Taliban  and  forced
    to become a suicide bomber. He has now been reunited with  his  brother
    in the United Kingdom. He has not seen  his  mother,  sister  or  uncle
    since he left Iran.

15. At paragraph 10 the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dealt  with  what  the
    Appellant had to say about the previous appeal  hearing.  The  original
    Judge said there was differing evidence between the Appellant  and  his
    brother. The Appellant said this was a result of his youth at the  time
    and also that he was very young when his brother was in Afghanistan and
    they had been separated for a long time. He also said that although his
    brother had travelled from Manchester to London to attend that  hearing
    they had not previously met in person in the UK as the claimant was  in
    foster care in London while his brother lived in Manchester.

16. The Judge, at paragraph 11, noted that the previous Judge dismissed the
    appeal "at least in substantial part, on the basis he  did  not  accept
    that they were brothers and that there were material inconsistencies in
    their accounts". The  judge  indicates  that  he  had  before  him  DNA
    evidence confirming their relationship.

17. The Appellant also said he was no longer in contact with his family.

18. The judge then set out the evidence of the Appellant's brother  and  in
    relation to the previous appeal he said that he had  been  confused  by
    the questions and could not understand why the  Judge  did  not  accept
    they were brothers.

19. At paragraph 19 the Judge refers to various  letters  of  support  from
    witnesses who knew the Appellant (in relation to the Article  8  claim)
    and also to an expert report by Claudio Franco dated January 2014 which
    included evidence about the inability the authorities  to  protect  the
    Appellant in Afghanistan, the  potential  difficulties  he  would  have
    being internally relocated if it was concluded that he could not return
    to his own village and also that if he were returned his own village he
    would be at a risk from the Taliban.

20. At paragraph 20 - 22 the Judge set out  the  law  in  relation  to  the
    burden and  standard  of  proof  and  then  his  findings  commence  at
    paragraph 23. He notes in paragraph 23 and 24 that he is to  be  guided
    by Devaseelan in relation to the determination of the  previous  Judge,
    Judge Greasley  and  he  notes  that  there  were  adverse  credibility
    findings against  the  Appellant  from  paragraph  37  to  47  of  that
    judgment. At paragraph 25 the Judge  states:-

         "However, those credibility findings focused principally  upon  the
         apparent discrepancies between the evidence given by the  Appellant
         and that of his brother, described by the  previous  Judge  as  his
         "claimed" brother. At paragraph 37 of the  previous  determination,
         the Immigration Judge found  there  were  material  inconsistencies
         between their  accounts  to  such  a  degree  that  the  claim  for
         international protection is a "wholly fabricated account.""

21. The Judge then identified at  paragraph  26  that  Judge  Greasley  had
    focussed on the discrepancies about whether  the  Taliban  had  entered
    the family home and whether the Appellant   would  have  returned  from
    Iran to Afghanistan to reoccupy that home.  He  had  not  accepted  the
    Appellant's father had disappeared or that his mother had continued  to
    reside in Iran. He also points to a number of factual findings focussed
    upon his failure to accept the Appellant and his brother were  in  fact
    brothers.

22. At paragraph  27 the Judge related that Judge Greasley had found,  even
    allowing for  the  Appellant's  young  age,  that  he  had  provided  a
    fabricated account and he says:-

         "It  is  clear  focussed  very   substantially   upon   the   found
         discrepancies between the Appellant and his  brother  and  did  not
         accept that they were in fact brothers."

23. At paragraph 29 the Judge, having once more reminded himself about  the
    Devaseelan  guidelines,  notes  that  since  the  previous  appeal  the
    Appellant had the benefit of an expert report and also DNA evidence. He
    said:-

         "Applying  the  necessary  flexibility  recognised  in  Djebbar  in
         consideration of the Devaseelan guidelines, I find that armed  with
         the significant and fundamental further evidence, the Appellant can
         now establish that he and Mr S  are  brothers.  I  find  that  this
         central element, which was absent when the matter came for previous
         hearing, has considerable significance in assessing the Appellant's
         credibility generally in relation to the background of  his  claim,
         which is not a case dependent upon the Appellant  maintaining  that
         he was the victim of torture by the Taliban or  his  own  political
         opinions, but is limited to essentially to  the  disappearance  and
         subsequent claimed death of his father, and the movements of  other
         members of his family."

24. In paragraph 30 the Judge then says:-

         "Applying the lower standard and take into account the  expert  and
         DNA evidence  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant,  I  find  that  the
         Appellant  has  established  to  the  relevant  standard  that  the
         background of his claim, which I do  not  find  is  an  exaggerated
         claim, has been established and I accept the  Appellant's  evidence
         that his father has disappeared and has probably died and that  his
         family were forced to leave for  Iran,  before  being  returned  to
         Afghanistan and then returning to Iran where I find the Appellant's
         surviving family remain."

25. I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  on  credibility  are
    inadequately reasoned. The Judge appears to base his entire credibility
    findings upon the fact  that  the  Appellant  and  Mr  S  are  in  fact
    brothers. It is apparent from what the Judge himself said [25] and [26]
    that the previous Judge had a number of reasons for finding the account
    to be a fabrication which included a greater number  of  discrepancies.
    This Judge did not deal with those at all. He gives no reason  to  find
    the Appellant had established his claim save for the fact he and  Mr  S
    are  brothers.  More  reasons  are  required  to  justify  a   positive
    credibility finding than that the Appellant  and  Mr  S  are  brothers,
    particularly as Mr S's own asylum claim was unsuccessful. He  gives  no
    reason for finding that it is not an exaggerated claim  and  no  reason
    for accepting the Appellant's evidence  that  his  father  disappeared,
    probably died or that the family were forced to leave for  Iran  before
    returning to Afghanistan and then once again going to Iran.

26. As credibility is clearly  at  the  heart  of  this  case,  the  wholly
    inadequate findings render the decision unsustainable as a whole and  I
    find that I must set it aside.

27. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the
    extent that the decision is set aside and remitted for rehearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  None of the findings are preserved.

28.  The First-tier Tribunal having made an anonymity  direction  I  see  no
    reason not to continue it.


Signed   Date 23rd July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




Direction regarding anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed   Date 23rd July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
