
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08362/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th July 2015                            |On 4th September 2015         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                            Mr EDRESS Abdulrahman
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Madubuije - Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Edress Abdulrahman, a citizen of Sudan  born  31st
    December 1984.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  made
    on 29th September 2014 to refuse to grant asylum and to remove him from
    the United Kingdom by  way  of  directions  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The Appellant appealed  against  that
    decision and his appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Davies in January 2015.  The Appellant appealed against  that  decision
    and on 5th May 2015, having heard submissions, I found that there was a
    material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in that the Judge failed to take account of relevant  evidence  and  to
    consider the evidence before  him  in  the  round.   I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  now  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision.

The Basis of the Appellant's Claim for Asylum

 2. The Appellant claims to be in opposition to  the  Sudanese  Government.
    He claims  to  have  demonstrated  against  the  Government's  economic
    legislation  in  September  2013.   He  said   that   he   joined   the
    demonstration at 9 o'clock in the morning  and  at  midday  the  police
    arrived and dispersed the crowd with tear gas bombs,  batons  and  live
    ammunition.  He ran off and was then stopped by police in a vehicle who
    beat him and knocked him unconscious.  He was arrested and taken  to  a
    detention centre where he was detained for a month and  tortured  every
    day.  He was charged and found guilty without being taken to court then
    released on 26th October 2013 on condition that he did not leave  Sudan
    or indeed his local area or tell anyone what had happened.  He was also
    to report to the police  every  two  weeks  and  provide  the  Sudanese
    Government with information about the opposition party.  He did  report
    to the police and when he did he would be interrogated and  threatened.
    In February 2014 he stopped reporting  and  went  into  hiding  at  his
    uncle's house in Khartoum.  Four months later he left Sudan and went to
    Egypt with the help of an agent.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom  on
    30th June 2014 and claimed asylum on 1st July.

The Decision of the Secretary of State

 3. The decision of the Secretary of State is contained in a  letter  dated
    1st October 2014.  The Appellant had said that he had  studied  English
    language at Omdurman Islamic University having  begun  this  course  in
    September 2008.  Essentially the  Secretary  of  State  dismissed  this
    claim.  She found inconsistencies in his account.  He had said that  he
    had only passed his first and second year of studies because he had  to
    resit some years and had financial difficulties which meant he  had  to
    have breaks in his studies.  The Secretary of State found his claim  to
    be internally inconsistent with his claim that he cannot read or  speak
    the English language and she did not accept that a student  who  passed
    their first and second year of a degree does not speak or read English.
     He had said that the modules that he had  studied  included  "writing,
    reading, English language skills, literature, grammar  and  phonetics".
    The Secretary of State also said  that  according  to  the  information
    before her English language is not a course on the syllabus at Omdurman
    Islamic University.  She therefore rejected his claim to  have  studied
    there.  Having done that she reasonably found it inconsistent  that  he
    had joined the  student  activist  community  at  that  university  and
    through that group expressed political opinions in  opposition  to  the
    Government.  She noted too that  his  last  address  in  Sudan  was  in
    Qadarif, not Omdurman.  The Secretary of State took into  account  that
    the country information shows that there  were  many  protests  between
    September  and  October  2013  across  Sudan  against  the  President's
    decision in 2012 to stop subsidising fuels and other main  commodities.
    She accepted  that this supports his claim but concluded  that  because
    of the fact that these demonstrations were widely reported in the media
    the Appellant would know about them whether he attended  them  or  not.
    She also noted discrepancies in his answers at the interview about when
    the police had intervened giving different times at various  stages  of
    his interview.   The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant was living in Omdurman at the time of the demonstration.  She
    went on to dismiss his claim to have been arrested and  ill-treated  by
    the authorities in Sudan.  She also took into account the fact that the
    Appellant did not seek asylum immediately on his arrival in the UK  and
    indeed did not seek asylum in Italy or France.

Evidence at the Hearing

 4. A bundle of documents was provided at the hearing.

 5. Firstly I have an original certificate from Omdurman Islamic University
    in the Appellant's name confirming him to have  been  enrolled  in  the
    third year at the Faculty of  Arts  -  English  Department  -  for  the
    academic year 2013/2014.  It is dated 20th October 2014 and has various
    stamps on it including one from the Academic Secretary's Office of  the
    University.

 6. I have a statement from the Appellant rebutting  the  reasons  for  the
    refusal of his claim.  He said that his home  address  where  his  wife
    also lives is in Qadarif but he moved to Omdurman  to  study.   He  was
    staying with his brother as he did not have a home of  his  own  there.
    He attended the demonstrations outside his brother's  house.   He  gave
    approximate times when he joined the demonstration and when the  police
    and security services arrived.  It was around midday.   He  was  not  a
    member of any political party but was accused of being a member of  the
    opposition.  Four of  the  subjects  at  the  university  were  English
    related.  The learning of English is a gradual progression.  It was not
    necessary for him to be able to speak English when he began the course.
     The standard of English is not the same as  it  is  in  England.   The
    letter from the university which he had produced confirming that  there
    is a Faculty of Arts - English Department at the  university  had  been
    obtained and produced by his brother.   He  said  he  was  providing  a
    bundle of cards which he  was  issued  with  during  his  time  at  the
    university.  He explained why he was unable to claim  asylum  in  Italy
    and France saying that he was on  the  streets  in  Italy  and  it  was
    dangerous.  In France the police told him to leave their country within
    a month.  He went to 'the jungle' with other asylum seekers  and  lived
    in destitution until he got out of France.  He is from  the  Beni  Amer
    Tribe which is generally marginalised by the Sudanese Government.

 7. I have nine cards, some of them laminated.  I have translations of them
    though one is in English.  It was issued by the English Cultural Centre
    with an issue date of 1st July 2013 and an  expiry  date  of  1st  July
    2013.  There is a residential  certificate  for  October  2014,  travel
    passes and library cards  issued  in  December  2009,  September  2008,
    September 2011 and one with no issue date but covering 2013 to 2014.

 8. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant.  He adopted his statement.

 9. Mr Madubuije went through the cards with him.  It  had  been  suggested
    that the photograph on all the cards was the same.  I have to say  that
    I do not agree with that.  In any event what  the  Appellant  said  was
    that the  way  the  university  cards  worked  was  that  they  took  a
    photograph at the start and used it throughout.  It was pointed out  to
    him that some of the student ID cards were different from  others.   He
    said that they just changed over the years.

10. Ms Johnstone cross-examined the Appellant at great length on the cards.
     She asked him for example why he produced a library card that had been
    valid for ten days only.  He said that he had failed an exam and had to
    do a resit.  He was given the card for a limited period to  enable  him
    to use the library to study for the resit.  He  had  had  to  stop  his
    studies for two years and then he repeated a course for two years.   He
    took a refresher course in 2010.  He was clearly becoming  confused  by
    the questions and I asked him to take his time and try to give us rough
    dates.  He said that in 2008 he did his first year; in 2009 he repeated
    his first year; in 2010 he stopped for a year; in 2011 he  started  his
    second year; in 2012 he repeated his second year and in 2013 he did his
    third year.  He explained why the card numbered (7) says that he was in
    his second year when according to his evidence he was in his first.  He
    said it was because the year was repeated.

11. Ms Johnstone put it to him that there was tear around the photograph on
    one of the cards (page 19).  He said it  was  just  a  mistake  by  the
    person who laminated  it.   It  was  split.   She  suggested  that  the
    photograph looks as if it had been put into someone  else's  card.   He
    said it was his name that was on  the  card  and  his  photo.   Similar
    comment was made with regard to other cards i.e. that  he  had  changed
    the photo.  He denied this saying about one of them that it was  not  a
    magnetic card.  He would  put the photo in and then hand it over to the
    university to be laminated.  She questioned why  the  English  Cultural
    Centre card was in English but I made it clear immediately that  I  had
    no difficulty with that at all.  One would expect it to be in  English.
    She questioned why one of the cards indicated that  the  Appellant  was
    enrolled at the university for the year 2013/14 when he was arrested in
    September 2013.  He said he had started the course in  early  September
    and the demonstration was on 25th September.  She questioned why  there
    were two letters on different headed paper  from  the  university.   He
    said he got the second one from the Faculty that he attended because it
    had been questioned that such a Faculty existed.   She  questioned  why
    the document at page 31 was stamped by the Ministry of Foreign  Affairs
    given that he claims to fear the authorities in Sudan.  He said it  was
    his brother that had obtained that.  He was in the UK at the time.  She
    questioned the name of the person who had signed it.  He responded that
    some people write their names in a different order and there is nothing
    odd about the name at all.

12. She questioned his claim to have lived with his uncle  in  a  different
    town and he explained that his uncle also had a flat in Khartoum  which
    was empty.

13. In submissions Ms Johnstone questioned the Appellant's  statement  that
    he had lived in Qadarif  and not Omdurman.  She  submitted  that  there
    was no credible evidence that he had attended university.  She asked me
    to give no weight to the document which he had produced to say  he  had
    lived in Omdurman.  She submitted that the photos on his ID cards  were
    all the same.  There was a spelling mistake in one of the letters.  The
    professor's name was different.  Even if it were the case that  he  was
    arrested he was released and would be of no interest to the authorities
    on his return.  He said he was a member of a political party  and  then
    that he was not.

14. Mr Madubuije said in his submissions that what was actually said in the
    refusal letter at paragraph 2 was that the Appellant had been suspected
    of being a member of an opposition party.  He had never  said  that  he
    was a member.  He asked me to give weight to the two letters  from  the
    university.  He said it was he, as the Appellant's representative,  who
    had taken steps to get the second letter, given what had been  said  in
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  He  submitted  that  the
    onus is on the Respondent to show that the ID cards which were produced
    are forgeries.  The photos on the cards are not all the same.  He  said
    that the name of the Professor on the letter has  variations  but  this
    does not mean that it is  wrong.   It  is  just  a  slightly  different
    spelling.  With regard to the spelling mistake in the  letter  he  said
    that there are spelling  mistakes  in  documents,  even  determinations
    issued by the First-tier Tribunal.  He  submitted  that  the  Appellant
    would be at risk on return on account of his political  opinion.   This
    has been established to the required standard of proof.

Burden and Standard of Proof

15. The burden is on the Appellant to show with regard to the asylum appeal
    that returning him would expose him  to  a  real  risk  of  an  act  of
    persecution for reasons set out in  Regulation  6  of  The  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006.  With regard to Humanitarian Protection he  would  have  to  show
    substantial grounds for believing that he would face  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm as defined by paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules  or
    face a real risk of a breach of his protected human rights

Findings and Decision

16. I have given very careful consideration to all the evidence before  me.
    No submissions were made on the claim initially made that the Appellant
    would face persecution on the grounds of his  ethnicity  and  I  reject
    that element of his claim.

17. I accept that the Appellant attended university as claimed.   There  is
    evidence that English is taught there.  In any event even at  the  time
    of the refusal by the Home Office the evidence was that  the  Appellant
    had been enrolled in the Faculty of Arts. It is common for languages to
    be taught in an Arts Faculty and therefore reasonable  to  assume  that
    languages are taught at Omdurman and that it is it  not  unlikely  that
    English would be taught.   The Appellant produced nine  cards  said  to
    have been issued to him during his studies.   Ms Johnstone  tried  very
    hard to persuade me that these cards were forgeries but I cannot  reach
    that conclusion.  The photographs on the cards were not all  identical.
    The Appellant gave clear and immediate responses to  the  questions  he
    was asked about the cards.  He spoke of having  to  take  time  out  of
    university because he had no money.  He spoke of  having  resits  which
    resulted on one occasion in him being given a card to use  the  library
    for only a month.  The reasons he gave were perfectly  reasonable.   It
    is the case that as a  Judge  in  this  Tribunal  I  see  many   forged
    documents but I do find it very difficult to accept that  an  Appellant
    would go to the trouble of buying or even putting together himself nine
    cards to establish that he had attended a university.  All of the cards
    are different in one way or another.  Why would he make them different?
     It is  obvious  that  questions  would  be  asked  because  they  were
    different.  I therefore accept that he attended the course as  claimed.
    This means that he spent time studying in Omdurman.

18. The question  therefore  is  whether  he  attended  the  demonstration,
    whether he was arrested, detained, ill-treated and failed to adhere  to
    reporting conditions and whether he would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Sudan.  The Secretary of State  accepted  the  Appellant's  account  of
    events at the demonstrations to be externally consistent but said  that
    because all the information about the demonstrations and the actions of
    the security forces is in the public domain the  Appellant  could  have
    known about them whether he attended or not.

19. In his submissions Mr Madubuije relied on the  decision  AY  (political
    parties - SCP - risk) Sudan CG [2008] UKAIT 00050 in which the  summary
    of the findings was as follows:

         1. Opposition parties are allowed  to  function  within  relatively
         narrow parameters in Sudan.



         2. The Sudanese authorities do not seek or even attempt to take
         action which could amount to persecution against all political
         opponents but in the main they seek to control by the use of fear
         and intimidation. Depending on the particular circumstances of an
         individual, they may resort to stronger measures, particularly
         against those actively engaged in building up grass roots
         democracy, working in support of human rights and involved in open
         criticism of the regime's core ideology and philosophy.


         3. In general it will be difficult for ordinary members and
         supporters of the SCP or any other political party to establish a
         claim for asylum. They will need to show that they have been
         engaged in specific activities likely to bring them to the
         attention of the adverse authorities such as active and effective
         local democratic activity or support for particular human rights
         activities. Whether any individual political activist is at risk
         will necessarily depend upon his individual circumstances set
         within the context of the situation as at the date of decision.
         This will include an assessment of the nature of the activities
         carried out and how they will be seen by the authorities.


         4. The legal status of an opposition party has no significant
         bearing in itself on whether an individual is likely to be at risk
         of persecution. Political activities also take place under the
         guise of cultural associations

20. I am prepared, given the low standard of  proof,  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant was at the demonstration and that he was  picked  up  by  the
    police and detained. He was not a member of  any  party  and  does  not
    claim to have been involved in any other political  activities.  Indeed
    he said that the demonstration was passing by and he decided to join in
    because he agreed with what the protesters were saying. He did not  set
    out that day to attend a demonstration he knew had been planned. He was
    an onlooker who joined in on the spur of the moment. There  is  nothing
    to suggest that he would have been known to the  authorities  prior  to
    the demonstration. In those circumstances it does not appear to  me  to
    be likely that one of the conditions of his release would  be  that  he
    provide information about the opposition party. I do  not  consider  it
    likely that he would be required  to  report  and  be  subject  to  the
    conditions stated. He claims that he was told  that  if  he  failed  to
    provide information on the opposition party (of  which  he  was  not  a
    member) he would be re-arrested and returned to prison but he is silent
    as to  what  information  he  gave  the  authorities  to  prevent  this
    happening on the several occasions he reported between his  release  on
    26th October 2013 and his decision to stop reporting in February  2014.
    I do not accept that if the authorities had  any  interest  in  him  he
    would have been able to hide at his uncle's house in a  different  area
    of Khartoum for four months prior to leaving the  country.  If  he  had
    been reporting the authorities presumably had  his  details  and  would
    have made efforts to track him down had they any interest  in  him.  He
    said he used his brother's address when he was at  the  university  but
    has said nothing to suggest that  the authorities  pursued his  brother
    for information on his whereabouts  during the time he  was  hiding  at
    his uncle's or indeed since he came to the UK. He  has  been  in  touch
    with his brother as  it  was  he  who  obtained  the  letter  from  the
    university and sent it to him.

21. I find therefore that the Appellant has not  established  even  on  the
    lower standard of proof that  he  would  be  of  any  interest  to  the
    authorities in Sudan. I accept that KY was heard 7  years  ago  but  no
    background information was put before me to show that  there  has  been
    any change in the general attitude of the authorities  with  regard  to
    returning failed asylum seekers in whom they had  no  interest  at  the
    time they left the country.

22. I find that the Appellant has not established that he would have a well-
    founded fear of persecution if he were returned to Sudan.

23. No submissions were made under Article 8 of the European Convention for
    the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

The Appellant has not established a right to Humanitarian Protection in  the
UK.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 31st August 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
