
IAC-AH-LEM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08514/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 June 2015                                |On 12 June 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                Maliha naeem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Janjua, Morden Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Maliha Naeem, was born on 14 March 1980 and is a citizen
    of Pakistan.  She arrived in the United Kingdom  in  October  2005  and
    claimed asylum.  That application was refused and she  did  not  appeal
    the respondent's decision.  She made a subsequent fresh  claim  to  the
    Secretary of State on 30 May 2009 and further submissions on 25 January
    2011.  She claimed that she had converted from Sunni Islam to Shia  and
    also that she would be a lone woman in Pakistan who was  at  risk  from
    her husband, a prominent politician in his local area.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Dearden) in a determination  promulgated  on  23  March
    2015,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Deans found that the first ground of  appeal
    (that the judge misunderstood the nature of the claim by assessing that
    she was at risk only as a lone woman rather than considering  the  risk
    of renewed violence from her husband) was not  arguable.   Judge  Deans
    noted that Judge Dearden "did not believe that [the appellant]  was  at
    risk from domestic violence."  He did, however, find it  arguable  that
    the judge's credibility findings may be unreliable  because  the  judge
    may have misapprehended the appellant's evidence.

 3. Ground 2 challenges the judge's  findings  on  credibility.   At  [21],
    Judge Dearden recorded that,

         "The appellant said that she had never been to the police to report
         physical threats to her daughter because her husband  was  from  an
         important political party and was  very  influential  in  Pakistan.
         Whilst  the  appellant  acknowledged  that  she  had  produced   no
         documents to show that her husband  was  high  up  in  a  political
         party, it was maintained that if she had complained  about  him  it
         would  have  been  fruitless  because  she  would  not  have   been
         believed."

 4. The appellant asserts, contrary to the judge's finding, that the police
    would be likely to inform her husband of her complaint and her presence
    in Pakistan and that this would "make  the  violence  suffered  worse."
    [Grounds, 10].

 5. The appellant was asked at her substantive asylum interview whether she
    had reported "threats to your daughter's life to the police."  She  had
    replied, "you don't know the  police  in  my  country.   The  husband's
    friend killed two people and my husband used his influence to  get  the
    case closed.  The police in Pakistan are not like in this country.   If
    you go to the police they will inform him [the  appellant's  husband]."
    It is clear that the judge's  finding  is  not  inconsistent  with  the
    answer which the appellant gave at  interview.   Her  answer,  however,
    went further than the finding of  the  judge  and  indicated  that  the
    appellant might be exposed  to  risk  simply  by  reason  of  reporting
    violence to the police because they would, in turn, tell  her  husband.
    In his findings at [30], the judge stated that, "if, [the  appellant's]
    husband was a  powerful  politician  then  other  powerful  politicians
    opposed to him would welcome his being investigated by the  police  for
    offences of violence against his wife."  That observation  was  clearly
    open to the judge on the evidence.  It is true to say  that  the  judge
    has not made a finding as  to  whether  the  police  would  inform  the
    appellant's husband of her presence and her complaint but,  given  that
    the judge went on to find that the appellant's evidence  was  generally
    unreliable, I do not consider that he has erred in law  by  failing  to
    make a specific finding on that particular issue.  The judge  was  well
    aware of what the appellant had said at interview because he refers  to
    the interview elsewhere in the decision (for example, at paragraph 22).
     He has simply made a different finding from that urged upon him by the
    appellant.  He did not err in law by doing so.

 6. The judge went on at [30] to find that there was "something  not  quite
    right about the appellant's account because if she  was  married  on  1
    January 1997 and left four months later  when  she  was  pregnant,  the
    daughter could not have been born on 30 December 1998."  The grounds of
    appeal complain that that observation  by  the  judge  had  "completely
    overlooked important evidence".  The appellant had supplied a statement
    before the Tribunal to say that  her  daughter  had  been  born  on  30
    December 1997, not 1998.  She stated  that,  "the  year  given  in  her
    screening interview was simply a mistake on her behalf  at  the  time."
    [Grounds, 11].

 7. I do not find the judge has misunderstood the evidence.  As he recorded
    in his decision at [16], the appellant  had  stated  in  the  screening
    interview for her 2005 asylum claim that her daughter had been born  in
    December 1998.  The appellant did not appeal against  the  decision  of
    the respondent.  I note from the refusal letter of 27 October 2005,  at
    [20], that the respondent had drawn specific  attention  to  the  clear
    discrepancy in that part of the appellant's evidence.  Moreover, as the
    judge noted at [16] because the earlier asylum decision  had  not  been
    the  subject  of  an  appeal,  the  particulars  of  that  claim  could
    legitimately act as the "starting point"  for  his  assessment  of  the
    evidence (Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 (Starred)).   Furthermore,  the
    most recent refusal letter of 1 October 2014 recorded that, when  asked
    to explain the discrepancy in her evidence, the appellant had  replied,
    "I'm confused about dates.  My documents should be here Friday.  I  can
    check them."  It seems extraordinary that the appellant would  need  to
    refer to documents in order to give the correct year of  birth  of  her
    own daughter.  I do not find that Judge Dearden erred by having  regard
    to the discrepancy in the 2005 interview or by refraining from  dealing
    with the appellant's subsequent correcting statement.

 8. At [30], Judge Dearden also stated that he had never been,

         "... entirely clear as to whether the appellant was saying that she
         had been beaten by her husband or  whether  she  left  because  she
         feared that her daughter was going to be beaten.  What she said  in
         answer to question 34 of the asylum interview  conducted  with  her
         was that it was her daughter who was the  victim  of  threats,  not
         her, and yet she now says she has been the victim  of  violence  as
         evidenced by the scar on her temple."

    The grounds of appeal point out [12] that, in her 2009  representations
    to the respondent, the appellant had indicated that she had in the past
    been subject to violence at the hands of her  husband.   The  appellant
    asserts that the judge misunderstood her evidence  at  the  substantive
    asylum interview [question 34] where, in response to the question "When
    did [your husband] start to threaten to kill you?"  the  appellant  had
    replied, "Not me, he said he will kill my  daughter  and  then  divorce
    me."

 9. I agree that the appellant's answer to the question about her husband's
    threat to kill her is not obviously inconsistent with  her  claim  that
    she had been the victim of violence at the hands of her husband in  the
    past.  I also accept that Judge Dearden's observation (see above) would
    appear to suggest that there is an inconsistency.  Having said that,  I
    am not persuaded that the judge has erred in law such that his decision
    is  unsafe.   His  observation  about  the  medical  evidence  [30]  is
    essentially that it is of neutral effect; he  correctly  noted  that  a
    number of the answers given by Dr Winspur were in response to questions
    the text of which had not been disclosed.  It  was  also  open  to  the
    judge to observe that the doctor had  failed  to  follow  the  Istanbul
    Protocol and that it was "difficult" to accept  the  doctor's  evidence
    attributing  scars  on  the  appellant's  body  to  injuries  sustained
    seventeen years  earlier.   Given  the  sound  reasons  the  judge  has
    provided for doubting the credibility of the  appellant's  evidence,  I
    consider it was  open  to  him  to  refrain  from  accepting  that  the
    appellant had been "abused by her husband"  [31].   Indeed,  the  judge
    went on to make an alternative finding on the basis that the  appellant
    had been abused.  At [31], he writes that, "even if [the appellant] had
    [been abused by her husband] that is a very long time ago and, assisted
    by her parents and daughter,  there  is  a  sufficiency  of  protection
    available to her on return."  I find,  therefore,  that,  even  if  the
    judge was wrong to identify a discrepancy in the  appellant's  evidence
    between the medical report and her answer to question 34 of the  asylum
    interview, his analysis is sufficiently comprehensive so  as  to  avoid
    his perpetrating any legal error.

10. In conclusion, I find that it was open to the judge  to  attach  little
    weight to the appellant's own evidence.  He has given sound reasons for
    finding that evidence to be unreliable.  His assessment of risk to  the
    appellant upon return to Pakistan is also sound.  He has, in a detailed
    and thorough decision, found, in the alternative,  that,  even  if  the
    appellant had been the victim of violence at the hands of  her  husband
    in the past, she would not be exposed to real risk should she return to
    Pakistan now.  I am satisfied that the judge did not misunderstand  the
    appellant's evidence such that his decision is flawed by  legal  error.
    I find that the appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
