
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08559/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 January 2014                            |On 20 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            mr srimohan thavarasa

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Tribunal Judge Abebrese) which dismissed the appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  his
    claim for asylum.
2.   The appellant is a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.  He  claims  that  he  was
    forcibly recruited to work for the LTTE and that he  was  arrested  and
    tortured in 2007 and in 2010 until his release on payment of a bribe in
    July 2011.  He bears scars which are the subject of medical and  expert
    reports.

3.   The grounds seeking permission to  appeal  argue  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to deal adequately with the expert  reports  from
    Dr Smith and from Dr Martin and in particular failed  to  give  any  or
    adequate reasons why he rejected the conclusions of those reports.

4.   At the commencement of the hearing before me it  was  conceded  by  the
    Presenting Officer that the determination was  defective  for  all  the
    reasons set out in the grounds.  I agree.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge failed adequately to engage with  the  expert
    reports that were before him  and  to  give  any  or  adequate  reasons
    generally for his findings and  conclusions.   He  found  many  of  the
    appellant's assertions not to be credible but gave no specific  reasons
    for many of those findings.

5.   It was agreed by both  representatives  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination should be set  aside  in  its  entirety  and  the  appeal
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Decision

6.   Accordingly my decision is that the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Judge contains an error of law.  I set it aside and remit the matter in
    its entirety to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House (for hearing by
    any judge other than Judge Abebrese).



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
17 January 2014
