
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/08783/2014




|At  Field House                           |Decision and Reasons           |
|On 14h May 2015                           |Promulgated  On 7th July 2015  |
|                                          |                               |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     A B

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Rachel Francis, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Ms Julie Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


 1. The appellant is a national of Albania, born on 25 June 1998. He has
    been granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mayall who dismissed his appeal in a decision
    promulgated on 28 January 2015.


 2. The appellant claimed asylum on 9 June 2014, stating he had just
    arrived in this country having entered illegally. He said he was not
    accompanied by any responsible adult. He said he lived on a farm in
    Albania with his parents and three older brothers. His father inherited
    the land on the death of his father. A neighbouring family disputed
    ownership of the farmland and assaulted the appellant and his father.
    Out of fear the appellant's brothers and then his father fled the
    country. Before leaving, his father made arrangements with an agent for
    the appellant to leave.

 3. The claim was considered in the context of blood feuds in Albania. The
    claim engaged the Refugee Convention on the basis the appellant was a
    member of a particular social group: a member of his father's family.
    The respondent did not accept the claim was true. If true, the Albanian
    State could provide effective protection. Furthermore, he could
    reasonably be expected to relocate within Albania to avoid any risk. On
    the basis the appellant was an unaccompanied minor the respondent
    agreed to allow him to remain until his family were contacted or until
    he turned 18 years of age.

 4. First-tier Judge Mayall's decision sets out the main points in the
    respondent's refusal letter which in turn sets out the appellant's
    claim.  It is clear from the decision the judge did not believe the
    appellant's claim. There were a number of points made in support of the
    negative credibility finding:

          i) None of the rival family had been killed. Consequently, there
             was no blood to avenge.
         ii) The appellant's grandfather died when he was very young. The
             appellant's father had been farming the land since without
             difficulty and it was implausible that the rival family would
             only become active in 2012.
        iii) There were inconsistencies between the appellant's claim that
             his parents kept him at home for safety and the rival family
             beating him up when he was on his way to meet his friend. The
             account of the attack was also inconsistent and lacking in
             detail.
         iv) At screening he did not to know the name of the rival family
             yet could name them in a statement dated before screening and
             in his substantive interview despite claiming no contact with
             home.
          v) The limited enquiries by him as to what had become of his
             brothers.
         vi) Going away without asking if he was joining his brothers.
        vii) The likelihood that no arrangements would have been made for
             contact afterwards.
       viii) The appellant in his witness statement said his mother still
             lived on the farm but at hearing said he did not know if this
             was still the case.


 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it may have been an error
    of law for Judge Mayall to attach significance to a more detailed
    account given in the substantive interview than the screening. Bearing
    in mind the appellant was 13 or 14 at the time it may have been an
    error of law for the judge to place weight on an apparent lack of
    discussion of events between the appellant and his parents. It was also
    arguable that the judge placed undue reliance upon the details of the
    appellant's account about the claimed assault on him. The judge
    referred to him saying it occurred at his friend's house which was next
    door. He then said he was assaulted not more than three minutes away
    from his own home.



The error of law


 6. Ms Francis submitted that Judge Mayall erred in law in concluding that
    as there had been no killing then this was no blood feud. Firstly, she
    made the point that there may have been a killing of which the
    appellant was unaware. Furthermore, the country information indicated
    that blood feuds could begin with an argument which can include a
    dispute over the ownership of land. She also submitted that the judge
    was not entitled to make inferences from the appellant's limited
    knowledge of his brothers' situation. The appellant said he had asked
    about his brothers and was told they were all right. She also submitted
    that there was a material factual error in relation to the claim by the
    appellant as to when he was assaulted. Judge Mayall drew an adverse
    inference from the appellant being assaulted which was not consistent
    with the claim his family were keeping him indoors. She submitted the
    judge misunderstood the factual claim, namely, that the appellant was
    kept indoors as a result of and following the assault. She also
    submitted that the judge erred in drawing inferences about where the
    attack took place. She submitted that there was no inconsistency with
    the appellant's evidence that the houses were close to each other: next
    door and three minutes away.


 7. Another criticism of the judge's approach was in relation to the
    comment that more details were given in the substantive interview then
    at screening. Reference was made to the decision of GM((risk-failed
    asylum seekers)DRC CG [2002] UKIAT 06741. This case concerned a
    challenge to the negative credibility finding made by the adjudicator.
    At paragraph 15 the Tribunal said that the interview records should be
    treated with considerable care given that the appellant was 17 at the
    time and mention was made to the vulnerability of unaccompanied
    children. The Tribunal at paragraph 16 stated `we would be very
    cautious before drawing any adverse inferences from ommissions or
    discrepancies in the SEF or the interview'.

 8. I was also referred to paragraph 79 of the country guidance decision of
    E. H.( Blood feuds) Albania [2012] UK UT 00348 were the tribunal in
    assessing credibility referred to the appellant's age and the fact the
    index events occurred when he was younger.

 9. In response, Ms Isherwood argued that the disagreement related to the
    outcome and that there was no error of law in the judge's approach. She
    pointed out that the appellant had signed a prepared statement dated 18
    June 2014, the day before his screening occurred. In that statement he
    sets out that the whereabouts of his parents and brothers are unknown.
    He states he has not had contact with his family since leaving Albania.
    At paragraph 10 he stated that his happy existence changed in 2012 when
    his father would not allow him to go out alone. He mentions in
    paragraph 11 that his father was in a dispute with the S family about
    the land. He then goes on to state his father was assaulted in June
    2013 and because of that he was not allowed to play with his friends
    any more and he would be escorted to school. At paragraph 14 he stated
    at the end of July 2013 he was out of the house waiting for a friend
    when a car pulled up and he was assaulted. He states that he stopped
    going to school as his family were afraid for his safety and he was
    then forced to remain indoors and not allowed to spend time with his
    friends. She submitted that allowance had to be made for the appellant
    age but nevertheless they were credibility issues arising. She
    submitted that the judge was considering the evidence as a whole. She
    said it was open to the judge to question the appellant's account about
    his brothers. She referred to paragraphs 45 and 46 of the decision
    which refers to inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence.


Consideration


10. Material facts must always be assessed in the context of the evidence
    as a whole and not in isolation. It is the total content of the
    evidence, including consistency, improbabilities or reasonableness that
    has to be evaluated. General credibility findings are not the starting
    point. Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000]
    EWCA Civ 11 established that everything capable of having a bearing on
    the case must be given the weight due to it. This was summarised in SM
    (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116 (5 July 2005):


             "It is the task of the fact-finder, whether official or judge,
             to look at all the evidence in the round, to try and grasp it
             as a whole and to see how it fits together and whether it is
             sufficient to discharge the burden of proof. Some aspects of
             the evidence may themselves contain the seeds of doubt. Some
             aspects of the evidence may cause doubt to be cast on other
             parts of the evidence... Some parts of the evidence may shine
             with the light of credibility. The fact-finder must consider
             all these points together; and ... although some matters may
             go against and some matters count in favour of credibility, it
             is for the fact-finder to decide which are the important, and
             which are the less important features of the evidence, and to
             reach his view as a whole on the evidence as a whole".



11. Assessing the credibility of asylum claims presented by children is
    particularly challenging. When the appellant came for his screening he
    was approaching his 16th birthday. On his account his family had
    experienced difficulties from when he was 14 to 15. On his account his
    brothers and father had left the previous summer, fearful of their
    neighbours. The appellant said he had been confined to the house from
    the summertime and had been assaulted. When he came to his screening on
    his account he had been away from home for just over a week and had
    travelled through various countries. Consequently, if the claim was
    true he was approaching his screening having experienced significant
    trauma and sensitivity was required in considering his claim.


12. The respondent has a protocol which is reflected in the screening
    interview. At 3.1 of the screening it was recorded he did not know the
    name of the family that were causing his family the difficulties. This
    clearly is not consistent with the statement he provided which names
    the family. This inconsistency was something the judge is entitled take
    into account. I appreciate that a screening interview is meant to
    provide only basic details in relation to the appellant and is not
    dealing with the specifics of the claim. However, if a detail relating
    to the claim is given which is at odds with the later claim a judge is
    entitled to take this into account in assessing credibility. GM((risk-
    failed asylum seekers)DRC CG [2002] UKIAT 06741 does not lay down any
    principle that omissions or contradictions cannot be taken into
    account. Instead, the tribunal refers to the caution required,
    particularly in the case of a child. It is my conclusion that it was
    open to the judge to factor this into the credibility assessment.


13. In his first statement he indicates the whereabouts of his mother was
    not known. At paragraph 11 of his later statement of 19 November 2014
    he states that his mother still lives on the land and that it was
    supporting her. He said the land could not simply be given away but
    required the appearance of consent. The judge records that in his oral
    evidence he said he did not know if she was still on the disputed land.
    He had not claimed any contact with home to explain this change. Again,
    the judge was entitled to take this into account in making an
    assessment of the truth of the claim.

14. On behalf of the appellant it was submitted that the judge made a
    factual error in relation to when the appellant was kept at home. The
    significance of the point is that it raises the question of how he
    could have been assaulted if he was not allowed out.It was submitted
    his confinement only began after he was assaulted and consequently
    explains why he was out of doors. However, I do not find the judge made
    an error of fact in this regard. At paragraph 12 of his statement of 18
    June 2014 he sets out how his father was assaulted in June 2013 and
    after that his father would escort him to school and he was not allowed
    to play with his friends. At paragraph 14 he states it was July 2013
    when he was assaulted.

15. At paragraph 46 of the decision the judge comments on the appellant's
    account as to how far he was from home when the assault took place. In
    his original statement at paragraph 14 he says he was out of the house
    waiting for a friend when a car pulled up and he was assaulted. In the
    following paragraph he states he then went home. In his substantive
    interview at question 60/63 he said the rival family lived nearby and
    had been living in the same area for a long time. At question 65 he
    states that his family would not let him step out of the house. He also
    states it would not leave him on his own. Then he goes on to describe
    being beaten up in July 2013. At question 67 he states he was on his
    way to meet a friend when he saw a car pull up. At question 74 he was
    asked where he was when the attack took place. He states it was in the
    neighbourhood. At Q 76 he said his house and house of his friend were
    close. One of the points made in the refusal letter at paragraph 23 was
    the apparent inconsistency between the appellant being assaulted and
    the claim he never went out. His later statement, dated 19 November
    2014 was made after the refusal. At paragraph 12 of the subsequent
    statement he seeks to explain this by saying his friend's house was
    directly next door. The judge was entitled to comment on the differing
    accounts.

16.  The judge accepts other points made in the refusal letter which go to
    credibility. The first is the fact that on the appellant's account his
    father inherited these lands when he was a child. The appellant
    indicates there were no problems when he was growing up and things only
    came to a head in the summer of 2012. The respondent and the judge then
    questioned why, if the dispute related to ownership of the land, it had
    not been an issue before. There is always a danger in speculating but
    in the circumstances the observation was reasonable.

17. A further point related to the appellant's apparent lack of enquiry
    from his parents about his brothers. In response, it is argued that he
    did ask and was told they were all right. However, it is legitimate to
    ask why he would simply accept this.

18. Another issue was his apparent lack of awareness as to where he was
    going. Linked to this is his claim that no arrangements were made about
    contact. It seems highly improbable that a mother would entrust her
    young child to an agent without knowing the arrangements and then check
    he had arrived safely and was doing well. I find these were legitimate
    factors for the judge to take into account.


19. If the judge was suggesting at paragraph 40 that a Kaun blood feud
    could only take place on foot of the killing this was wrong. The image
    of a blood feud may suggest this but the realities are that lesser
    events can result in a feud. In making the comment the judge was
    repeating what was said at paragraph 38 to 40 of the reasons for
    refusal letter. I find this to be a comment by the judge, rather than
    an indication of a conclusion. Had it been determinative the judge
    would not have gone further and considered the other issues.

 Conclusion

20. It is my conclusion that when the determination is read as a whole it
    is sound. I find the points taken by the judge were legitimate. The
    judge did not believe the appellant's claim and gave rational reasons
    for this conclusion. I find there is no material error of law and so
    the decision shall stand.

Decision.

The appeal is dismissed. No material error of law is established and so the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's appeal shall
stand.

FJ Farrelly
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



