
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08602/2014

                              Decision promulgated

                                  On 5 April 2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before


                                     RH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                                  DECISION


 1. On 17 February 2016 the Tribunal issued a direction  in  the  following
    terms:

        1. The appellant has applied for permission to appeal to the  Court
           of Appeal. The challenge is narrow, limited to an  objection  to
           DUTJ Pickup upholding at [11] the positive credibility  findings
           of the First-tier Tribunal but directing at [20],  [21]  and  in
           the Directions that the  remaking  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           would be "afresh" and "with no findings of fact preserved".

        2. The directions on the scope of the re-making are not  consistent
           with the decision at [11] that the positive credibility findings
           of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose an error of law.

        3. The reference at [19] to the Upper  Tribunal  not  exercising  a
           primary fact finding function is anomalous given  the  preserved
           findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

        4. The reference at [20] to a fresh hearing  being  required  as  a
           fair hearing did not take place is anomalous where this was  not
           a ground raised by either party.

        5. It is not set out in the  grounds  of  appeal  how  a  direction
           attached to  a  remittal  decision  can  form  the  basis  of  a
           challenge to the Court of Appeal, however.

        6. Also, directions can be varied so the point could be dealt  with
           by way of an application to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
           direction on the  scope  of  the  remittal  to  be  varied.  The
           availability of this alternative  suggests  that  the  challenge
           would be unlikely to meet the second appeals criteria.

        7. The scope of the remittal is clearly of material  importance  to
           the appellant, however. Having considered  the  matter  at  some
           length, my preliminary decision is to exercise the  power  under
           Rule 48 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
           and  treat the application for permission as an application  for
           set aside of part of the decision under Rule 43.

        8. The final terms of the Upper Tribunal decision responding to the
           challenge to the Court of Appeal would be:

               "1. The Tribunal treats the application  for  permission  to
               appeal to the Court of Appeal  as  an  application  for  set
               aside; Rule 48 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
               Rules 2008 applied.

               2. The decision promulgated on 21 December  2015  of  Deputy
               Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup is set aside under  Rule  43  to
               the extent that it  remits  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
               Tribunal to be re-made "afresh" or "with no findings of fact
               preserved".

               3. The re-making of the appeal by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
               will proceed on the basis of the preserved findings of  fact
               from the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lall;
               see [11] of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup's decision."

        9. The preliminary  decision  will  become  final  subject  to  any
           written objections from the parties made within 7 days the  date
           of issue of this direction.  No response will be  deemed  to  be
           consent to the preliminary decision becoming final.

 2. There has been no response from either party. The preliminary  decision
    therefore became final as of 25 February 2016. The appeal  is  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal  to be re-made in line with the decision  of
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup promulgated on 21 December varied to
    the extent set out above as to the preserved findings.

Signed: [pic]                                Date: 17 March 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
