
[pic]
IAC-UT

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08334/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 February 2016                           |On 18 March 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            REKAN SHWAN KAKARASH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms G Capel, counsel.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge John Jones QC) allowing  an  appeal  by  the
    applicant against a decision made on 11 May 2015 refusing to grant  him
    asylum. In this decision I will refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 18 April  1997.  He  arrived
    in the UK on 10 November  2014  and  claimed  asylum  on  arrival.  His
    application was refused for the reasons set out in the decision  letter
    of 11 May 2015. The  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a
    Kurdish Iraqi citizen whose village had been attacked by ISIS and  that
    there was a generalised risk from ISIS in his home  area.  However,  it
    was the respondent's view that the appellant could relocate  in  safety
    in Iraqi Kurdistan. The judge noted as a preliminary  matter  that  the
    respondent confirmed that she proposed to remove the appellant  to  the
    autonomous Iraqi Kurdish region ("IKR") rather than to Baghdad [13]. In
    her submissions Ms Capel confirmed that as the appellant was no  longer
    a minor, she was not pursuing the appeal under the  refugee  convention
    but on humanitarian protection and human rights grounds [55]-[56].

3.   The judge set out the common ground between the parties  at  [71].  The
    appellant could not return  to  his  home  village  and  there  was  an
    insufficiency of protection from ISIS there. He could  be  returned  to
    the IKR which was virtually violence  free  and  as  he  was  from  the
    Kurdish region of Iraq, he would be able to return to the IKR and could
    internally relocate there. The issue between the parties was whether it
    would be reasonable to expect him to relocate there or whether it would
    be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.

4.   The judge accepted the submission that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for
    the appellant for the reasons set out at [74]. He took into account the
    appellant's youth, his very low prospects of securing  employment,  the
    fact that he would not be eligible to receive any benefits in the  IKR,
    he would not have available to him the assistance of family and friends
    and he would not be eligible for financial assistance simply by  virtue
    of having an identity card.

5.   The judge summarised his findings at [75] as follows:

         "At paragraph 11 of AA, the Tribunal referred to a person  who  was
        both unable to access financial  assistance  and  who  was  without
        family or other means of support, as being likely "to face  a  real
        risk of destitution amounting to serious  harm".  I  consider  that
        this applies too to the appellant. I find that he does not have any
        family or support network in Iraq that he can  access,  his  family
        having dispersed and being untraceable, will not  be  eligible  for
        financial benefits in the IKR, and will be very unlikely to find  a
        job. He will then be facing a real risk of destitution. I  consider
        that this meets, indeed surpasses, the threshold whereby  it  would
        be "unduly harsh" for him to relocate within the IKR."

6.   The judge found that the appeal succeeded in  terms  of  the  grant  of
    humanitarian  protection  in  accordance  with  article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive and article 3 of the ECHR. He commented that in
    these circumstances it was not necessary to consider article 8 but, had
    he been required to do so,  he  would  have  found  applying  para  276
    ADE(1)(vi) that there would  be  "very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration" into the IKR.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

7.   In the grounds it is argued  that  the  country  guidance  case  of  AA
    (Article 15 (c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 44  incorporates  a  conclusion  of
    internal relocation/removal to IKR and Baghdad. On that basis it was  a
    necessary requirement in  order  to  determine  the  appellant's  claim
    lawfully for the judge to consider internal relocation to  Baghdad  and
    he had failed to do so. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had made
    an error of law by not considering whether the appellant could relocate
    to Baghdad following the guidance given in the current country guidance
    cases.

8.   Mr Kotas accepted that no specific internal relocation  submission  had
    been made in relation to Baghdad but  nonetheless  there  had  been  no
    concession that the appellant could not be returned  there.  The  judge
    should have considered not only the IKR but also Baghdad.

9.   Ms Capel relied on her rule 24 response  of  2  February  2016  arguing
    that AA did not require the consideration of whether Iraqi  Kurds  from
    the IKR, who could not reasonably locate there, should have  to  travel
    to and relocate in Baghdad. Further, the respondent had not  previously
    argued that the appellant could internally  relocate  in  Baghdad,  the
    argument being raised for the first time in the respondent's grounds of
    appeal and no submissions being made at the hearing  about  whether  it
    would be reasonable for the appellant to return there.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

10.  I must consider whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such  that
    its decision should be set aside. I am not satisfied that it did so err
    for the following reasons. The respondent's case as it was presented at
    the appeal (and reflecting the decision letter) was that the  intention
    was to remove the appellant to the IKR  [13].  It  is  clear  from  the
    judge's decision  that  no  issue  was  raised  at  the  hearing  about
    returning the appellant to Baghdad. I was referred to the  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in Daoud v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA  Civ  755
    and in particular to [12] where Sedley LJ said in respect  of  internal
    relocation that it was a serious and  frequently  problematical  issue,
    requiring proper notice, proper evidence and proper argument.

11.  As the issue of relocation to Baghdad was not raised  in  the  decision
    letter or at the hearing before the judge, it was too late for it to be
    raised in the grounds of appeal. None of the requirements identified by
    Sedley LJ in Daoud were met.  In any event, the reasons  given  by  the
    judge's finding that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to
    relocate in the IKR may well equally apply in  Baghdad.  However,  this
    can only be speculation. The fact remains that the position in  Baghdad
    was not considered at the hearing as the issue was not raised or argued
    before the judge.


Decision

12.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its  decision  to  allow
    the appeal on humanitarian protection and article 3 grounds stands.




Signed   H J E Latter

H J E Latter                                     Date:  1 March 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

