
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: AA/08925/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 July 2016                           |On 26 July 2016                  |
|Prepared on 22 July 2016                  |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    I. J.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Tunisia who entered the  UK  from  Papua
      New Guinea as a  work  permit  holder  in  July  2009.  He  became  an
      overstayer in  January  2010,  and  made  his  first  application  for
      protection on 8 June 2011. That application was refused on  5  January
      2012, and his appeal  was  dismissed  in  a  decision  of  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge Levin promulgated  on  16  February  2012.  His  appeal
      rights against that decision were duly exhausted in 2012.
   2. The Appellant then travelled illegally to Germany, which  resulted  in
      his return to the  UK  by  the  German  authorities  on  3  May  2013,
      whereupon  he  made  a  second  claim  for  protection.  That   second
      application was refused on 29 May 2015, and  a  further  decision  was
      then made to remove him from the UK.
   3. The Appellant's appeal against the decisions of 29 May 2015 was  heard
      on 4 February 2016, and it was dismissed on all grounds, in a decision
      promulgated  on  15  February  2016  by  First  Tier  Tribunal   Judge
      Griffiths.
   4. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  that  decision  on  22
      March 2016 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on the  basis  it  was
      arguable the Judge's approach to the evidence before her was flawed.
   5. Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   6. Both parties were agreed before me that  the  Judge's  starting  point
      ought to have been the decision of Judge Levin,  who  had  found;  (i)
      that the Appellant was an apostate, having converted from Islam to the
      Roman Catholic  Church  when  he  lived  in  Belgium,  (ii)  that  the
      Appellant did not face a risk of harm in Tunisia as a Christian,  and,
      (iii) that the Appellant had been refused entry to Papua New Guinea to
      rejoin his wife and children because their customary marriage was  not
      recognised by the authorities of that country.
   7. Both parties were agreed therefore that the focus of  the  appeal  was
      upon the risks the Appellant claimed to face in the event of return to
      Tunisia, since the Respondent was unable to  show  that  he  could  be
      removed to Papua New Guinea where the appellant  agreed  he  faced  no
      risk of harm.
   8. The parties were also agreed  before  me  that  the  Appellant's  case
      before the Judge  was  that  the  evidence  showed  that  the  general
      position of Christians within Tunisia had  deteriorated  significantly
      since the decision of Judge Levin in 2012. In any event,  it  was  the
      Appellant's case that Judge Levin had failed  to  distinguish  between
      the position of those who had always been Christian, and those who had
      converted to that faith from Islam.  The  Appellant's  case  was  that
      apostates faced very serious difficulties, even if those who were born
      into the Christian faith faced lesser problems.
   9. It was not disputed  before  the  Judge  that  the  Appellant  was  an
      apostate [43]. Two Catholic priests gave evidence to  the  Judge  that
      the Appellant was familiar with the rites customs and rituals  of  the
      Catholic Church, and that he was a  regular  attender  at  worship  in
      their Church. There was evidence from the Appellant to explain some of
      his behaviour when he was an  alcoholic,  and  his  changed  behaviour
      since he had accepted that addiction and  sought  assistance  to  deal
      with it.
  10. It was not the Appellant's case before the  Judge  that  he  had  ever
      sought to prosletyse his faith, or that he had any intention of  doing
      so in the future.
  11. The Appellant's case therefore was that he would wish  to  pursue  his
      faith within a Roman Catholic congregation, in any place that he would
      live, but that he would feel unable to do so in Tunisia  for  fear  of
      very serious physical harm if he  did,  because  the  state  would  be
      unable to protect him from the attitudes  of  the  general  population
      which would be prevalent across the whole country. He  would  have  no
      family support from Tunisia because his own family had rejected him as
      a result of his apostasy, and indeed he would need to avoid  them  for
      fear of their reaction to him. (Judge Levin's view was that  he  would
      be able to do so, but he accepted that he would need to do so.)
  12. Before me it was agreed by both parties that the Judge's  approach  to
      the evidence was flawed. Having focused upon an event that was said to
      have taken place in the UK, in which the Appellant had claimed he  had
      been  threatened  with  violence  as  an  apostate,  the  Judge  found
      (following her own questioning of the Appellant) that there had been a
      discrepancy in his account which damaged his general credibility as  a
      witness of fact. She went on to conclude that the  Appellant  was  not
      being truthful when he said that he would wish to pursue the Christian
      faith if he were living in Tunisia, and, that she was not satisfied as
      to the true extent of his Christian faith which she considered to have
      been exaggerated. That approach led her to go  behind  the  concession
      that had been made before her by the Respondent to the effect that the
      Appellant was genuinely an apostate, who had indeed converted  to  the
      Roman Catholic Church from Islam. She did not  in  consequence  follow
      the proper approach to that concession, which is to  be  found  in  HJ
      (Iran) [2010] UKSC
  13. Since both parties were agreed that the decision had to be  set  aside
      and remade, the focus of the hearing then turned to the mechanism  for
      doing so. I have in these circumstances considered whether or  not  to
      remit the appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be  reheard,  as
      requested by both parties. In the circumstances of  the  appeal  I  am
      satisfied that this is the correct approach. In circumstances where it
      would  appear  that  the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
      considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law
      has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his  case  to
      be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of
      the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover  the  extent  of
      the judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard  to  the
      over-riding objective, it is appropriate that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012. Having reached that  conclusion,  with
      the agreement of the parties I make the following directions;
     i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted
        to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. No findings of  fact  are
        preserved. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Griffiths.
    ii) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after 29 August 2016 for directions, and for
        listing for full hearing. The Appellant must be in  a  position  to
        inform the Tribunal at that hearing what (if any) further  evidence
        he seeks to rely upon.
    iv) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

  14. The decision promulgated on 15 February 2016 did involve the making of
      an error of law sufficient to require it  to  be  set  aside  and  the
      appeal to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is  set
      aside and the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal  with  the
      following directions;
     i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside. The appeal is remitted to
        the First Tier Tribunal for  rehearing.  No  findings  of  fact  are
        preserved. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Griffiths.
    ii) No interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the North
        Shields hearing centre after 29 August 2016 for directions, and for
        listing for full hearing. The Appellant must be in  a  position  to
        inform the Tribunal at that hearing what (if any) further  evidence
        he seeks to rely upon.
    iv) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 22 July 2016

