
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aA/08384/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 November 2016                  |On 06 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     AH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. Mr AH (Appellant) appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the
        First-tier  Tribunal  S  J  Pacey,  promulgated  on  31  May  2016,
        dismissing his protection  and  human  rights  appeal  against  the
        Respondent's decision of 14 May 2015 refusing  his  protection  and
        human rights claims.






   Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Iran, date of birth 02 July 1978. He
        claims to have left Iran around September 2013 and arrived  in  the
        United Kingdom on 3 October 2013. He claimed asylum  the  following
        day.


     3. The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim is twofold. Firstly,  the
        Appellant fears persecution on account of having  reported  members
        of the Basij to the authorities in respect of  a  rape  and  sexual
        assault allegation dating back to the summer of 2006. The Appellant
        maintains that he and a friend were  kidnapped  by  Basij  members,
        threatened, beaten up, raped and  then  released.  The  matter  was
        reported to the police and in July  2006  the  Basij  members  were
        convicted  of  kidnapping,  extortion,  and  forging  a  government
        officer's title.  They  were  acquitted  of  the  rape  allegation.
        Sometime after the convictions the Appellant discovered that one of
        the men was not serving his sentence and the  family  of  this  man
        threatened the Appellant's family as they wanted him  to  drop  the
        charges. In June 2012 individuals came  to  the  Appellant's  home,
        attacked him and his friend and damaged the house. In November 2012
        he was dismissed without explanation from his university.


     4. The 2nd basis of  the  asylum  claim  related  to  the  Appellant's
        claimed conversion to Christianity following his entry into the UK.


     5. As a result of a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
        account the Respondent did not find him  credible.  The  Respondent
        did not believe that the Appellant had  converted  to  Christianity
        because he demonstrated little knowledge of the Christian faith.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing

     6. The First-tier Tribunal heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant.  The
        judge had before her an Appellant's bundle divided into 3 sections.
        The  2nd  and  3rd  sections  contained,  respectively,  background
        evidence and case law.  The  1st  section  was  headed  'subjective
        evidence'. This contained, inter alia, a number of translations and
        medical certificates (in English)  said  to  have  been  issued  by
        doctors in Iran.


     7. The judge did not believe the  Appellant's  account  of  events  in
        Iran. The judge did not find it credible  that  the  Appellant  was
        unable to recall when he made his complaint to the authorities  and
        when he discovered  that  one  of  the  men  was  not  serving  his
        sentence,  and  drew  adverse  inferences  based  on   inconsistent
        evidence  relating  to  these  events.  The   judge   referred   to
        contrasting  answers  given  by  the  Appellant  relating  to   the
        frequency of threats and whether any threats were made directly  to
        him. There were said to be inconsistencies between the  Appellant's
        account and some of the  court  documents  he  provided  that  were
        translated. The judge referred to inconsistent evidence relating to
        the attack on the Appellant's house and the  manner  in  which  his
        friend was attacked. The judge additionally relied on  inconsistent
        evidence from the Appellant in respect of whether he had ever  been
        issued his own passport. The judge drew an adverse  inference  from
        the absence of any evidence from the Appellant's father and because
        he had been able to leave Iran without problems.


     8. At [16] the judge referred to a medical letter and  a  copy  of  an
        'exemption  from  military  service'  document  that  were  in  the
        Respondent's bundle. The judge noted that these documents were  not
        translated, and that other documents relating  to  the  Appellant's
        medical treatment in Iran  will  also  not  translated.  The  judge
        stated that these documents therefore commanded no probative value.


     9. At [21] the judge referred to a letter confirming  the  Appellant's
        dismissal from University contained in the Respondent's bundle  but
        attached no weight to it because it was not translated.  The  judge
        noted an inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence as to who issued
        this letter.


    10. The judge did not accept the Appellant's explanation for  his  lack
        of knowledge of basic tenets of the Christian faith. The judge drew
        an adverse  inference  based  on  the  timing  of  the  Appellant's
        attendance at the Oasis Church. The judge noted the absence of  any
        church representative at the hearing. The judge drew an  additional
        adverse  inference  from  the  Appellant's  claim   that   he   was
        effectively  engaged  in  street  evangelising   given   his   poor
        proficiency in English.


    11. The judge considered a psychiatric report which indicated that  the
        Appellant manifested features indicative  of  an  anxiety  disorder
        but, in light of her other adverse credibility findings, the  judge
        was not satisfied that the Appellant's anxiety disorder was  caused
        by  his  version  of  events.  Having  found  that  the   Appellant
        fabricated his account, had  left  Iran  legally,  and  was  not  a
        genuine Christian convert, the judge concluded that  the  Appellant
        did not face a real risk of persecution or a breach  of  Article  3
        ill-treatment and dismissed his appeal.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

    12. The grounds contended that the judge  failed  to  take  account  of
        material evidence before her. It was submitted  that,  contrary  to
        the judge's assertions  at  [16]  and  [21],  there  were  in  fact
        translations of  the  University  document  and  medical  documents
        contained in the Appellant's bundle. The judge made no reference to
        these translations. In so doing  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
        account  relevant  evidence  and  misdirected  herself  as  to  the
        availability of translated documents. It was further submitted that
        the judge failed  to  take  into  account  other  medical  evidence
        contained in the Appellant's bundle and supportive of  his  account
        of being raped. This evidence was said to be  material  because  it
        was capable of going some way to explain the inconsistencies in the
        Appellant's evidence.


    13. The grounds additionally contended that the judge was not  entitled
        to  drawn  adverse  inferences  from  the  absence  of  any  church
        representative at the  hearing,  particularly  since  a  letter  in
        support had been provided. It was submitted that the  judge  failed
        to refer to evidence indicating the Appellant had attended a church
        in London prior to being transferred to  Birmingham.  Nor  did  the
        judge consider that the Appellant, when  handing  out  leaflets  on
        streets, was accompanied by an interpreter.


    14. The grounds finally contended that the judge misdirected herself in
        respect of any risk faced  by  the  Appellant  as  an  undocumented
        failed asylum seeker being returned to Iran.


    15. In granting permission judge of  the  first-tier  Tribunal  Osborne
        stated,


             "In an otherwise careful  and  well-reasoned  decision  it  is
             nonetheless arguable that in relation to the translations, the
             judge gave no probative value to documentary evidence of which
             there were translations  which  could  and  should  have  been
             considered. It is at least arguable that the judge  failed  to
             consider the translations and  therefore  failed  to  properly
             consider all of the evidence."

Submissions at the error of law hearing


    16.  Mr  Eaton  did  not  pursue  the  ground   relating   to   illegal
        exit/undocumented returns. I say  no  more  about  that.  Mr  Eaton
        submitted that the judge was factually mistaken in concluding  that
        there were no translations of the University letter or the  medical
        documents  emanating  from  Iran.  He  drew  my  attention  to  the
        translations contained at A53 and A54 of the Appellant's bundle. He
        submitted that the documents at A70 and A71 were not considered  at
        all. The document at A71 was a letter  purportedly  written  by  Dr
        Mehdi Hosseini indicating that the Appellant  had  been  under  his
        supervision as a result of PTSD caused by sexual  trauma.  Nor  had
        the judge considered the University letter translation at  A60.  It
        was submitted that the Appellant had been  attending  a  church  in
        London and that he found it  more  difficult  to  find  a  suitable
        church in Birmingham. The judge therefore failed to  consider  that
        the Appellant was in fact a regular church attending in London.


    17. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no material error of law. The
        judge produced a well-reasoned determination and relied on  a  wide
        range of reasons to support her  adverse  credibility  conclusions.
        There were two similar translations of medical certificates  issued
        by Dr Seyed Nasab, the  1st  [A53]  dated  29  October  2012  which
        indicated that the Appellant  received  treatment  for  an  anxiety
        disorder from 28 October 2010 to 3 April 2011, the 2nd [A54]  dated
        7 October 2013 indicating that  the  Appellant  received  treatment
        from 27 December 2010 to 3 April 2013. An untranslated letter  from
        Dr Nasab [A71], written in English, confirmed the  details  in  the
        1st certificate. It was submitted that the University letter  [A60]
        was vague, did not clearly indicate whether the  Appellant  had  in
        fact been expelled, and did not support his claim.  The  letter  at
        [A70] was under dated and was written in English.

Discussion

    18. Ms Isherwood did not dispute that the judge made  no  reference  to
        the  translated  University  letter  or  the   translated   medical
        certificates. Nor  was  it  in  dispute  that  the  judge  made  no
        reference to the letter, written in English, from Dr  Hosseini.  It
        was the Respondent's contention that any such failure by the  judge
        could not have made any material difference to  her  assessment  of
        the Appellant's credibility and, consequently, to her assessment as
        to whether the Appellant faced a real risk of persecution.


    19. I acknowledge Ms Isherwood's observations of  the  translations  of
        the medical  certificates.  The  certificates  are  very  brief  in
        nature, indicating only that the Appellant was being treated for an
        anxiety disorder, and there were  differences  in  respect  of  the
        period of his  treatment.  The  letters  do  however  provide  some
        support  for  the  Appellant's  claim  to   have   been   receiving
        psychiatric treatment prior to coming to the UK.


    20. The letter at A70 was undated and there was no  explanation  as  to
        how it was obtained, when  it  was  obtained,  or  why  it  was  in
        English. It does not however appear that  the  Appellant  was  ever
        asked to provide an explanation in respect  of  these  points.  The
        letter indicated that its author, D Mehdi Hosseini, a psychiatrist,
        was supervising  the  Appellant  "...  Because  of  PTSD  disorders
        resulted from sexual trauma." Once again, although this  letter  is
        brief in  nature  it  is  capable  of  providing  support  for  the
        Appellant's account of being raped.


    21. At [21] the judge attaches no weight to the Appellant's account  of
        being dismissed from University because, according  to  the  judge,
        there  was  no  translation  of  the  letter   contained   in   the
        Respondent's bundle. Although  there  was  no  translation  in  the
        Respondent's  bundle,  the  Appellant's  bundle   did   contain   a
        translation at A60. This translation named the Appellant, gave  his
        student number and indicated that  he  was  studying  architecture.
        There is no date under the heading 'date  of  breakdown  relation',
        and all that appears under the heading  'reason  of  the  breakdown
        relation' is "determined/transfer/expelled".  The  letter  contains
        other details relating to the University. It is not clear from  the
        letter who issued it or  which  university  department/office  they
        belonged to. Nor is the exact reason for the  'breakdown  relation'
        clear. This letter does however indicate that the Appellant  was  a
        university student and that he left university, and that one of the
        reasons for his leaving may have been that he was expelled. It does
        therefore provide some corroboration for aspects of the Appellant's
        claim.


    22. I am satisfied that the judge failed to take  account  of  material
        evidence that was before her. Ms Isherwood submits  that  any  such
        failure is not material given the judge's other adverse credibility
        findings  and  the  factors  identified  by  Ms   Isherwood   which
        undermined the reliability of the unconsidered documents.  Although
        the judge may ultimately have reached the same conclusion  had  she
        taken account of all the evidence before her, I  am  not  satisfied
        that she inevitably would have  reached  that  conclusion.  If  the
        judge had considered the documents  contained  in  the  Appellant's
        bundle, and found them reliable, this may have reduced  the  weight
        she attached to the  various  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
        evidence. Given the need to consider  asylum  claims  with  anxious
        scrutiny I am not satisfied  that  the  judge's  error  of  law  is
        immaterial.

    23. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the  decision  is  unsafe.
        Given that the judge's error related to issues of credibility it is
        appropriate to remit the matter back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
        for a fresh hearing, all issues open.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law.
The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S J Pacey.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum               06 December 2016


