



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08334/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Sent:        |
|On 14th May 2014                                |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts
                       upper Tribunal Judge kopieczek

                                   Between

                         mr sritharan ganeshapillai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka who was born on  15th  May  1980
    has appealed to the Upper Tribunal against  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Denson) promulgated on 27th  November  2013,
    dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision of 16th  August
    2013, refusing to grant him leave to enter and refusing him asylum.

Background

 2. The Appellant, who is of Tamil ethnicity, left Sri Lanka on  22nd  June
    2013 travelling on his own passport.  He  transited  several  countries
    using another passport to which he was not entitled and arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 23rd June 2013. He claimed asylum on his arrival.

 3. He was interviewed about his claim on 23rd June  2013.  Following  that
    interview, the Respondent made a decision on 16th August 2013 to refuse
    the  claim and to refuse him leave to enter the United Kingdom.

 4. The Appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Denson, who in a determination promulgated on  27th
    November 2013 dismissed the appeal. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was initially  refused  but  was  granted  by  UTJ  Goldstein,
    following  a  renewed  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,   in  the
    following terms:

         "Apart from the present uncertainties as regards the  situation  as
         it relates to Tamils on return to Sri Lanka, I  am  persuaded  that
         the grounds (Ground One in particular) raise arguable issues as  to
         whether the First-tier Judge may have  made  an  error  of  law  in
         failing to give adequate  reasons  for  his  findings  on  material
         matters and as to whether in  such  circumstances,  the  Judge  was
         entitled in law to reach  the  conclusions  that  he  did  for  the
         reasons given.

         I have concluded in the circumstances, that  permission  to  appeal
         should be granted in respect of all the renewed grounds".

The Appellant's Case

 5. The basis of the  Appellant's  claim  is  a  fear  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities on account of his LTTE involvement. There are two  distinct
    strands to his claim;

    First Detention 2007

    It has always been accepted by the Respondent, and subsequently by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, that the Appellant voluntarily joined the LTTE  in
    1996 as a full-time and trained member providing front  line  services.
    He was arrested in  October  2007,  detained  by  the  authorities  for
    sixteen months and tortured during this period  of  detention.  He  was
    released on reporting conditions and was  required  to  sign  on  at  a
    police station. By his own account he signed on  twice  before  ceasing
    reporting, because of the harassment he faced when reporting. Following
    that he went to live away from his home area and relocated to Vavuniya.

     Second Detention 2010

    The second strand to the Appellant's claim is his account that  he  was
    arrested a second time whilst  in Vavuniya. This occurred in  2010.  He
    was detained initially at Thekkawatthai Special Forces Camp. The arrest
    was a routine one but suspicion  was  excited  by  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's permanent address was Mullaithivu. He was questioned at the
    Special Forces Camp and asked whether he  was  working  for  the  LTTE,
    hiding ammunition or involved in bombing projects. He  was  transferred
    to Joseph  Camp  and  after  further  interrogations  he  accepted  his
    involvement with the LTTE. He was then further transferred to Boosa TID
    Camp in the south. During the period of detention he was  tortured.  He
    escaped on 20th March 2013, when his sister arranged for a bribe to  be
    paid.

 6. When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal, the Judge accepted
    that the Appellant had been detained and tortured in 2007.  So  far  as
    the  second  detention  was  concerned,  he  heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant, his two brothers, both of whom  have  been  granted  refugee
    status and a fourth witness Miss.  Vinothiny  Adaikkalanathan  who  has
    also been granted refugee status. The Judge took into  account  medical
    evidence from Mr Martin, Consultant Surgeon at the Royal Free Hospital,
    but nevertheless rejected the  Appellant's  account  of  detention  and
    torture in 2010 (the second detention). He dismissed the appeal.

 7. The grounds seeking permission form three strands.

      i) The Judge's rejection  of  the  Appellant's  account  of  the  last
         detention is flawed because the  Judge  noted  adversely  that  the
         Appellant's account of his second detention lacked  detail.  Allied
         to this, the Judge noted adversely the detailed  clinical  findings
         at paragraph 7  of  the  medical  report  relating  to  the  second
         detention.

     ii) The Judge erred in failing  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant's
         breach of reporting conditions imposed in 2008 would place  him  at
         risk now.

    iii) The Judge made no findings in respect of the detention order issued
         by the Ministry of Defence dated 28th October 2007. The  order  was
         important because it stated that,

             "There are reasons to suspect  that  he  is  involved  in  the
             commission  of  the  offenses  under  above   regulation   vis
             providing information to the intelligence leaders of the  LTTE
             using mobile  telephone  regarding  movements  of  VIPs,  safe
             places of the government and places of economic importance".

         The importance of the order is that it shows,  notwithstanding  the
         actual nature of the Appellant's involvement with the LTTE that the
         authorities perceive him as having  high profile involvement.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. Before us Ms Jegarajah appeared on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  and  Mr
    Walker on behalf of the Respondent. Ms Jegarajah  essentially  followed
    the lines of the grounds seeking permission. She drew our attention  to
    the Reasons for Refusal letter and to the interview of  the  Appellant.
    She outlined that when the Appellant was asked to  describe  his  first
    detention  and  torture,  the  interviewer  asked  a  whole  series  of
    questions. Those questions began at question 40 through to question 57.
    Because of the questions asked, the Appellant was enabled to give  full
    details of his first detention and torture. Those details outlining the
    sequence of events had been accepted, by both the  Respondent  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, as credible.

 9. She asked us to compare the above  with  the  questions  asked  of  the
    Appellant concerning the second detention. She drew  our  attention  to
    question 247.

         Q:   Were you ill-treated whilst you were here?

         A:   Yes

10.  She submitted this was an example of there being no follow-up question
    about the  type  of  ill-treatment  the  Appellant  had  suffered.  The
    Appellant should not be faulted for the interviewer failing to  examine
    fairly. This is what the Judge had done when he adversely found against
    the Appellant, stating as he did at paragraph 43 of his determination;

         "As regards to whether or not the  appellant  was  detained  as  he
         purports again he goes into great detail in relation to  his  first
         detention as to the exact dates as to  when  he  was  detained  and
         released and  precisely  what  happened,  however,  in  his  second
         detention he cannot and did not recall exactly when he was detained
         and also looking at the interview record and his subsequent witness
         statement the details in relation to the second  detention  are  to
         say the least vague and certainly not as comprehensive  as  regards
         to his first detention".

11. This was a material error on the part of the  Judge.  The  failings  of
    both the interviewer in not asking full questions  and  the  Judge  for
    not recognising this, should not be held against the Appellant.

12. Following on from the above, Ms Jegarajah pointed out that the  Judge's
    assessment of the medical evidence was also flawed. It  was  unfair  of
    the Judge to draw adverse inferences concerning  the  medical  report's
    record of the injuries suffered in the 2010  (second)  detention,  when
    the Appellant had never been properly examined by  the  interviewer  on
    the extent of the injuries suffered during that detention and torture.

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  made  no  findings  concerning  the
    evidence of the detention order and that also gave rise to  a  material
    error of law.

14. Finally Ms Jegarajah sought permission to adduce an additional  ground.
    This we allowed. The additional ground submits as  follows;  there  are
    three family members of the Appellant here in the United  Kingdom  (two
    brothers and a sister). All have been granted refugee status on account
    of  their  claimed  political  activities  and  LTTE  involvement.  She
    referred us to the Country Guidance case of GJ and  Others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka C G [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and in particular
    to the current categories of persons at risk set out in that  judgment.
    She submitted that with three close family members having been  granted
    refugee status, the Appellant should come within the terms of  category
    (8), (which is set out here for convenience).


           (8) The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on
           sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities within Sri
           Lanka and in the diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities know that
           many Sri Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and
           also that everyone in the Northern Province had some level of
           involvement with the LTTE during the civil war. In post-conflict
           Sri Lanka, an individual's past history will be relevant only to
           the extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as
           indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state or the
           Sri Lankan Government.



    No consideration had been given to this and we should therefore do  so,
    finding  that the Appellant came within this risk category.

15. Mr Walker on behalf of the Respondent conceded that  the  determination
    may contain an error of fact in the assessment of  questions  234  -235
    but that this was not material. The Judge had set out  fully  that  the
    Appellant's  credibility  was   undermined   by   inconsistencies   and
    implausibility in his account of his second detention.  The  Judge  had
    formulated cogent reasons for finding as it did. In addition, Mr Walker
    reminded us, the judge had found with  reasons,  that  the  Appellant's
    witnesses lacked credibility. Those findings were open to  him  and  he
    had given good reasons for so finding. The determination should stand.

16. Mr Walker accepted GJ is subject to appeal but pointed out  at  present
    it is good law. So far as the additional ground put forward  on  behalf
    of the Appellant is concerned he submitted that there was nothing in GJ
    category (8) to show that it should be extended to those  whose  family
    members had been granted refugee status.

Discussion and Consideration

17. Contrary to the assertions  made  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  we  are
    satisfied that Judge Denson's decision  was  based  on  a  careful  and
    rounded assessment of  the  evidence  and  was  supported  by  cogently
    reasoned findings. Our reasons for coming to  this  conclusion  are  as
    follows: The main challenge to the Judge's determination,  takes  issue
    with the adverse credibility findings made  regarding  the  Appellant's
    claimed  second  detention.  What  is  advanced  is  that  the  Judge's
    conclusion in paragraph 43 amounts to an unfairness  and  therefore  an
    error, because what is being compared is the full explanation for  2007
    detention against a vague one for the 2010 detention.  It is  submitted
    that the fault for this lies not in the Appellant's reticence, but with
    the interviewer in effect finding fault with  the  Appellant  for  "not
    answering  questions  he  was  not  asked".  We  disagree   with   that
    interpretation. The Judge did not simply rely upon the lack  of  detail
    set out in the interview concerning the second detention. He took  into
    account, as he was tasked to do, the Appellant's witness statement  and
    the oral evidence of the Appellant together with that of his witnesses.

18. He found, as he outlines in paragraph 44 of his determination, that the
    Appellant's witnesses did  not  assist.  He  noted  that  although  the
    Appellant, in his interview, was able to give the precise date of  when
    he was detained the first time (28th October 2007), he was vague  about
    the date of his second detention. The Appellant recalled that it was in
    September 2010 but could not  be  more  precise.  The  Judge  noted  in
    paragraph 44 that the Appellant's brother Suthakaran  claimed  to  have
    been told about the Appellant's second detention "a few  days  after  I
    came". It is on record that Suthakaran came to the  United  Kingdom  on
    25th June 2010 and was interviewed in relation to his own asylum  claim
    in July 2010. He gave evidence in the Appellant's  case,  that  another
    brother had told him that the Appellant had been detained for a  second
    time. The Judge noted  that  this  could  not  be  correct,  since  the
    Appellant, by his own account, had claimed he was not detained for  the
    second time until September  2010.  Noting  that  conflict,  the  Judge
    formed  the  conclusion  that  he  could  not  place  reliance  on  the
    Appellant's account. Therefore it is incorrect to infer that the  Judge
    placed too much weight  on  the  lack  of  detail  in  the  Appellant's
    interview responses, relating to the second detention.

19. We are reinforced in that view by  the  Judge  noting  that  when   the
    Appellant was interviewed about the torture he had received during  the
    second detention, he limited his response to saying that  he  was  ill-
    treated and was beaten with batons and  copper  wires  (Questions  232-
    235). Medical evidence was produced to the Judge.  The  Judge  noted  a
    discrepancy in that the medical report from Dr Martin records that  the
    scars on the lower limbs show eight round hyper pigmented scars typical
    of injuries caused by being burnt with a small round object such as hot
    cigarette butts. According to Dr Martin the  Appellant  told  him  that
    these scars were caused after being burnt with cigarette  butts  during
    his detention in 2010. The interview record concerning the  Appellant's
    detention in 2010 is contained in questions 221 to 252.  The  Appellant
    is specifically asked whether he was ill-treated badly  whilst  he  was
    detained he replies "yes" when asked  what  happened  his  response  is
    "they used to beat me with batons they used copper wires to beat me  up
    I have a few scars on my back". There is  no  further  information  put
    forward in interview to indicate that the Appellant  received  injuries
    from cigarette butts. Once more it  was   advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that the interviewer was at fault. The  beating  with  copper
    wires refers to a beating which took place at the first detention  camp
    where the appellant was detained for one day  only.  It  was  said  the
    interviewer should have probed further about the injuries the Appellant
    received when transferred to the next camp and the one after that.

20.  We disagree with that assessment. The appellant was asked at  Question
    247 if he was ill treated and replied in the affirmative  but  gave  no
    further details. Added to this the medical evidence records details  of
    cigarette burn type scars on the appellants  back,  but  no  record  of
    scars from beatings with copper wires.

21.  There has never been any explanation put forward  even  at  this  late
    stage  to  us,  why  the  medical   evidence   should   contain   these
    discrepancies. We keep in mind that Mr Martin based his findings on the
    history given him by the Appellant.

22. Viewed as a whole, therefore, we find that  the  Judge's  determination
    contains fully and cogently reasoned findings  of  fact  based  upon  a
    detailed assessment of the  evidence.  He  was  entitled  to  make  the
    adverse findings that he did and was entitled to come to the conclusion
    he did on those facts.  That is sufficient to dispose of ground one.

23. So far as grounds 2 and  3  are  concerned,  we  can  deal  with  those
    together. We accept that the Judge made  no  explicit  finding  in  his
    determination on whether the Appellant's breach of reporting conditions
    would place him at risk on return. We do not find that this constitutes
    a material error on the part of the Judge.  By  his  own  account,  the
    Appellant claimed he was detained the second time having been picked up
    in a routine search. He was asked at question 231:

         Q:   Did they ask you about your previous detention?

         A:   No

    The Appellant himself does not refer to any  risk  on  account  of  his
    breach of reporting conditions. Whilst it might be said once more  that
    the Appellant was not asked  the  appropriate  question  in  interview,
    nevertheless he submitted a full statement for his hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and this point was not raised there. It is hard  to
    see why it is said the Judge has fallen into error  in  not  making  an
    explicit finding on that matter. In the event, the Judge found that the
    evidence of the second detention  amounted  to  a  fabrication  and  so
    concluded in paragraph 49 of his determination that the Appellant would
    not be  at  risk  on  return.  He  was  assisted   in  coming  to  this
    conclusion, by noting that the Appellant left Sri Lanka  travelling  on
    his own passport.

24. Likewise concerning  ground  3,  the  Respondent  considered  that  the
    detention order dated 20th October 2007 did not add any weight  to  the
    Appellant's claim for the reasons  set  out  in  paragraph  41  of  the
    Reasons for Refusal letter. It is submitted that the Judge erred in not
    making a finding that that document added  weight  to  the  Appellant's
    claim. We disagree. We remind ourselves that the Judge found  that  the
    Appellant had been detained in 2007; the challenge before the Judge was
    the assessment of the credibility of the Appellant's claim to have been
    re-arrested and tortured in 2010. The lack  of a finding  on  the  2007
    detention order adds nothing to that; and we observe the Appellant  did
    not raise this point in his witness statement.

25. We come to the additional ground raised by Ms Jegarajah which  we  have
    set out in full in  Paragraph  14  above.  It  is  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's past history as  a  family  member  of  accepted  refugees,
    places him in the category  of   being  perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities as someone who poses a present risk to the unitary state or
    government. We do not find favour with that argument. We bear  in  mind
    that the First-tier Tribunal did not accept the Appellant's account  of
    being detained in 2010. Therefore there was nothing credible put before
    us to show that even if the Appellant has family members who have  been
    granted refugee status, he is of such interest to the authorities, that
    he would be perceived by them as a  present  risk  on  account  of  his
    family history.

26. Finally we acknowledge that it is true that permission to appeal to the
    Court of Appeal has been granted to the Appellants in the  case  of  GJ
    but it nevertheless remains authoritative Country Guidance. Furthermore
    the reported case of KK (Application of  GJ)   Sri  Lanka  [2013]  UKUT
    00512 (IAC) considered the arguments now advanced (in the  alternative)
    in relation to the correctness of GJ and rejected  them,  including  in
    relation to the significance of the UNHCR Guidelines. Accordingly it is
    with reference to the existing Country Guidance of GJ that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal assessed the potential risk to the Appellant.

27. For the foregoing  reasons  we  find  that  the  First-tier  tribunal's
    determination contains fully reasoned  findings  of  fact  based  on  a
    detailed assessment of the evidence. The tribunal was entitled to  make
    the adverse findings it did and was entitled to reach the  decision  it
    did. The Tribunal did not make any material errors of law

Decision:

28. The making of the decision of the first-tier tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. We do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

No anonymity direction is made

Signed:                                      Dated  :



Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




