
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08818/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 November 2015                  |On 2 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                              MR MARIGLEN XHIKA
                        (no ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr I Palmer, Counsel (instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted by  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Bruce on 10 August  2015  against  the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge IA  Ross  promulgated  on  11  May  2015,
         dismissing the  Appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
         human rights appeals.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Albania, born on 3 November 1996,
         and thus 18 years of age at the date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         hearing.  The Appellant had claimed that he was  at  real  risk  if
         returned to Albania as a potential victim of a blood feud involving
         his family.  As Judge Ross  noted  at  [6]  of  his  decision,  the
         Respondent accepted that the Appellant had given a credible account
         of the two blood feuds declared by two different  families  against
         his family.  The Respondent also did not  dispute  the  Appellant's
         account of being abducted and  attacked  in  June  2013.   However,
         notwithstanding the  acceptance  of  his  account,  the  Respondent
         decided  that  the  Appellant  did  not  qualify  for   asylum   or
         humanitarian protection because  he  could  avail  himself  of  the
         protection of the state in Albania and could internally relocate.

    3.     At [11] of his decision, Judge Ross reflected  the  Respondent's
         concessions in his findings of fact, but went on at [14]  and  [15]
         to find that the Appellant's lately added new evidence in which  he
         had claimed that his uncle's shop had been burned down  was  untrue
         and was designed to exaggerate the claimed risk.  The  judge  found
         that the Appellant was not a  credible  witness  and  could  return
         safely to Albania.  Judge Ross followed EH (Blood feuds) Albania CG
         [2012] UKUT 00348 as to the availability of  state  protection,  in
         preference to the views of the Appellant's expert.

    4.     Permission to appeal had been refused in the First-tier Tribunal
         but Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  considered  that  it  was
         arguable that Judge Ross had failed to apply paragraph 339K of  the
         Immigration Rules, had given an unduly restrictive reading  to  the
         country guidance and had erred in his treatment of the  Appellant's
         expert evidence.

    5.     Standard directions had been made by the tribunal and the appeal
         had been listed for adjudication of whether  or  not  there  was  a
         material error of law. The Respondent filed notice  under  rule  24
         dated 1 September 2015  indicating  that  the  onwards  appeal  was
         opposed.

    Submissions

    6.     Mr Palmer for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal earlier submitted and the grant of permission to  appeal  by
         the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.  He  contended  that  the  judge's
         assessment of the case had been based on inconsistent findings  and
         a misunderstanding of EH (Albania)  (above).   The  Respondent  had
         accepted the substance of the Appellant's claims.   The  judge  had
         given  inadequate  reasons  for  giving  no  real  weight  to   the
         Appellant's expert's report.  The decision and  reasons  should  be
         set aside and the appeal reheard before a  differently  constituted
         First-tier Tribunal.

    7.     Mr Kandola for the Respondent submitted that there was no  error
         of law.  The judge had given sufficient reasons for  not  accepting
         the Appellant's expert's report.  The expert had not  been  ignored
         and the judge had not been  obliged  to  agree  with  the  expert's
         conclusions. The judge's findings were consistent with the  country
         guidance in EH (Albania).

    8.     In reply, Mr Palmer submitted that the judge had fallen into the
         trap of reading EH (Albania) as saying that there was a sufficiency
         of protection.  The country guidance was that the state may provide
         a  sufficiency  of  protection  in  places  but  that   there   was
         persecution outside those areas.  The judge had not addressed that.

    9.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that its
         determination as to error of law was reserved.   That determination
         now follows.

    No material error of law

    10.    The tribunal finds that there was no material error  of  law  in
         the decision and reasons.  In the tribunal's view,  the  permission
         to appeal application  was  correctly  refused  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  The permission to appeal application quite rightly  made
         no attempt to challenge the judge's careful findings of fact.   The
         judge was bound to accept the Secretary of State's concessions,  as
         noted above, but he was free to  find  that  the  Appellant  was  a
         dishonest witness on the basis he explained with clear  and  proper
         reasons.  The reality  was  that  there  was  little  left  in  the
         Appellant's appeal, if at all, after those adverse  findings  which
         addressed future risk in accordance with EH (Albania).

    11.    The background evidence concerning the evil of  blood  feuds  in
         Albania was not in dispute and informed the judge's approach to the
         case.  The  experienced  judge  correctly  applied   the   guidance
         summarised in the official headnote of EH (Albania), and set out at
         [21] of the decision a commendably full and careful analysis of the
         relevant factors there identified based on his  findings  of  fact.
         Prior to that analysis, the judge  gave  detailed  and  sustainable
         reasons for differing from the Appellant's expert  and  for  giving
         that report little weight.   In  particular,  and  critically,  the
         judge found that the Appellant's village was  in  central  Albania,
         not in northern Albania where Kanun law predominates: see  [18]  of
         the decision.  Again that finding of fact was not  challenged.   As
         the judge explained, the concessions made by the Secretary of State
         (which it can now be said appear to have been generous) by no means
         showed that the Appellant faced  a  real  risk  of  persecution  on
         return.

    12.    Thus the tribunal finds that there was no error of  law  in  the
         determination.  There is no basis for interfering with the  judge's
         decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal,  which  dismissal  must
         stand.

    DECISION

    The tribunal finds that there is  no  error  of  law  in  the  original
    decision, which stands unchanged




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
