
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08040/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 May 2017                           |On 22 August 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     RR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel instructed by M A Consultants
(London)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. After a hearing before me and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson on  14
    December 2016, we decided to set aside for error of law the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge ("the FTJ") who  heard  this  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's decisions to refuse him asylum  and  to
    remove him to Iraq.

 2. The decision setting aside that of the FTJ contains detailed  reference
    to the circumstances of the claim, the appellant's background  and  the
    FtJ's decision. I have incorporated the material parts of the error  of
    law decision here, and the extracts I quote set the context for my  re-
    making of the decision.

 3. At [1]-[7] of the error of law decision the background  to  the  claim,
    and the FTJ's findings, are set out as follows:

    "1.  The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on 3 September 1988.   He
         arrived in the UK on 1 October 2012 as a Tier 4 student and made  a
         claim for asylum on 8 November 2014.  His  application  for  asylum
         was refused in a decision dated 7 May 2015, and at the same time  a
         decision made to remove him under section 10 of the Immigration and
         Asylum Act 1999.

    2.   His appeal against the decision to refuse asylum came before First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough  ("the  FTJ")  at  a  hearing  on  29
         September 2015 following which the appeal was dismissed on  asylum,
         humanitarian protection and  Articles  2,  3  and  8  of  the  ECHR
         grounds.

    3.   Permission to appeal was granted in respect of the FTJ's  decision
         and the appeal came initially before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         O'Ryan on 15 January 2016.  However, he was unable  to  complete  a
         written  decision  within  a  reasonable  time  of  that   hearing.
         Accordingly, a transfer order was made, transferring the appeal  to
         be heard by a differently constituted Tribunal.  Thus,  the  appeal
         came before us.

         The FTJ's decision

    4.   The FTJ recorded the basis of the appellant's claim to the  effect
         that he would be at risk from Shia militia because he  is  a  Sunni
         Muslim and his father is a retired  Iraqi  army  major  who  served
         under Saddam Hussein's Ba'athist regime, and who has been  targeted
         by them in the past.  He also claimed to be at risk generally  from
         various factions and militias operating in Iraq, because  his  aunt
         and two of his cousins worked as  interpreters  for  the  US  Army.
         Subsequently, his cousins enlisted with the US Army and have served
         in Iraq.  In addition, his parents and sisters  have  been  granted
         refugee status in the USA.

    5.   The FTJ recorded that it was accepted by the respondent  that  the
         appellant is a Sunni Muslim and that his father is a retired  major
         of the Iraqi Army, having served under Saddam Hussein's regime.  It
         was further accepted by the respondent in the decision letter  that
         the appellant's parents  and  sisters  have  been  granted  refugee
         status in the USA, and that his aunt worked as a  "translator"  for
         the American military in Iraq.

    6.   The FTJ also recorded that it was not accepted by  the  respondent
         in the decision letter  that  the  appellant  or  his  family  were
         targeted by militia in Iraq.  Similarly, it was not  accepted  that
         the family obtained refugee status on the basis of being  at  risk,
         but because they came under  a  special  programme  called  the  US
         Refugee Admissions Program ("USRAP"), because of their relationship
         to his aunt and her work as a translator.  The appellant  had  been
         unable to take advantage of the Program because he was over  21  at
         the date of the application, and was only a nephew (of his aunt).

    7.   After setting out further details of the  appellant's  claim,  and
         the evidence given before him, he made  a  number  of  findings  of
         fact.  These can be summarised as follows:

         .    The appellant is a Sunni Muslim,  and  his  father  a  retired
             major of the Iraqi Army.   His  aunt  and  cousins  worked  as
             translators for the American military in Iraq, and the cousins
             have served there having enlisted in the US Army.

         .    His parents and sisters have been granted  refugee  status  in
             the USA under the USRAP Program.   This  was  because  of  the
             appellant's aunt's work  as  a  translator.   His  father  was
             eligible as her brother,  and  his  mother  and  sisters  were
             eligible as his father's spouse and dependent  children  under
             21 years of age.

         .    The incidence of a threatening letter in 2007/2008, and a 2009
             incident in which it is claimed that a shot was fired  at  the
             family home, are relatively trivial  incidents  which  do  not
             bear significantly on the outcome  of  the  appeal.   If  true
             however, they may indicate that  the  appellant's  antecedents
             and affiliations were known in his home area.

         .    Despite the claim that the appellant and his  family  were  at
             risk because of his father's military service, the family were
             able to avoid coming to harm in Iraq, before coming to the  UK
             in 2012, and other family members going to the USA in 2013.

         .    Despite living in a Shia-controlled area, the family  received
             no threats after September  2009.   Although  the  appellant's
             father spent some time outside Iraq,  particularly  from  2010
             onwards,  and  the  family  relocated  internally  on  several
             occasions, the appellant was able to  complete  his  secondary
             education and his  bachelor's  degree  at  the  University  of
             Technology in Baghdad in 2011.

         .    The appellant went to Jordan in  2012  but  returned  to  Iraq
             twice before he eventually departed for the UK.

         .    The appellant did not come to the UK fearing for  his  safety,
             but came to study.  He did not claim asylum  until  two  years
             after he entered the UK.

         .    The fact that the appellant's parents and  sisters  have  been
             granted refugee status under the USRAP Program does  not  mean
             that the appellant is also a refugee.

         .    The appellant does now  have  a  genuine  subjective  fear  of
             persecution in Iraq, in the main because of the  deteriorating
             security situation.  He perceives that his  father's  military
             service and the activities undertaken by his aunt and  cousins
             enhance the generalised risk upon return.

         .    Both of the appellant's cousins are also of the view that  the
             appellant would be at risk because  of  his  association  with
             them.  A measure of their concern is that they both flew  from
             California to give evidence at the hearing.

         .    The security situation in Iraq has deteriorated  significantly
             since the appellant's arrival in 2012.

         .    The appellant has a current Iraqi passport valid until 21 June
             2017.  If returned it would be to Baghdad, where he  was  born
             and brought up, and where he spent most of his life.

         .    The appellant and his family were able  to  live  in  relative
             safety in Baghdad in an area controlled by  Shia  militia  for
             many years.  Accordingly, their antecedents  and  affiliations
             were not as widely known as has been claimed.

         .    The appellant has never specifically been targeted because  of
             his affiliations.  There was nothing to indicate  that  he  or
             any member of his family enjoyed any sort of national profile.



         .    The appellant's cousins were both generally credible but there
             was a degree of embellishment in their evidence  in  terms  of
             their having become  well-known  in  Baghdad.   It  is  highly
             unlikely that they would have broadcast their affiliations  in
             the course of their duties.  Knowledge of  those  affiliations
             did not extend beyond the appellant's home area.

         .    As a result, the appellant would be able to relocate elsewhere
    in Baghdad.

         .    Whilst the possibility of a chance encounter with someone  who
             is  aware  of,  and  has   antipathy   to,   the   appellant's
             affiliations cannot be excluded, this does not create  a  real
             risk of persecution.

         .    All of the appellant's family have now left Iraq and he  would
             be without  any  familial  support  if  returned  to  Baghdad.
             However, he is a young, fit and highly educated male  with  no
             encumbrances.  He would be returned to the city  in  which  he
             has spent most of his life."

 4.  The  analysis  of  the  challenge  to  the  FtJ's  decision,  and  the
    conclusions on that challenge are at [22]-[36]:

    "22. As is clear from the guidance  in  AA  (Iraq),  where  a  person's
         return to Iraq is found to be feasible (and it is not suggested  in
         this case that it is not), it will generally be necessary to decide
         whether the person concerned has a CSID, or will be able to  obtain
         one reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  The  decision  explains
         the importance of that document.  However, it is clear that even if
         a person does not have a CSID, as a general  matter  he  should  be
         able to obtain one using an  Iraqi  passport,  whether  current  or
         expired.  In this case, it was found by the FTJ at [64],  that  the
         appellant has a current Iraqi passport, valid until 21  June  2017.
         In the screening interview in answer to question 2.2, the appellant
         said that his national passport has been with the Home Office since
         August 2013.  It is therefore, in the UK.  On that basis, according
         to the guidance in AA (Iraq), the appellant would be able to obtain
         a CSID card on return.

    23.  In this context we also take into account that it was accepted  in
         submissions before us  that  the  document  copied  at  C8  of  the
         respondent's bundle is in fact a copy of the appellant's CSID card.
          Although it was submitted that the appellant would not be able  to
         obtain a CSID card because of the  risk  of  harm  because  of  the
         general situation in Mosul, it  is  apparent  that  the  CSID  card
         copied at C8 was issued to the appellant in Baghdad.

    24.  Furthermore, as is clear from [13] of the guidance in  AA  (Iraq),
         an alternative Civil Status  Affairs  Office  for  Mosul  has  been
         established in Baghdad.   Even  if  therefore,  it  is  correct  to
         conclude, which we do not think it is,  that  the  appellant  would
         have to apply for a CSID card in Mosul, such an application can  be
         made in Baghdad.

    25.  Although we accept that the FTJ should have, as a matter  of  law,
         considered the issue of whether the  appellant  would  be  able  to
         obtain a CSID  card,  notwithstanding  that  strictly  the  country
         guidance in AA (Iraq) was not before him on the actual date of  the
         hearing, we do not find that there is any materiality in any  error
         of law on the part of the FTJ in that respect.

    26.  In relation to the FTJ's conclusions in terms of no  harm  and  no
         threats to the family from 2009 onwards, we agree with Mr  Clarke's
         characterisation  of  this  aspect  of  the  grounds  as  simply  a
         disagreement with the FTJ's conclusions.  It is said in the grounds
         that the FTJ failed properly to understand the  chronology  of  the
         appellant's claim, and the details of the  family's  movements  are
         given in the written grounds.

    27.  However, between [32] and [36] the FTJ set out a  summary  of  the
         appellant's account  of  the  family's  movements  from  August  or
         September 2009 after a shot was fired at the family home whilst the
         appellant's father was in the garden.  At [43] he referred  to  the
         appellant's evidence to the effect that the  family  had  not  been
         targeted since September 2009 because they had been moving around a
         lot, the appellant having said that he had travelled to  Jordan  in
         2011 and had returned to Iraq twice before coming to the  UK.   The
         appellant's evidence also recorded by the  FTJ  was  that  on  each
         occasion he had lived with his family in Mosul.  At  [58]  the  FTJ
         assessed the issue of there having been no harm  or  threats  after
         September 2009 with reference to the appellant's account, accepting
         that  the  appellant's  father  spent  some  time   outside   Iraq,
         particularly from 2010  onwards,  and  that  the  family  relocated
         internally on  several  occasions.   He  noted  however,  that  the
         appellant was able to complete  his  secondary  education  and  his
         bachelor's degree at the University of  Technology  in  Baghdad  in
         2011.  At [59] he referred to the appellant having gone  to  Jordan
         in 2012 and returning to Iraq twice before then coming to  the  UK.
         He concluded at [60] that the appellant did  not  come  to  the  UK
         fearing for his safety.

    28.  Although the grounds contend that the FTJ failed to appreciate the
         chronology of the appellant's  claim,  that  contention  is  simply
         unsustainable in the light of what is in the  FTJ's  decision.   He
         plainly did appreciate the chronology, referring to it  at  various
         places in his decision.  We do  not  consider  that  there  is  any
         feature of the appellant's account in this  respect  that  has  not
         been considered, or that the FTJ  took  into  account  material  or
         information that he should not have done.   He  plainly  understood
         the appellant's account and his explanation  for  the  events  post
         2009 and came to sustainable conclusions in terms of  the  lack  of
         harm or threat of harm in that period.  The disagreement  with  the
         FTJ's conclusions in this respect is just that.  No error of law is
         apparent.

    29.  Similarly, we  see  no  merit  in  the  contention  that  the  FTJ
         misunderstood the evidence in relation to  the  appellant's  family
         members in the USA having been granted  refugee  status  under  the
         USRAP Program.  Despite  our  pressing  Mr  Khan  to  identify  any
         documentary  evidence  which  indicated  that  refugee  status  was
         granted to any member of the appellant's family on the basis of  an
         individual-based risk assessment, he was not able  to  do  so.   We
         consider that what the FTJ said at [61] in relation to  this  issue
         fully reflects the evidence  that  was  before  him.   He  said  as
         follows:

             "The fact of the Appellant's parents and sisters  having  been
             granted refugee status under the USRAP program does  not  mean
             that this Appellant is also a  refugee.   My  reading  of  the
             papers indicates that this was a special program with its  own
             discreet eligibility criteria designed  for  people  emanating
             from Iraq, Jordan and Egypt  with  US  affiliations.   If  the
             scheme related solely to risk of persecution there could be no
             justification for excluding dependants over  the  age  of  21"
             (our emphasis).

    30.  We consider that the FTJ's observation in  the  last  sentence  is
         particularly pertinent.  The appellant would not have been excluded
         from the programme, as he was, if he was considered to be  at  risk
         of persecution, simply on the basis that he was over  21  years  of
         age.  No doubt the programme was designed  to,  and  probably  did,
         incorporate into it those who would in fact on an individual  basis
         be at risk, perhaps the translators or interpreters themselves, and
         maybe even some relatives or dependants, but that does not mean  to
         say that all those within the programme were granted refugee status
         because of an individualised risk of persecution or harm.

    31.  However, although not emphasised in the grounds, or in the written
         submissions before us, we do consider that the FTJ erred in law  in
         terms of the issue of internal relocation.

    32.  We have rejected the argument in terms of the CSID, but there is a
         more nuanced argument that arises.  At [69] the FTJ concluded  that
         it was unlikely that the appellant's cousins would  have  broadcast
         their work as translators for  coalition  forces  and  he  did  not
         accept "that knowledge of the same extends beyond  the  Appellant's
         home area.  As a result, he would be  able  to  relocate  elsewhere
         within Baghdad".  In other words,  it  is  implicit  that  the  FTJ
         accepted that the appellant had established a risk  of  persecution
         in his "home area".  He then went on to consider  the  question  of
         internal relocation, referring at [70] to  the  Baghdad  governate,
         consisting of 10 districts with a population of between 6.6 and 7.1
         million, about 80% of  whom  are  Shia.   The  FTJ  obtained  those
         figures from [118] of AA (Iraq), as he states.

    33.  However, we do not find in the FTJ's decision an adequate analysis
         of the factors that need to be considered, as set out  at  [15]  of
         the guidance in AA (Iraq).  Some of the factors  set  out  in  that
         part of the guidance are taken  into  account,  but  the  issue  of
         accommodation is not considered, and although  the  FTJ  recognised
         that the appellant is a  Sunni,  that  is  not  a  matter  that  is
         specifically referred to in the analysis of  whether  it  would  be
         unreasonable or unduly harsh for the appellant to  relocate  within
         Baghdad.

    34.  The question of internal relocation in his particular case is also
         affected by what is accepted to be a genuine fear of persecution on
         the part of the appellant ([62]).  It  is  not  a  case  therefore,
         simply of the appellant being able to 'slot in' to some unspecified
         part of Baghdad,  without  any  questions  being  asked  about  his
         circumstances  or  background.   His   family   circumstances   and
         background come into sharp focus in that respect.

    35.  We also consider that although not specifically  advanced  in  the
         grounds, the question arises as to whether it can realistically  be
         concluded that if the appellant is at risk in one part of  Baghdad,
         the concept of internal relocation in relation to another  part  of
         Baghdad can be said to apply.  We do not consider that there is  an
         adequate analysis in the FTJ's decision of the  issue  of  internal
         relocation in the respects to which we have referred.

    36.  Accordingly, we are satisfied that in that  distinct  respect  the
         FTJ erred in law and that that error of law is such as  to  require
         the decision to be set aside."

 5. The focus for the further enquiry and the re-making of the decision can
    thus be seen from [32]-[36] of the error of law decision.

 6. Notwithstanding the directions that were given  at  the  conclusion  of
    that hearing, the appeal on the  next  occasion  had  to  be  adjourned
    because neither party was properly prepared for the hearing.

 7. I heard submissions from the parties at the hearing  on  17  May,  with
    both parties also relying on skeleton arguments.  After  that  hearing,
    the Court of Appeal found that the Upper Tribunal ("UT") had  erred  in
    its conclusions at [170] of its decision in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC). The Court of Appeal  (AA (Iraq) V Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944) amended the guidance
    that the UT had given. As a result, I issued further directions to  the
    parties affording them an opportunity to make submissions  in  relation
    to the Court of Appeal's decision.

 8.  I  now  summarise  the  submissions,  both  written  and  oral,   that
    cumulatively are put before me on behalf of the parties.

    Submissions

 9. At the hearing on 17 May, on  behalf  of  the  appellant  the  skeleton
    arguments both for that and the earlier, adjourned, hearing were relied
    on. It was submitted that both  the  decisions  in  AA  (Iraq)  and  BA
    (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) look at Baghdad as  a
    whole, in terms of  one  administration,  one  police  force  and  free
    movement within the city. In this respect [17] of the skeleton argument
    dated 5 April 2017 was relied on. There  is  it  acknowledged  that  at
    [118] of AA (Iraq) it was stated that Baghdad governate consists of  10
    districts with a population of between 6.6 and 7 million, about 80%  of
    whom are Shia. It is contended that it is  an  artificial  exercise  to
    separate out parts of the city where the appellant would be at risk and
    those where he would not, in circumstances where he has been  found  to
    be at risk in his home area.

10. The appellant has no home to return to in Baghdad  and  would  have  to
    rent accommodation, and that may be somewhere that may not be safe.  In
    order to obtain employment he would  have  to  move  to,  and  through,
    different parts of the city.

11. At [115] of BA it was said that it is difficult to  stay  anonymous  in
    Baghdad. It is not said on his behalf that a CSID  card  could  not  be
    obtained, but that it would lead to his identification.

12. Mr Clarke relied on the respondent's skeleton  argument.  Although  the
    appellant relied on [115] of BA, the risk for him is said to be in  his
    home area. The  decision  in  BA  can  be  distinguished  in  that  the
    appellant in that case worked for a Western company. In this  case  the
    appellant had never been targeted. There had been  no  threats  to  the
    family since 2009 and they had lived in Baghdad until 2011.

13. The appellant has not identified exactly who his aggressors are and how
    they would be able to obtain information from the CSID if he lived in a
    Sunni majority area.

14. The skeleton argument on behalf  of  the  appellant  provided  for  the
    adjourned hearing of 30 March emphasises the  importance  of  a  family
    support network for a returnee, relying on aspects of  AA  (Iraq),  and
    the scarcity of employment opportunities. Lack  of  family  support  is
    also important in terms of the ability of a  person  to  be  able  rent
    accommodation, for which the  person  would  have  to  have  access  to
    employment. The UNHCR report dated 31 March  2016  ('Relevant  COI  for
    Assessments on the Availability of Internal Flight' etc.) is relied  on
    in terms of the availability of rented accommodation.

15. The same skeleton argument refers to the importance of a CSID  and  the
    "extensive" information recorded on it, including a person's  religious
    background, and family ties. That information could  be  discovered  by
    the authorities  and  non-state  actors  such  as  militias.  There  is
    reference again to the  UNHCR  report  in  relation  to  the  increased
    presence of Shia militias at checkpoints in Baghdad and  Sunnis  using,
    for example, forged ID cards to avoid identification.

16. It is pointed out in the skeleton argument that the appellant's  family
    have left Iraq for the USA, and his extended family have also left. The
    family home in Iraq was sold by the appellant's father before  he  left
    Iraq. The appellant would not be able therefore, to rely on any  family
    to provide him with shelter, support or protection.

17. In countering any  suggestion  that  the  appellant,  being  young  and
    educated, would be able to obtain employment, it  is  argued  that  the
    main employer is the Iraqi state and thus it is extremely difficult  to
    obtain employment without political or family connections.

18. At [19] of  that  skeleton  argument  the  risk  to  the  appellant  is
    summarised. It is argued that the appellant faces a significant risk of
    harm if returned to Baghdad because of his family's connection  to  the
    US military and he would not be able to relocate within Baghdad.  Given
    the information contained on the  CSID  and  the  need  for  it  to  be
    carried, every time the appellant applies for a  job,  rents  property,
    obtains healthcare or social services, or approaches a  checkpoint,  he
    is at risk of having his family connections and background  discovered.
    He would not be able to remain "incognito and anonymous".

19. In the appellant's skeleton argument dated 5  April  2017  reliance  is
    placed on BA, in particular  at  [101]  in  terms  of  the  appellant's
    religion, being a Sunni Muslim.

20. As to the concept of internal relocation, it is contended that the case
    law on Iraq appears generally to have considered internal relocation to
    Baghdad city itself, rather than to specific districts  within  Baghdad
    city. The risk  must  extend  to  the  whole  of  Baghdad  because  the
    appellant would be easily identifiable on account of the fact  that  he
    is a Sunni and the information contained on the CSID. He would  not  be
    afforded protection by the authorities (BA  [105]).  It  would  not  be
    appropriate  to  expect  the  appellant's  movements  to   be   further
    restricted in Baghdad outside his home area.

21. The respondent's skeleton argument relies on AA (Iraq) in terms of  the
    factors to be taken into account in relation  to  internal  relocation.
    The appellant would be able to obtain a  CSID.  His  main  language  is
    Arabic. There was nothing in the reasoning in  AA  (Iraq)  to  indicate
    that a sponsor would be needed for  a  person  to  be  able  to  obtain
    accommodation. A cumulative consideration of the factors identified  in
    that decision reduces the impact of the lack of family support.

22. Although it is acknowledged that the appellant does not have family  in
    Baghdad, that is a matter that only becomes critical in the absence  of
    a CSID. At  [198]  of  AA  (Iraq)  it  was  suggested  that  there  are
    opportunities available  in  Baghdad  for  displaced  persons  to  earn
    sufficient funds to enable them to be able  to  rent  accommodation  if
    they have a CSID. This appellant is young and educated. He has a BSc in
    Architectural Engineering from the University of Technology in  Baghdad
    and had worked in the UK for a medical assistance company  and  for  an
    insurance company as an operations specialist. He would be  well-placed
    to obtain employment.

23. Furthermore, the idea of family should be considered in a wider context
    than just blood relatives ([84]  of  BA).  Assistance  from  the  Sunni
    community should be taken into account.

24. It is contended that the respondent does not have the legal  burden  of
    proving that there is a specific area of Baghdad to which the appellant
    could  reasonably  be  expected  to  go  (AMM  and  others   (conflict;
    humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC)
    at [225]).

25. It would  in  any  event  be  artificial  to  determine  that  internal
    relocation is not available purely on  the  basis  that  relocation  is
    limited to another area of the same city. It is necessary  to  consider
    the reach and intent of the aggressors in addition to whether there  is
    a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the  appellant  would   be
    recognised by chance in the new area.

26. The FTJ had found that the risk to the appellant in his home  area  was
    on account of his father's military service and his  cousins'  services
    as translators. The appellant's evidence to the FTJ was that  his  home
    area was a district adjacent to Sadr City in Baghdad.  The  risk  is  a
    general one from militias specifically  on  account  of  the  appellant
    being recognised as a relative of  his  father  or  cousins,  but  only
    within that district. There is no evidence that the militias would have
    the intention of looking for the appellant as the appellant  has  never
    himself been targeted. Therefore, the question was whether the militias
    would enter the appellant's new area, stumble upon the  appellant,  and
    recognise him.

27. Reference is made in the respondent's skeleton argument to [118] of  AA
    (Iraq) in relation to Sadr City, a Shia district within  Baghdad  city,
    Sunni areas, and mixed neighbourhoods. At [119] nine districts  and  89
    neighbourhoods are  identified  within  Baghdad,  containing  some  6.5
    million people. Sadr City is in the north east of Baghdad and the Sunni
    district of Al Doura is in the south, and  away  from  the  appellant's
    home area. That there are majority areas in Baghdad reduces the risk of
    a chance encounter as does the number of people living in the city.

28. Further, the preserved findings of the FTJ at [58] are relied on,  i.e.
    that there had been no threats to the family since 2009 despite  living
    in a Shia area, and despite the appellant's father spending  some  time
    outside Iraq especially from 2010 and the family relocating  internally
    on several occasions. Also, the appellant  was  able  to  complete  his
    secondary education in Baghdad in 2011.

29. There was no response on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  my
    directions in relation  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  (AA
    (Iraq)). On behalf of the appellant it was submitted that the appellant
    reiterates that he is unable to apply for a CSID, either from the UK or
    in Iraq. The UNHCR guidance (which I have referred to  above)  and  the
    updated guidance of 12 April 2017 are relied on, with relevant passages
    in the latter being highlighted.

    Assessment

30. In AH (Sudan) v  Secretary  of  State  [2007]  UKHL  49,  Lord  Bingham
    referred to what he had said in Januzi v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2006] UKHL 5, namely that:

           "The   decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all    relevant
           circumstances pertaining to the  claimant  and  his  country  of
           origin, must decide whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
           claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
           expect him to do so . . . There is,  as  Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
           observed  in Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home
           Department, [2002] 1WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of cases. The
           decision-maker must do his best to decide, on such  material  as
           is available, where on the spectrum the particular case falls. .
           . . All must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts."

31. The idea or concept of 'home area' has been  adopted  as  a  convenient
    means of referring to the area where a person claiming to  be  at  real
    risk of harm comes from, and where the person contends he or she  would
    be at risk if he returns. It is a term however, that is apt to  mislead
    in some circumstances, in particular where there is dispute about  what
    constitutes a person's home area.

32. A clearer way of looking at the issue of internal relocation is to  ask
    simply, where does the risk arise, and could the  risk  be  avoided  by
    moving to another place (applying the principles outlined in AH (Sudan)
    and Januzi). Looking at the issue that way,  it  is  not  necessary  to
    decide the question as to where is a person's 'home area'.

33. In principle, I do not consider it legally objectionable to find that a
    person could be at risk in one part of a  city,  but  not  in  another.
    There may be physical or other practical barriers  that  would  prevent
    the person at risk coming to harm from his aggressors from another part
    of a city. A city or district may be divided, for example physically or
    politically, in such a way as to mean that in practice the persecutors'
    reach would not extend to a different part of a city or district.  Each
    case will be fact-specific.

34. I was not referred to any reported decision  of  the  Tribunal  or  any
    authority in which it was accepted that a person at risk in one part of
    Baghdad could be said to have available to them the option of  internal
    relocation to another part of Baghdad.  The  appellant  relies  on  the
    contention that Baghdad has itself been seen as a  place  to  which  an
    individual is sometimes said to be able to  relocate,  but  not  within
    Baghdad itself. However, I do not consider that the absence of such  an
    identified case takes the appellant's case on internal relocation  very
    far. It may simply mean  that  the  point  has  never  been  raised  or
    reported before.

35. I have set out fully the competing arguments  of  the  parties  on  the
    facts, and I do not need to repeat them. At [7] above I  have  set  out
    from the error of law decision the findings of the FTJ.  All  of  those
    findings are preserved apart from what  is  said  about  the  appellant
    being able to relocate within Baghdad, which is the  very  issue  which
    must now be determined. The FtJ  accepted  that  the  appellant  has  a
    subjective fear of return, and that he now has no family in Iraq.

36. The position advanced on behalf of the appellant in terms of whether he
    would be able to obtain a CSID  is  inconsistent.  The  submissions  on
    behalf of the appellant, for example as recorded at [11] above,  accept
    that the appellant would be able to obtain a CSID. Furthermore, as  was
    made clear in the error of law decision at [22] and [23], the  argument
    that the appellant would not be able to obtain a CSID is one  that  has
    been rejected in terms of any error of law on the part of the FTJ.  The
    written submissions on behalf of the appellant in relation to the Court
    of Appeal's decision in AA (Iraq) seek to resurrect the argument  about
    the appellant not being able to obtain  a  CSID,  but  that  point  has
    already been decided against the appellant.

37. However, having considered the parties'  competing  arguments,  I  have
    come to the view that not only would the appellant be at  risk  in  the
    place from which he comes in Baghdad, near to Sadr City, but there is a
    real risk of persecution or serious harm throughout Baghdad.

38. In BA, a decision to which I was a party, it was  recognised  that  the
    general level of violence in Baghdad city remains significant, and that
    sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal of the US  forces
    in 2012. Sunni men are more likely to be at risk. Evidence was given in
    BA of the large number of checkpoints, both legal and  illegal,  manned
    by Shia militias (see [89]- [90], [99], and [119]).

39. The point made on behalf of the appellant in relation to the  means  by
    which he can be identified from his CSID seems to me to be a good  one.
    The respondent's contention about the lack of  potential  risk  from  a
    'chance encounter' I consider to be too simplistic an approach.  It  is
    not just a case of the appellant possibly being encountered  by  chance
    by those that might identify him (from where he lived before), but  the
    risk of  an  encounter  by  individuals  who  would  identify  him  not
    necessarily as a recognised individual, but in terms of his  background
    and his family connections.

40. It may be that the appellant's relatives in the USA  will  be  able  to
    provide him with at least  some  financial  support,  although  neither
    party made submissions on the point. Nevertheless, it is reasonable  to
    assume that the appellant will seek employment, not only in  order  for
    him to be able to find accommodation, and feed and clothe himself,  but
    also because he is  used  to  being  employed  as  his  background  and
    qualifications would suggest. It is also reasonable to conclude that he
    will have to travel within Baghdad city to seek or engage in that work.
    As was said by Dr George in BA, people do not live anonymously in  Iraq
    and a person's background is likely to become known in  a  local  area.
    Such a lack of anonymity is also reasonably likely  in  relation  to  a
    person  travelling  within  Iraq  whose  identity  and  background   is
    indicated on the all-important CSID.

41. But I do not consider that in this case  one  must  go  so  far  as  to
    conclude that the appellant would be at  risk  even  outside  the  area
    where the risk first arose, i.e. that he would be  at  risk  throughout
    Baghdad. That is because, even in the alternative, I am  not  satisfied
    that it would be reasonable to expect him to relocate.

42. I have come to that view for a number of reasons.  It  has  been  found
    that the appellant has a subjective fear of persecution.  Baghdad  city
    still suffers from a high level of general violence, and  significantly
    from sectarian violence. The  appellant  would  be  without  family  in
    Baghdad to support him on return. He would have to find employment  and
    accommodation. To find employment it is doubtful as to whether he could
    maintain a 'low profile', even if he could be expected to do so,  which
    in law I doubt (see HJ  (Iran)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Rev 1) [2010] UKSC 31). It is  reasonably  likely  that  he
    would be living in constant fear of exposure in terms of his background
    and family connections.

43. I do not consider that even by the standards of those living in Baghdad
    and the violence that its residents  are  frequently  exposed  to,  the
    appellant could be said to be able to live a relatively normal life.

44. The respondent relies on the lack of harm or threats  that  the  family
    were exposed to in the  period  before  the  appellant  left,  and  his
    ability to have completed his secondary education in 2011  in  Baghdad.
    However, for all that, it has nevertheless been found  that  he  is  at
    risk in a particular part of Baghdad. The only issue that needs  to  be
    resolved is that of internal relocation.

45. My analysis  of  this  appellant's  particular  circumstances  and  the
    background evidence as revealed by the cases to which I have  referred,
    leads me to conclude that the appellant does  not  have  available  the
    option of internal relocation. In his case  I  am  not  satisfied  that
    relocating within Baghdad means that he would be free of the real  risk
    of harm, and in any event in the alternative, I am not  satisfied  that
    it is reasonable to expect him to do so.

46. Accordingly, I allow the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds with
    reference to Article 3.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision having been set aside,  I  re-make  the
    decision by allowing the appeal on asylum grounds, and on human  rights
    grounds with reference to Article 3 of the ECHR.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 22/8/17


