
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08189/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 23 October 2015                  |On: 21 December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                             MR HAIDER MOHAMMAD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                            Decision and Reasons

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1  January  1991.  He
    appeared against the decision of the respondent dated 21 September 2014
    to refuse to grant him further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as
    a refugee and on humanitarian protection grounds.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Farmer  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  5  June   2015.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused by a Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Andrew  and  subsequently  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Goldstein on 24 August 2015 who found that  it  is  arguable  that  the
    Judge's approach, evaluation and reasoning, in relation to  the  "night
    letters" claim to be from the Taliban brought him into error  which  in
    turn led to tainting the weight that he  attached  to  the  appellant's
    expert report.

The First-tier Tribunal's findings

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made the following findings in dismissing
    the appellant's appeal which I set out in summary. It was agreed by the
    appellant's representatives that the primary issue to determine in this
    appeal, is the credibility of the  appellant's  account.  However,  the
    Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  even   taking   the
    appellant's account at its highest, protection would  be  available  to
    the appellant in Kabul and relocation therefore would be an option  for
    him.

 3. The respondent produced a document at the hearing, detailing an account
    of the appellant's  arrest  which  adversely  affects  the  appellant's
    credibility. When the appellant was questioned in examination in chief,
    he said that he could not understand the questions that the immigration
    Officer had put to him because the officer  spoke  in  English.  Later,
    when asked to explain how then was it that he managed to give  so  much
    information at his  interview,  most  of  which,  he  has  accepted  is
    accurate. The appellant said he did understand some  of  the  questions
    because the officer also spoke some Urdu. The Judge accepted  that  the
    information given by the appellant  in  his  asylum  interview  was  an
    accurate account of what he told the  interviewing  officer  and  found
    that the appellant has been in the United Kingdom longer than the three
    days that he claimed at the date of arrest.

 4. It is not accepted that the appellant was kidnapped and detained as  he
    has described. It is inconsistent that he would claim that the  Taliban
    have strong intelligence on him and who have  his  address,  photo  and
    telephone number and yet not ambush him in the city but they would wait
    until he visited his family in the village, to ambush him given that he
    only visited the village once a fortnight. According to the  appellant,
    the Taliban had his address and could have visited  him  there  at  any
    time.

 5. The appellant's explanation for why they ambushed him  at  the  village
    was that in the city there would be police around and it would be  more
    difficult to kidnap him. The appellant has therefore accepted  that  he
    would be able to avail himself of police protection should he need  it.
    However, the appellant also stated that he had  not  sought  protection
    from the government  and  that  he  cannot  seek  their  protection  is
    contradicted by his statement that it is safer in cities due to  police
    presence.

 6. While it is accepted that the appellant has achieved a  good  level  of
    competency in Taekwondo, there is no reasonable explanation for why the
    Taliban would have identified him specifically as  their  trainer.  The
    evidence is that the appellant himself still had trainers to train him.
    It is more likely that the Taliban would seek to recruit  the  trainers
    rather than the pupil,  regardless  of  his  level  of  proficiency  in
    Taekwondo. The appellant has given no reasonable explanation as to  why
    the Taliban would have identified him to train them.

 7. The appellant claims to have been detained for 14 days by  the  Taliban
    and then released on the surety of his  brother  and  his  trainer.  He
    claims that following this the government were harassing his mother  to
    find out where the Taliban and the helpers are. This is not a  credible
    claim because the appellant lived in Jalalabad and he accepts that  the
    Taliban knew his address. It would  have  been  more  likely,  had  his
    account been true about  being  recruited  by  the  Taliban,  that  the
    government would have come and asked him about it.

 8. The appellant's answer at question 55 of the asylum interview that  the
    Taliban also released him as he backed them is not credible. He  stated
    that he begged the Taliban very much and lay at their  feet  and  cried
    and told them he would return and that he suffered very much which  was
    why he was released. The Judge  did  not  find  it  credible  that  the
    Taliban would release the appellant on arrangements for him  to  return
    to the Taliban if called upon,  in  light  of  the  fact  that  he  was
    ambushed. This goes to the appellant's credibility.

 9. The appellant has produced two night letters in support of  his  claim.
    He states that following the receipt of the second letter, he knew that
    he that if he was caught he would be killed. This was what led  him  to
    make the decision to leave the country and this was also on the  advice
    of his mother and trainer. The Judge  was  referred  to  the  objective
    evidence that deals with letters  and  what  form  they  may  take  and
    submits that the letters produced by  the  appellant  are  within  this
    format. The letters considered in in the round, in accordance with  the
    case of Tanveer Ahmed. The Judge found that the letters are  completely
    self-serving and therefore do not assist  the  appellant's  credibility
    and placed no weight on them.

10. The Judge did not accept Mr Dowd's evidence at the hearing.  He  stated
    that it is unlikely that  Mr  Dowd  would  travel  to  Afghanistan  and
    discuss the appellant with  his  trainer  and  yet  make  no  enquiries
    whatsoever of the appellant's family in Afghanistan. The fact that  the
    appellant did not want enquiries to be made of his family  damages  the
    appellant's credibility. Given  that  the  appellant  claims  that  his
    brother was killed shortly before he  left  Afghanistan,  it  would  be
    expected that the appellant would want to be reassured that his  family
    were safe. Mr Dowd's initial evidence was that the  appellant's  family
    were in "bad situation" which is undermined by his evidence under cross-
    examination that he has not discussed the family or  asked  after  them
    but now says, it was just a general comment about the situation of  the
    people in the area where the appellant's family comes from.

11. The appellant claims that he has no family connections  in  Afghanistan
    which is not accepted. The  appellant  made  no  enquiries  about  them
    through his friend Mr Dowd because he  did  not  want  any  information
    about his family that would provide a connection of  the  appellant  to
    Afghanistan, knowing that his appeal was going to be determined. He has
    made no other attempts to trace his family.

12. The appellant clearly does not want to return to  Afghanistan.  In  the
    case of HJ Iran [2010] UK SC 31 at paragraph 88, Lord Walker noted that
    where a person earnestly does not wish to be returned to  his  country,
    his evidence may have to be treated with caution because of his  strong
    personal interest in the outcome of his claim.

13. The expert report has been considered and Ms Bhatti's  submissions  are
    accepted that the expert is entitled to give an opinion  and  does  not
    have to put all sources for all assertions  about  Afghanistan  in  his
    report. However, the report's conclusions were that they relate to  the
    specific detail of the appellant's claim do not  assist  in  the  Judge
    coming to his conclusions. It is accepted that it is plausible that the
    professional people may be  recruited  by  Taliban  to  provide  skills
    otherwise lacking, however it still remains to be determined whether in
    this case, on these facts, the claim is a credible one. It is  for  the
    Judge to determine the credibility of the appellant  having  looked  at
    all the evidence including his oral evidence. Ms Bhatti  quite  rightly
    and helpfully conceded this  point  in  her  submission.  While  it  is
    accepted in general terms the account that a sportsman may be recruited
    could happen, it is for the reasons set out above  that  the  appellant
    has not established to the required standard of proof that it  occurred
    as he has stated.

14. The appellant's central core  of  his  case  is  not  accepted.  It  is
    submitted on behalf of the appellant that the  appellant  left  shortly
    after receiving the second night letter dated 5 December 2013 and  took
    a couple of months to get to the United Kingdom arriving  on  23  March
    2014. She stated that the appellant  claimed  asylum  at  the  earliest
    opportunity. However, the appellant only  claimed  asylum  after  being
    arrested and there was little alternative  for  him  as  he  was  being
    detained having entered the country illegally.

15. The Judge took into account Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants Etc) Act 2004 which requires the Judge to  take
    into account as adversely affecting the credibility of the  appellant's
    account any behaviour  which  is  designed  and  likely  to  result  in
    concealment of information or to mislead or delay  consideration  of  a
    claim. This in particular includes failure to  produce  a  passport  or
    production of an invalid passport as if it were valid, destruction of a
    passport or ticket, failure to  answer  a  question,  failing  to  take
    advantage of a reasonable opportunity to claim asylum in a  safe  third
    country, failure  to  make  a  claim  promptly  failing  to  provide  a
    reasonable explanation for these matters. Although not determinative of
    the appeal, the appellant was in to France  for  two  to  three  months
    prior to coming to the United Kingdom and could have claimed asylum  in
    that country. However, because this was not raised in evidence and  the
    appellant was not asked for an explanation for why  he  did  not  claim
    asylum in France, little weight is attached to this.

16. The appellant is 24 years old and has family in Afghanistan to whom  he
    could return. He could also return to Jalalabad where  he  worked  with
    his trainer and had accommodation. He has not established  any  of  the
    core aspect of his asylum claim. He has not established that he or  his
    family were targeted by the Taliban  or  the  government.  He  has  not
    established that he was kidnapped or detained. He has  not  established
    that the Taliban  or  anyone  else  was  seeking  him  before  he  left
    Afghanistan.

17. As to the circumstances  in  Afghanistan  generally,  the  case  of  AK
    Afghanistan [2012] UKUT 2163 has been considered including the COI  and
    the OGN Report.

18. On the  bases  of  the  decisions  of  AK  and  HMB  v  United  Kingdom
    application number 70073/10 and 44539/11. In a judgement handed down on
    9 April 2013. The appellant's claim is not established to the necessary
    lower standard of proof that it would be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
    to expect him to internally relocate to Kabul. He would lead  a  normal
    life as judged by Afghani standards.

19. The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds for the same reasons.

Grounds of appeal

20. The Judge's assessment of  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  core
    account is solely based on plausibility. The Court of Appeal  has  been
    categorical in repudiation of plausibility  as  a  means  of  assessing
    credibility. See HK v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1037 at paragraph 28. In Y v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 paragraph 25, it was stated that "there
    seems to be to be very little dispute between the  parties  as  to  the
    legal principles applicable to the approach which an  adjudicator,  now
    known  as  the  Immigration  Judge,  should  adopt  towards  issues  of
    credibility. The fundamental one is that he should be  cautious  before
    finding an account to be inherently  incredible,  because  there  is  a
    considerable risk that he will be over influenced by his own  views  on
    what is or is not plausible, and those views will have inevitably  been
    influenced by his own background in this country and by the customs and
    ways of our own society. It is therefore important that it should  seek
    to view an appellant's account of events, as Mr Singh  rightly  argues,
    in the context of conditions in the country from  which  the  appellant
    comes".

21. The Judge found that it was implausible that  the  Taliban  would  have
    waited until the applicant visited  his  family  before  attempting  to
    abduct him or that they would have  only  sought  to  do  so  when  the
    applicant was alone travelling to his family's home.  It  is  contended
    that there is clearly nothing implausible about the applicant's account
    and more importantly the FTTJs finding is reliant on  how  he  assesses
    the Taliban, unsupported  by  evidence,  would  or  would  not  behave.
    Similarly, the Judge found that it was  implausible  that  the  Taliban
    would not have attempted  to  abduct  the  appellant  when  he  was  in
    Jalalabad.

22. In respect of the  Taliban's  ongoing  interest,  the  Judge  found  at
    paragraph 27 that in spite of the accepted ability of the applicant, he
    would not accept the Taliban would seek to recruit him as  a  taekwondo
    trainer. Again the finding is based entirely on the  assumed  knowledge
    of how the Taliban would operate.

23. The Judge found that it is implausible that the Taliban  would  release
    the applicant after 14 days, with an understanding  that  he  would  be
    recruited to return again when they needed  his  assistance.  There  is
    nothing intrinsically implausible about the appellant's account of this
    and once again the  finding  is  solely  predicated  on  an  assumption
    concerning the actions of the Taliban. Moreover, the Judge  finds  that
    it is inconsistent that the Taliban would have released  the  appellant
    having captured him in the manner that they did. The Judge  found  that
    this inconsistency damaged the appellant's credibility  overall.  There
    is no inconsistency.

24. The second ground of appeal is  that  the  Judge  give  a  misdirection
    regarding the case of Tanveer Ahmed and  perverse  findings  were  made
    regarding the night letters served on the appellant. The  Judge  placed
    no weight on the letters based on a misdirection regarding  this  case.
    He also reached the perverse conclusion that the letters could  not  be
    relied on  as  they  were  all  self-serving.  All  evidence  submitted
    "serves" the appellant's claim it is not  a  reason  to  fail  to  give
    weight to that evidence.

25. The third ground of appeal is that the Judge failed to give  weight  to
    the expert evidence of Jawad Haassan Zadeh. The Judge  should  consider
    the objective evidence in reaching his conclusions on  the  appellant's
    credibility. Particularly as the Judge appears to accept  the  expert's
    comments that the Taliban do recruit specific professionals  to  assist
    them and that in general terms,  sportsmen  may  be  recruited  by  the
    Taliban.

26. The fourth ground is that the failure of  the  Judge  to  consider  the
    relevant country guidance regarding internal flight. The night  letters
    demonstrate that the Taliban have an ongoing interest in the  applicant
    and therefore there is an individual  risk  for  the  purposes  of  the
    country guidance case of RQ Afghanistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00013.

Findings as to whether there is an error of law

27. The main complaint made about the determination is that the Judge based
    his  findings  on  plausibility  without  regard  to  the   appellant's
    evidence, the Taliban night letters and the expert report  on  how  the
    Taliban functions. It is also alleged  that  the  Judge  did  not  make
    sustainable findings as he did not consider the evidence in the round.

28. The Judge in his determination stated that he  has  taken  the  country
    guidance case of AK Afghanistan, COIR and the OGN on  Afghanistan  into
    account in his decision. This clearly  indicates  that  the  Judge  was
    aware of how the Taliban operates in Afghanistan. Therefore, the  Judge
    did not just take into account his view of the world, as alleged by the
    appellant in his grounds of appeal, but that of the world as it existed
    for the appellant in Afghanistan.

29. The Judge in a careful and detailed determination made many credibility
    findings against the appellant and took into account all  the  evidence
    in the appeal. His credibility findings are set out from  paragraph  24
    to 30 of the determination. At paragraph 30 the Judge took into account
    the two night letters and  also  took  into  account,  the  appellant's
    evidence that following the receipt of the second letter, the appellant
    knew that if he was caught by the Taliban he would be killed  and  this
    was the catalyst for his decision to leave the country to find safety.

30. Given appellant's claim that he fled Afghanistan for  his  safety,  the
    Judge took into account, in the  round,  the  evidence  that  that  the
    appellant was in France for two to three months and he  did  not  claim
    asylum while in a safe country. The Judge was  entitled  to  find  that
    this is not a profile of a genuine asylum seeker that he would not seek
    asylum while in a safe  country.  The  Judge  also  found  against  the
    appellant that he only claimed asylum after he was arrested. The  Judge
    gave other  reasons  for  finding  the  appellant  and  his  claim  not
    credible.

31. The Judge considered the night letters from the Taliban  in  the  round
    with the guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed and found  them  to  be  self-
    serving and placed no weight on them. He found that it was not credible
    that the Taliban who  had  to  the  appellant's  name  and  address  in
    Jalalabad would not kidnap him there but would wait for him  to  go  to
    the village, which he did only fortnightly, in order to abduct  him  to
    recruit him into the Taliban. The Judge took into  account  the  reason
    that the appellant gave for  why  he  was  not  abducted  in  Jalalabad
    because he said there  is  police  presence  in  Jalalabad.  The  Judge
    rightly concluded from this evidence that the appellant's claim that he
    could not access police protection in Jalalabad was not credible  given
    his evidence of the police presence and thereby protection against  the
    Taliban in Jalalabad.

32. The Judge took into account the background evidence, and found that  it
    is not credible that the Taliban who knew the  appellant's  address  in
    Jalalabad would wait for him to go to the village to ambush him instead
    of doing so in Jalalabad. This evidence demonstrated to the Judge  that
    this cautious  approach  by  the  Taliban  does  not  accord  with  the
    background evidence that the Taliban would abduct  anyone  they  wanted
    notwithstanding where they lived.

33. The Judge took into account, against  the  appellant,  his  attempt  to
    deceive. He found  at  paragraph  24  of  the  determination  that  the
    respondent handed in a document detailing an account of the appellant's
    arrest in this country in an attempt to determine when he came to  this
    country. The Judge noted that the appellant distanced himself from what
    he said in his answers at his interview and explained that he  did  not
    understand all the questions put to him  because  the  interviewer  was
    speaking English which he does not understand. The Judge did  not  find
    this to be credible as he noted that there  was  abundant  information,
    (most of which the appellant  accepted  was  true),  in  the  interview
    record which would not have been possible if  the  appellant  does  not
    speak English. The appellant then said that he understood some  of  the
    questions as  the  immigration  officer  spoke  some  Urdu.  The  Judge
    implicitly found that the appellant has  a  propensity  to  deceive  to
    achieve  his  objectives  by  distancing  himself  from  evidence   not
    convenient for him.

34. The Judge also did not find the appellant's evidence credible  that  he
    would be ambushed by the Taliban and detained  for  14  days  and  then
    released merely because he pleaded with the Taliban to release  him  on
    the surety of his brother and his trainer on the understanding that  he
    would return to Taliban when they wanted  him.  The  Judge  essentially
    found, given that the  appellant  was  a  reluctant  recruit  into  the
    Taliban because he had to be  ambushed,  the  Taliban  would  not  have
    believed him that he will return to the  Taliban  in  the  future.  The
    Judge was entitled not find credible that by releasing  the  appellant,
    the Taliban would have given the opportunity  to  run  away  from  them
    which in fact is exactly what the appellant did. The Judge was entitled
    to find that this is not credible evidence and does not  fit  into  the
    profile of the  Taliban  as  he  understands  it  from  the  background
    evidence.

35. The appellant also claimed that the government was harassing his mother
    to find out where the Taliban and helpers are located.  The  Judge  was
    entitled not to find this evidence of harassing the appellant's  mother
    credible given that the authorities knew  the  appellant's  address  in
    Jalalabad and would have gone to his home to see the appellant  instead
    of harassing his mother. This was another credibility point against the
    appellant amongst others which the Judge took into account with all the
    other evidence in the appeal.

36. The Judge at paragraph 36 considered the expert report. He rightly said
    that the expert's conclusions which relate to the  specific  detail  of
    the appellant's claim do not assist him in his conclusions.  The  Judge
    said although he accepts that the Taliban do recruit  professionals  in
    order to assist them, but found that the appellant was not one of them.
    He was entitled to so find and it is for the Judge to decide about  the
    appellant's credibility and not an expert.

37. The Judge found that the appellant is aged 24 years and can  return  to
    Jalalabad where he worked with his trainer and  had  accommodation  and
    continue his life. The Judge placed reliance on  the  country  guidance
    case and the background  evidence  on  Afghanistan  and  came  to  this
    sustainable conclusion on the evidence before him.

38. I find that there is no material error of law made by the Judge in  the
    determination and therefore it stands. The grounds  of  appeal  are  no
    more than a quarrel with the Judges findings.

    Decision

    Appeal Dismissed


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the upper Tribunal    Dated this 6th day of December 2015
Mrs S Chana

