
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08325/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 July 2016                               |On 17 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     JW
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer


Anonymity

I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  orders
otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any form of  publication  thereof
shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.   This  prohibition
applies to, amongst others, all parties and their representatives.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On the day of  the  hearing  an  application  for  an  adjournment  was
    received on behalf of the appellant, it being said in  a  communication
    from the clerk to Counsel (Mr Patrick Lewis of Garden  Court  Chambers)
    that although solicitors had instructed Mr Lewis to attend the  hearing
    there had been an administrative error within his Chambers and thus  he
    was unaware that the hearing was to take place.  The  Chambers  are  in
    London and there was no prospect of Mr Lewis being available to  attend
    the hearing in Manchester later on the same day. Neither was there  any
    prospect of alternative Counsel being made available.

 2. I refused such application primarily on the basis that,  having  sought
    Mr Harrison's views on it he quite properly indicated that it  was  the
    Secretary of State's intention to accept that the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision contained an error of law, that it should  be  set  aside  and
    that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de
    novo hearing.

 3. In these circumstances, given that this is the best that the  appellant
    is likely to achieve before the Upper Tribunal, I concluded that it was
    not in the interests of justice to adjourn the hearing.

 4. Turning then to the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   The  appellant
    brought an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 8 May 2015 refusing his protection  claim.
    That appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moxon  at  the
    Harmondsworth hearing centre on 5  January  2016  and  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 8 January.  I need not go into the evidence and
    conclusions of the judge, save to observe  that  core  aspects  of  the
    appellant's claim were disbelieved.

 5. The appellant appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  with  the  permission  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle, made in the following terms:

         "2.  The grounds argue that the judge erred in failing to give  any
             weight to the core of the appellant's claim and the  claim  of
             his cousin whose  appeal  was  allowed.   His  claim  was  not
             undermined  by  the  factors  listed  by   the   judge.    The
             appellant's evidence and that of his  cousin  was  consistent.
             The judge failed to refer to objective evidence.  The  reasons
             for rejecting the appellant's claim were inadequate.

         3.   It is arguable that the judge  failed  to  explain  adequately
             why, given his findings in paragraph 35, the  appellant  would
             not be at risk on return.  It is arguable that in  criticising
             the appellant's delay in making his claim, the judge  did  not
             engage with the core of the claim."

 6. As it turns out there is a more fundamental  error  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision than that identified as arguable by Judge  Astle  -
    as Mr Harrison properly acknowledged.

 7. In paragraph 4 of its decision the First-tier Tribunal  directs  itself
    as follows in relation to "The Law":

         "4.  The burden is on the appellant to  show  with  regard  to  the
             asylum appeal that returning him would expose him  to  a  real
             risk  of  an  act  of  persecution  for  reasons  set  out  in
             Regulation 6 of the Refugee or Person in Need of International
             Protection 'Qualification' Regulations 2006."

 8. On its face this paragraph  does  not  identify  anywhere  therein  the
    standard of proof to which the appellant must make out his  claim.   Of
    course, the First-tier Tribunal is an expert Tribunal and one should be
    slow to infer from the absence of an  appropriate  self-direction  that
    the First-tier Tribunal have misunderstood or misapplied such standard.



 9. Nevertheless, at paragraph 53 of its decision  the  Tribunal  state  as
    follows:

         "Having balanced all these factors into  account  I  find  as  more
         likely than not that whilst it would have been foreseeable for  the
         army to have attended the appellant's address as a  consequence  of
         information provided by his cousin that they have in fact not  done
         so.  The fact that they have not attended his address  is  a  clear
         indication that he is of no interest to them and that they  do  not
         believe that he has assisted, supported or otherwise the LTTE."

10. Looking at the decision as a whole, and in particular observing (i) the
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal to properly  direct  itself  to  the
    standard  of  proof  and  (ii)  the  obvious  misdirection  as  to  the
    appropriate standard in paragraph 53 thereof,  I  cannot  be  satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal applied the correct standard of proof.

11. As a consequence, and as accepted by Mr Harrison, the FtT's decision is
    flawed by legal error capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal.
    Consequently, I set aside the such decision.

12. The most appropriate course in the circumstances of this  case  is  for
    the matter to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard
    on a de novo basis.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  an  error  of  law
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and it is set aside.

    The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined
    on a de novo basis.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
