
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08654/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2015                    |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     R B
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by MDL Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. By a decision dated 19 July 2015, Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara
    and myself found that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  when
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  of
    6 October 2014, refusing his asylum claim and to remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom by way of directions under section 10 of the Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999. The error  of  law  decision  is  annexed  to  our
    decision on the final disposal of this appeal. In summary, we concluded
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  erred  in  respect  of  his
    assessment of the Appellant's sur place claim. In addition, we had real
    concerns over the consideration of the destination for the  Appellant's
    removal (whether that was to be Sudan or South Sudan, or both).

 2. At the continuation hearing, Mr Biggs candidly informed us that he  had
    only been instructed very late in the day, and that he  was  not  in  a
    position to adequately present the Appellant's case in respect  of  the
    important issue of nationality and multiple  removal  destinations.  He
    was minded to seek an adjournment.

 3. However, after a useful discussion with Mr Biggs and  Mr  Whitwell,  an
    alternative  route  forward  emerged.  Mr  Biggs  submitted  that   the
    Appellant's appeal could properly be allowed on the limited basis  that
    the Respondent's decision of  6  October  2014  was  not  otherwise  in
    accordance with the law. This submission was based primarily  upon  the
    Respondent's failure to consider the  risk  on  return  to  Sudan.  The
    Appellant has  always  asserted  to  be  a  Sudanese  nationality.  The
    Respondent has maintained the view that the Appellant could be returned
    to either Sudan or South Sudan. However, the reasons for refusal letter
    did not deal with a removal to Sudan in the  context  of  international
    protection, but instead only considers it under the section on  Article
    8. In addition, the Respondent has never inquired as to the Appellant's
    nationality, a matter that may have consequences for risk on return  to
    Sudan.

 4. In response, Mr Whitwell adopted what he described as a  pragmatic  and
    fair position, namely that allowing the appeal on  this  limited  basis
    was the appropriate course of action  in  all  the  circumstances.  The
    Upper Tribunal should not be the primary decision-maker in  respect  of
    the issues raised by Mr  Biggs.  He  noted  too  that  the  section  10
    decision did not in fact name any country of destination.

Remake decision

 5. We concluded that the joint  position  of  the  representatives  was  a
    correct one, and we therefore allow the appeal to the extent  that  the
    Respondent's decision of 6 October 2014 was not otherwise in accordance
    with the law.

 6. The Respondent failed to undertake a thorough assessment of  the  issue
    of risk on return to  Sudan,  that  being  the  country  of  which  the
    Appellant asserted nationality and a country that the Respondent had at
    no stage ruled out as a destination for removal. It  is  apparent  from
    the face of the reasons for refusal letter that whilst  the  issues  of
    detention and JEM activities in the United Kingdom are addressed, there
    is no express consideration of risk on return to  Sudan.  Further,  the
    Appellant's ethnicity was never addressed by  the  Respondent.  In  the
    context of Sudan and South Sudan, ethnicity is almost always likely  to
    be of potential relevance in properly assessing risk.



Additional observations

 7. In view of the fact that the Respondent will now be  reconsidering  the
    Appellant's claim for international protection, we make  the  following
    comments. Although we have found that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    law, we specifically  preserved  certain  findings  of  fact  from  his
    decision. In particular, his findings that the Appellant had  not  been
    detained in Sudan and that his activities on behalf of the JEM  in  the
    United Kingdom were opportunistic, were not vitiated by error.

 8. In respect of the JEM activities, we are aware that the Upper  Tribunal
    has recently heard a country guidance case on this  issue  (IM  and  AI
    AA/04799/2011 and AA/00746/2013). The  outcome  of  this  will  have  a
    bearing on the Appellant's case.

 9. In reconsidering the Appellant's case, the Respondent will also need to
    have in mind the inclusion of proposed destinations in any new decision
    notice, a full risk assessment in respect of both Sudan and South Sudan
    (if both countries are still to be proposed places of removal), and  an
    investigation into the Appellant's ethnicity.

10. As far as the Appellant is concerned, he might be well-advised to  seek
    expert  evidence  on  the  issues  of  nationality  and,  if  relevant,
    ethnicity.

Anonymity

11. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant from serious harm, having regard to the interests of  justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

We re-make the decision by allowing  the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
Respondent's decision was not otherwise in accordance with the law, and  the
Appellant's claim for international protection  remains  outstanding  before
the Respondent awaiting a lawful decision.


Signed      Date: 21 October 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 21 October 2015

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Annex A: The error of law decision

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08654/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 July 2015                              |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     R B
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by MDL Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Officer Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge K S H Miller (Judge Miller), promulgated on  5  February
    2015, in which he dismissed the Appellant's  appeal.  That  appeal  was
    against the Respondent's decision, dated 6 October 2014, to refuse  his
    protection claim and to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchinson on 26 February 2015.

Anonymity

 3. There has been no anonymity direction in this appeal so  far  and  none
    has been sought from us. At this stage we do not make such an order.

Background

 4. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1979. His nationality has been, and
    still is, the subject of debate. For  the  purposes  of  the  appellate
    process, the Respondent has stated that he claims to be a  national  of
    Sudan. He arrived in the United Kingdom back in May  2003  and  claimed
    asylum. It is unclear why it took the Respondent so long to decide this
    claim. The Appellant's account was that he was born in Juba in what was
    then the south of Sudan. He left there alone aged about seven and lived
    in Khartoum thereafter. He worked for an army officer. He  was  accused
    of stealing some documents and imprisoned for forty-five days. He  then
    left the country in 2003. It transpired that he had in fact gone to the
    Netherlands in 2002, but initially failed to disclose this.

 5. Once in the United Kingdom the Appellant began, in 2012, attending some
    demonstrations in support of the Justice for Equality  Movement  (JEM),
    an organisation in opposition to the Sudanese government. A core aspect
    of the Appellant's claim was that  these  sur  place  activities  would
    place him at risk on return. In addition, following the creation of the
    independent state of South Sudan in 2011, the issue of the  Appellant's
    nationality, or potential nationalities became relevant.

Judge Miller's decision

 6. The judge did not believe  that  the  Appellant  had  ever  encountered
    problems whilst in Sudan, finding that the fact of his presence in  the
    Netherlands when he had claimed to be in detention in his home  country
    severely undermined the credibility of the account (paragraph 30).

 7. As to the involvement with JEM, Judge Miller found that  the  Appellant
    had acted with opportunism in engaging with this organisation  so  long
    after arriving in the United Kingdom. He did not accept the written and
    oral evidence of a witness, the Secretary General of JEM, Mr Sharafedin
    Hussain. As a result, the judge rejected  the  claim  of  any  risk  on
    return to Sudan (paragraphs 34-37).

 8. On the issue of the destination of removal, Judge Miller concluded that
    this could be either to Sudan or South Sudan, neither  of  which  would
    present a  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  to  the  Appellant
    (paragraphs 38-39).



The grounds of appeal

 9. The grounds are threefold: that comments  made  by  the  judge  at  the
    hearing indicated a prejudice against the Appellant; that the sur place
    had not been adequately considered; and that the  judge  had  erred  by
    failing to make a clear finding on nationality  and  giving  inadequate
    consideration to the alleged possibility of a return to South Sudan.

The grant of permission

10. Permission was expressly refused on ground one  because  no  supporting
    evidence was provided, as it should have been  (see,  for  example,  BW
    [2014] UKUT 568  (IAC)).  Permission  was  granted  on  the  other  two
    grounds.

The hearing before us

11. Mr Dhanji fully accepted that the allegations of inappropriate comments
    by the judge had not been backed up with evidence, and he quite rightly
    did not seek to argue the point any further. We need say  nothing  more
    about ground one.

12. In respect of ground  two,  Mr  Dhanji  accepted  that  the  judge  was
    entitled  to  find  that  the  Appellant's  JEM  activities  had   been
    opportunistic. However, in light of well-established case-law, this was
    not fatal to a protection claim. Judge Miller had not engaged with  the
    country information at  all.  In  relation  to  ground  three  and  the
    nationality point, it was submitted that there was only  an  assumption
    by the judge that a removal to South Sudan was possible. The issue  did
    not appear to have been addressed fully at the hearing.  There  was  no
    assessment of risk on return to South Sudan. If there was an  error  of
    ground two, ground three became relevant.  It  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's  representatives  had  not  adduced  evidence  as  to   the
    nationality laws of South Sudan.

13. Ms Fijiwala submitted that even if the judge had erred in  relation  to
    his consideration of the sur place issue,  it  was  immaterial  because
    even at its highest the claim was bound to fail. Paragraph 13(c) of  MM
    (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC) shows that the authorities  in
    Sudan will not have all the information available to officials  in  the
    United Kingdom about government opponents and activists. As  to  ground
    three, the Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal  letter  mentioned  both
    countries. Judge Miller dealt with both countries in his decision. Even
    if there was an error on ground two, it was immaterial to  the  outcome
    of the appeal as a whole.

Decision on error of law

14. We find that Judge Miller erred in law in his consideration of the  sur
    place issue.

15. As Mr Dhanji accepted, the judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant had acted opportunistically when engaging  with  the  JEM  in
    this country. However, it is by now trite law that such a conclusion is
    not determinative of the issue of risk on  return  (see,  for  example,
    Danian [2000] Imm AR 96, YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ 360, and  article
    4(3)(d) of the Qualification Directive).

16. As we  read  paragraphs  34-37  of  Judge  Miller's  decision,  he  has
    effectively treated the absence of a genuine  commitment  to  political
    activities by the Appellant as being determinative of the issue of risk
    on return. We find this to be so not only from the observations  stated
    in these paragraphs, but also the complete absence of any consideration
    of the country information which we accept was cited before him at  the
    hearing.

17. In light of the above, the judge misdirected himself in law as  to  the
    correct approach on the sur place issue. He also failed to have  regard
    to relevant evidence, namely the country  information  before  him.  It
    follows too, that his reasons for rejecting the  sur  place  claim  are
    inadequate.

18. The error is material insofar as  a  removal  to  Sudan  is  concerned.
    First, the MM decision  does  not  specifically  deal  with  sur  place
    activities (see paragraphs 5 and  16)  and  so  is  not  fatal  to  the
    Appellant's case. Second, and contrary to Ms Fijiwala's submission, the
    country information before Judge Miller and to which we  were  referred
    by Mr Dhanji does disclose an arguable case (we put it no higher)  that
    even low level activists in the  United  Kingdom  may  attract  adverse
    interest on return to Sudan (see pages 1-2, 6, 9, 26, 27, 69, and 74 of
    the Appellant's bundle). The Appellant's claim was not bound to fail.

19.  The  issue  of  the  destinations  for  removal  is   not   quite   as
    straightforward as the first. It is accepted by Mr Dhanji  that  little
    if any evidence was adduced on the issues of South Sudanese citizenship
    and any risk on return there. It appears as though  those  representing
    the Appellant did not engage with the issues as best they  might  have.
    To that extent Judge Miller had little to go on.

20. Ultimately though, we conclude that as we have found an error of law in
    respect of ground two, and that this is material to the issue  of  risk
    on return to Sudan, we  will  exercise  our  discretion  under  section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  set
    aside Judge Miller's decision. Our reasons for this are as follows.

21. First, once an error of law is identified, there is then the  power  to
    set aside. It need not be the case that errors on all issues raised are
    found to exist.

22. Second, in  an  appeal  in  which  two  destinations  for  removal  are
    proposed, it is important, in  particular  in  view  of  the  need  for
    anxious scrutiny and Article 33 of  the  Refugee  Convention,  to  have
    sound risk assessments for both countries.  Here,  no  such  assessment
    exists for Sudan.

23.  Third,  Ms  Fijiwala  acknowledged  before  us  that  it  remains  the
    Respondent's position that the Appellant could  be  removed  to  either
    Sudan or South Sudan. Thus, if the judge's decision were  to  stand  in
    its entirety, the Respondent  could  potentially  seek  to  return  the
    Appellant to Sudan, a place in respect of which a sound risk assessment
    has  not  been  undertaken.  To  our  mind,  that  is  an  unacceptably
    precarious basis on which to base further administrative action by  the
    Respondent.

24. Fourth, whilst the Respondent's reasons for refusal letter does mention
    both Sudan and South Sudan, the former is only stated in the context of
    consideration of the Article 8 claim and not within the  ambit  of  the
    protection claim (see paragraph 18). Further, the section 10 notice  of
    immigration decision itself does not state either country. So, although
    the Appellant and his representatives might be said to have been on  at
    least some notice as to the Respondent's  proposed  destinations,  this
    was not expressed as clearly as it should have been.

25. Fifth, at the hearing before Judge Miller there does not appear to have
    been any substantive exploration of  South  Sudan  in  the  context  of
    citizenship and/or risk on return there. The  judge's  conclusion  that
    the Appellant could safely return to South Sudan is  briefly  expressed
    and appears to be based on an assumption that he  has  relatives  there
    (paragraph 39). It is right too that there is no clear finding of  fact
    on nationality, although the Appellant did not provide evidence on  the
    point.

26. In view of the above, and bearing in mind the importance of  the  issue
    in any protection claim, we set aside the decision of Judge Miller.

27. Two findings of Judge Miller should be and are preserved, as they  have
    not been challenged and were open to him. First, that the Appellant was
    never detained in Sudan; second, that his involvement in the  JEM  thus
    far has been opportunistic.

28. We note that there has never been any exploration as to the Appellant's
    ethnicity.

Disposal

29. Neither representative sought a remittal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Both agreed that a continuation  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    appropriate. This  appeal  will  require  further  evidence  (including
    perhaps oral evidence from the Appellant) and submissions. As a result,
    we were unable to re-make  the  decision  at  the  hearing  and  so  we
    adjourned the matter for a continuation hearing before us.

30. As discussed at the hearing, the issues are now:

    a)     The Appellant's nationality, in respect of both Sudan and  South
         Sudan;

    b)     Risk on return to  Sudan  for  the  Appellant  as  a  low  level
         activist for JEM in the United Kingdom;

    c)     Risk on return to South Sudan;

    d)     The Appellant's ethnicity and any relevance  this  may  have  on
         risk.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

We adjourn the  appeal  for  a  continuation  hearing  before  Deputy  Upper
Tribunal Judges Norton-Taylor and Kamara on a date to be fixed.

Directions

    1)     Any further evidence relied upon by the parties shall  be  filed
         and served with the other side and Upper Tribunal no later than  14
         days prior to the date of the continuation hearing;

    2)     Oral evidence from the Appellant may be permitted, but a witness
         statement must be provided (see direction 1, above);

    3)     Skeleton arguments/written submissions from both  parties  shall
         be filed and served with the other side and Upper Tribunal no later
         than 14 days prior to the date of the continuation hearing;

    4)     An Arabic interpreter is required for the continuation hearing.


Signed      Date: 19 July 2015

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

