

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/08737/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th July 2016                         |On 27th July 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                    miss euliter zvinavashe karen mutami
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Neale (instructed by Fadiga & Co, Solicitors))



                             NOTICE OF DECISION


 1. This is a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal  in  relation  to  Miss
    Mutami's asylum appeal. The matter first came before  me  on  8th  June
    2016 when I found an error of law. On that date I decided as follows:-

      a) "This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of  State
         in relation to a decision and reasons promulgated on 4th April 2016
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kaler.  It followed a hearing on  29th
         February 2016 at Taylor House.  It related to a female  citizen  of
         Zimbabwe born on 18th June 1994  who  had  arrived  in  the  UK  in
         December 2013 and claimed asylum.  It was her  appeal  against  the
         refusal of that claim which was before the First-tier Tribunal.

      b) In the appeal the Judge considered the  Appellant's  claims  as  to
         what  had  taken  place  in  Zimbabwe  and   found   them   without
         credibility.  At paragraph 26 she said in conclusion that while  it
         is accepted that the Appellant was and is now a member of  the  MDC
         she did not accept that the events of  18th  October  2014  or  5th
         November 2014 occurred.  She did not find that  the  Appellant  had
         been targeted or detained by anyone in  Zimbabwe.   Those  findings
         remain unchallenged.

      c) The issue before me  today  relates  to  the  claim  of  sur  place
         activitie,s the nature  of  which  have  not  been  challenged  and
         therefore must have been accepted by the Secretary of State.  These
         are set out by the Judge at paragraph 27 where she says:-

             "I turn to her sur place activities.  The  Respondent  accepts
             that the Appellant has  demonstrated to the  requisite  degree
             that she attends every week.  She has not been  consistent  in
             the frequency of  attendances.   The  Appellant  has  provided
             undated photographs of herself at  vigils.   The  letter  from
             Zimbabwe Vigil (page 10 of the Appellant's bundle) states that
             she attends  vigils  on  a  regular  basis  and  welcomes  new
             supporters.  Surprisingly the writer of this  letter  was  not
             present to be cross-examined and so his evidence has not  been
             tested.  Nor is there any presence of the person who wrote the
             letter from the MDC (page 14)".

      d) The Judge  goes on at paragraph 28 to say that:-

             "The Appellant has provided copies of posts on  twitter  (page
             17 to 63) which show recent messages from October 2015 onwards
             in support of the MDC,  minutes of MDC meetings from July 2015
             where the Appellant was present and  the  Appellant's  lengthy
             blog.  All this is highly  political  in  content.   They  all
             postdate the date of Decision to refuse her asylum claim so  I
             approach them with a degree of scepticism.

             The Appellant has I find enhanced her profile within  the  MDC
             in  the  UK  since  the  Decision  was  made  to  refuse   her
             application and I find this has been done to secure  her  stay
             in the UK rather than any political motivation.  What  I  must
             consider is how this would be viewed  by  the  authorities  in
             Zimbabwe".

      e) The Judge then goes on to refer to the country guidance cases of CM
         (EM Country Guidance disclosure) Zimbabwe [2013] UKUT 00059,  EM  &
         Ors (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98,  RT  (Zimbabwe)  [2012]
         UKSC 38, and HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT
         00094 and she recites the head note to EM.

      f) Having done all that the Judge, in one paragraph, says at paragraph
         34:-

             " Given this Appellant's circumstances, what is  the  risk  of
             her being subjected to ill-treatment on return.  That  depends
             on whether she has a significant profile according to the case
             above.  She has been a member of a branch of the MDC in the UK
             since May 2015.  She has welcomed  new  potential  members  of
             vigils.  She  attends  committee  meetings  as  shown  in  the
             minutes.  She has been photographed outside the Embassy and it
             would appear that those photographs are available  on  various
             websites.  She has since May 2015 been an active supporter  of
             the MDC, has carried out many activities  to  demonstrate  her
             commitment to them and her name appears on their records as  a
             committee member.  She is not just an ordinary member  but  an
             active one and she has been responsible for  publishing  anti-
             government blogs.  I find that she  is  at  risk  of  being  a
             person whom the authorities may have some interest and so  may
             wish to question her further."

         On the basis of that and quoting the country  guidance  cases  the
         Judge allowed the appeal.

      g) I am persuaded by arguments on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
         that the Judge's consideration of risk on return on account of  her
         sur place activities is inadequate and focuses more on her being an
         active member and the Judge conflates being an active  member  with
         being a person  with  a  significant  profile.  I  agree  with  the
         Secretary of State's representative the two are not the same.

      h) I have been directed to the country guidance cases of CM and HS and
         it is of note  particularly  that   at  paragraph  205  of  CM  the
         Tribunal expressed itself:-

             "fully satisfied that the fresh evidence completely failed  to
             disclose any change in the position described in HS as tending
             to suggest any  heightened  scrutiny  of  returnees.   On  the
             contrary the evidence of Ms Scruton, together with that of the
             7 returnees who featured in the 2010 FFM Report clearly  shows
             no justification for regarding low level MDC supporters as the
             sort of activists who the HS Tribunal thought likely  to  fall
             foul of the CIO".

      i) Whilst it is at this juncture not clear whether the Appellant would
         or would not succeed on the basis of her sur place activities I  am
         satisfied that the Judge's scrutiny of  that  risk  is  inadequate.
         Not only do we have the two country guidance cases I  have  already
         mentioned but there is also a  case  ,relied  upon  today  by   the
         Secretary of State, BA (demonstrators in Britain  risk  on  return)
         Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) and the question  arises  whether  the
         matters that are to be looked at in assessing  risk  on  return  to
         Iran should be extrapolated and taken into a consideration of  risk
         on return to Zimbabwe.

      j) That was not considered, indeed it was not put  before  the  First-
         tier  Tribunal,  but  is  a  matter  which  needs  to  be  decided.
         Therefore for inadequacy of consideration of risk on  return  as  a
         result of her sur place activities I set  aside  the  decision  and
         reasons in that regard to be re-decided in the Upper Tribunal.

      k) I direct skeleton arguments from both  sides  in  relation  to  the
         relevance of the various cases relied upon so to  that  extent  the
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal is successful  in  that  there  is  an
         error of law and the Decision set aside.  However it  will  be  re-
         decided by in the Upper Tribunal.



         Notice of Decision

         The appeal is allowed to the extent that the conclusion on risk  on
         return due to the app's sur place activities is  set  aside  to  be
         redecided in the Upper Tribunal "

 2. By the resumed hearing Miss  Mutami  (who  I  shall  refer  to  as  the
    Appellant)  had  changed  representatives.  Those  representatives  had
    sought an adjournment prior to the resumed hearing which was refused.

 3. Mr Neale renewed his application for an adjournment on the  basis  that
    he wanted to instruct an expert  to  advise  as  to  whether  having  a
    profile on social media amounted  to  a  significant  profile  for  the
    purpose of  the  country  guidance.  Mr  Neale  had  also  submitted  a
    substantial  supplementary  bundle  running  to  100  pages  and   also
    submitted a further document  being  a  printout  of  a  Google  search
    against the Appellant's name.

 4. I refused the adjournment application on the basis that I was  able  to
    determine for myself whether the Appellant's activities on social media
    would amount to her having a significant profile and put her at risk on
    return to Zimbabwe on the basis of the  current  country  guidance.  In
    short, if the Appellant's sur place activities, albeit entered into for
    the sole purpose of enhancing her asylum claim, would in fact give  her
    a significant profile then in  accordance  with  the  country  guidance
    cases she would be at risk on return and entitled to succeed.

 5. Mr Duffy had not seen the supplementary bundle. It had not reached  his
    file and so I allowed him the time he needed to peruse it.

 6. It was  deemed  unnecessary  by  either  representative  to  hear  oral
    evidence and the matter proceeded on submissions.  Both representatives
    had provided skeleton arguments.

 7. The evidence of the sur place activities shows that the  Appellant  has
    attended the Zimbabwe vigil on  several  occasions.  She  has  attended
    demonstrations. She has  welcomed  others  to  the  vigil  and  to  MDC
    meetings. She has  attended  MDC  meetings.  She  is  described  as  an
    activist at those meetings. Of greater significance are the Appellant's
    activities in her Blog and what I find the decisive factor  is  that  a
    Google search against her name reveals her as  a  blogger  and  someone
    actively criticising the regime in Zimbabwe.

 8. Mr Duffy relied on the  skeleton  arguments  and  queried  whether  her
    activities on behalf of the MDC and  online  would  raise  her  to  the
    position of a person with a significant profile. He indicated  that  it
    is accepted and known that the CIO have infiltrated the MDC in  the  UK
    and on that basis it was reasonable to assume they would know that  she
    had in fact carried out her  activities  purely  to  boost  her  asylum
    claim; they would know she was not genuine  and  tell  the  authorities
    that was the case.

 9. Mr  Duffy's  argument  is  firstly,  speculative  in  the  extreme  and
    secondly, raises the  standard  of  proof  too  high.  It  is  entirely
    reasonable to assume that when carrying out  checks  on  returnees  the
    first port of call would be an Internet search. That would  reveal  the
    Appellant's profile and activities which would place her at risk.

10. While it gives me no pleasure to find in favour of this Appellant,  who
    has deliberately set about sur place activities for the sole purpose of
    enhancing what was a wholly unmeritorious asylum claim, on the evidence
    before me she is entitled to succeed.

11. Having previously set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision, in  re-
    deciding the appeal, the Appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse  her  asylum  claim  is  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed  such
that the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.










Signed                              Date 26th July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




