
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/08492/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2016                            |On 18 July 2016            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                   I A M E
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Kirk (counsel), instructed by Elder Rahimi,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, because the appellant is a minor.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Raymond promulgated on 19 April  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 10 June 1998 and is a national of Egypt. On  15
May 2015 the Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's  application  for
asylum.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Raymond ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

5.  Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 20 June 2016 Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Smith gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      " ... I am  concerned  that,  even  taken  as  a  whole,  the  Judge's
      credibility findings are based on a high degree of speculation coupled
      with some quite minor inconsistencies which might be explained by  the
      Appellant's age. I therefore  grant  permission  on  grounds  one  and
      three.

      3. I am less convinced by ground two particularly when the content  of
      that document and its manner of production is considered.  However,  I
      do not limit the grant of permission."

The Hearing

6. (a) Mr Kirk, counsel for the appellant, moved the grounds of  appeal.  He
explained that there are three grounds of appeal. The first two  grounds  of
appeal amount to a rationality challenge. The third ground of appeal  argues
that the Judge failed to take account of relevant case  law  and  failed  to
follow the guidance on the assessment of evidence of minors.

(b) Mr Kirk read through the grounds of appeal and argued that  the  Judge's
reliance on implausibility in assessing credibility is unsafe.  He  told  me
that it is clear from a fair reading of the  decision  that  the  Judge  had
failed to understand some of the evidence placed before him,  and  that  the
Judge had proceeded on his  own  assumptions  rather  than  a  clinical  and
impartial examination of the evidence placed before him.  As  a  result,  Mr
Kirk  argued  that  the  judge  had  drawn  erroneous  inferences  and  made
inconsistent findings of fact based on his own assumptions.

(c) Mr Kirk told me that one crucial piece of  documentary  evidence  was  a
court document from Egypt. The Judge dealt with that document  at  [117]  of
the decision and  then  relied  on  his  own  assumptions  rather  than  the
evidence contained in the background materials. As a result, Mr Kirk  argued
that the Judge came to an irrational conclusion & failed  to  give  adequate
reasons. The thrust of this submission is that  the  Judge  failed  to  give
adequate reasons throughout the  decision  and  failed  to  give  weight  to
material matters.

(d) The final ground of appeal related to  the  assessment  of  evidence  of
minors. The appellant was 16 years of age when he was interviewed,  and  was
17 years of age when he gave evidence in this appeal to the  First-tier.  Mr
Kirk relied on GM (risk on return - family) DRC 2002  UKIAT  06741  and  the
Joint Presidential Guidance Note number 2 of  2010.  He  told  me  that  the
Judge failed to exercise the requisite degree of caution  in  assessing  the
various strands of the appellant's evidence.

(e) Mr Kirk asked me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

7. Mr Norton for the respondent told me that the decision does  not  contain
any errors of law, material or otherwise. He told  me  that  the  Judge  had
prepared a careful and detailed decision which withstands scrutiny. He  took
me to [110], [112] and [118] of the decision  and  told  me  that  there  is
clear that  the  Judge  was  mindful  of  the  appellant's  young  age  when
considering his evidence. He reminded me that,  in  granting  permission  to
appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith was not impressed with the second  ground
of appeal. He asked  me  to  dismiss  this  appeal  and  allow  the  Judge's
decision to stand.

Analysis

8. The Judge's credibility findings are set out at  [67]  to  [109]  of  the
decision. Throughout those paragraphs, the Judge is critical of the  account
given by the appellant, but at [76] the judge clearly  is  influenced  by  a
presumption. Between [78] and [82] the Judge discusses conflicting  evidence
which he does not clearly resolve. At [92]  the  Judge  clearly  embarks  on
speculation and engages in a narrative  which  is  not  part  of  the  fact-
finding exercise. At [94] the Judge delivers a  dramatic  interpretation  of
the background materials without explaining the source. At  [95]  the  Judge
offers what seems to be his  own  view  of  Muslim  brotherhood  recruitment
which does not have a foundation in the evidence  which  was  placed  before
the Judge.

9. The Judge has clearly gone to great  care  to  consider  each  strand  of
evidence and has identified conflicts of evidence.  The  two  problems  with
the Judge's decision are that although he  identifies  conflicting  accounts
in the various sources of evidence he does not resolve  a  number  of  those
conflicting accounts. The second problem is that whilst  engaging  with  the
various strands of evidence the Judge strays  into  expressing  (what  looks
like) his own opinion,  rather  than  completing  an  evidence  based  fact-
finding exercise directed at drawing impartial conclusions.

10. It is beyond dispute that the appellant was only 16 years  of  age  when
he participated in screening interview and substantive asylum interview.  He
was 17 years of age when he gave oral evidence to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. In October 2010 the Presidents of the First-tier and Upper Tribunals  of
the IAC released a guidance note for Judges assessing and dealing  with  the
requirements of vulnerable people  (including  children)  in  the  Tribunals
Service. 10.3 of that guidance says

      10.3
      Assessing evidence
      Take account of potentially corroborative evidence
      Be aware:
      i. Children often do not provide as much detail as adults in recalling
      experiences and  may  often  manifest  their  fears  differently  from
      adults;
      ii. Some forms of disability cause or result in impaired memory;
      iii. The order and manner in which evidence is given may  be  affected
      by mental, psychological or emotional trauma or disability;
      iv. Comprehension of questioning may have been impaired.

12. Although the Judge reminds himself that the appellant was a  child  when
his evidence was taken, he makes no  reference  to  the  Joint  Presidential
Guidance, and it is not obvious from an objective reading  of  the  decision
that his credibility findings are  approached  with  the  caution  necessary
when considering the evidence of a minor.

13. I find that these errors are material errors in law because the  outcome
to the appellant's appeal may have been different if the Judge had  followed
the joint presidential guidance when assessing credibility. There  may  well
be inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence, but the  approach  taken  by
the Judge to those inconsistencies amounts to a material error  of  law.  As
the Judge's decision contains material errors of law, I must set it aside.

14. The Judge's  decision  cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
entirety. All matters must be determined of new. I consider whether  or  not
there is sufficient material before me to enable me  to  substitute  my  own
decision. Because of the nature and  extent  of  the  fact-finding  exercise
required I find  that  I  cannot  substitute  my  own  decision.  This  case
requires to be determined of new.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

15. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 a case may  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16.  In this case I  have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because of the nature and extent of the fact finding exercise  necessary  to
reach a just decision in this appeal. None of the findings of  fact  are  to
stand. A complete re-hearing is necessary.

17. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Raymond.

CONCLUSION

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

19. I set the decision aside. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 18
July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


