

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08470/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 9th April 2015                    |On 15th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                               SAMI ULLAH ROHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance either in person or by a legal
representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Neither the appellant nor his legal representatives  appeared.  The
         notices of hearing had been sent to the last notified  address  and
         have not, so far as I  am  aware,  been  returned  undelivered.  No
         explanation for their non appearance was  provided  and  there  has
         been no request for an adjournment so far as I am aware. I  decided
         to proceed with the hearing.


      2. The appellant's appeal  against  removal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
         protection and human rights grounds was dismissed by the First-tier
         Tribunal in a determination promulgated following a hearing on 22nd
         December 2014. Permission to appeal was granted  on  12th  February
         2015.


      3. The grounds seeking permission raise  the following issues:


          i. That the judge erred in  not  placing  significant  weight  on
             letters the appellant asserted had come from the Taliban;
         ii. The judge had required corroboration of evidence  put  forward
             by the appellant
        iii. The judge had failed to address risk factors with regard  both
             to risk in  his  home  area  and  relocation  referred  to  in
             submissions  drawing  from   the   background   material;   in
             particular the existence of tattoos with English words and his
             manner and speech rendering him at risk of being perceived  as
             westernised and anti-Islamic.


         Background


      4. The applicant sought asylum on arrival in the UK on 2nd April 2008.
         His application was refused but, because he was  a  minor  with  an
         accepted date  of  birth  of  5th  December  1994  he  was  granted
         discretionary leave to enter until 9th July 2012. He  submitted  an
         appeal against that decision but withdrew the appeal on 17th August
         2009, some 4 days before the date of the hearing. In July 2011  the
         appellant left the UK. He returned to the UK on  3rd  August  2011.
         The applicant sought to vary his leave on asylum and  human  rights
         grounds, such application being refused for reasons set  out  in  a
         letter dated 22nd September 2014. An appealable decision to  refuse
         to  vary  leave  and  to  remove  the  appellant  pursuant  to  s47
         Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was made and served  on
         8th October 2014. It was that decision which was the subject of the
         appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The  appellant  appealed  on
         asylum and human rights grounds.


      5. The appellant's legal representative before the First-tier Tribunal
         accepted that the First-tier Tribunal judge's decision on the human
         rights application would stand or fall in line with the decision on
         asylum grounds. There does not appear to have been any  submissions
         as regards humanitarian protection and there was no ground  seeking
         permission to appeal on that ground.


         Discussion


      6. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out in detail in paragraphs 2  to
         24 the appellant's claim and the respondent's view of  that  claim;
         in paragraphs 27 he sets out the documentation he  had  before  him
         and in paragraphs 30 to 53 the judge set out the oral  evidence  he
         heard and the submissions. His findings and reason are set  out  in
         paragraph 58 to 70.


      7. Of particular relevance to this appeal  are  the  findings  of  the
         judge in the following paragraphs:


             60.   I  do  of  course  approach  my  consideration  of   the
             credibility of the Appellant and his claim  by  assessing  the
             evidence  in  the  round.  The  Appellant  has  now   produced
             documents, which he claims to be communication of threat  from
             the Taliban. However those were only brought forward some  two
             years after they were stated to have  been  available  to  the
             Appellant.  In  addition  there  is  no  independent  evidence
             available to this Tribunal, in the form of any  expert  report
             or additional personal evidence from  any  witness,  by  which
             there is any support to contend that the claimed letters  from
             the Taliban are in fact copies of genuine original  documents.
             In such circumstances it is not possible for this Tribunal  to
             consider that such documents  are  genuine  in  terms  of  the
             original  documents  which  have  been  copied.  There  is  no
             verification which has been undertaken. This Tribunal finds it
             inappropriate  to  give  any  significant  weight   to   these
             documents which are said to have been dated in mid-2011 but  I
             note they were only translated in May 2013. I do not find that
             the brother of a friend of the Appellant would have held on to
             such   documents,   surely   appreciating    their    apparent
             significance, if they could have been genuinely  available  to
             the Appellant in 2011.


             .....


             63. The Appellant is not able to bring forward  evidence  with
             respect to the disappearance of his late father or indeed  the
             apparent disappearance of his elder brother.......there is  no
             direct evidence before  this  Tribunal  to  confirm  that  the
             Appellant was being pursued, or might be pursued,  because  of
             his  family's  previous  associations  with   any   particular
             organisations or groups in Afghanistan. There  is  a  distinct
             lack of realistic evidence  and  the  burden  rests  with  the
             Appellant.


             ....


             66. I take account of the case  law  referred  to  above.  The
             circumstances are that the appellant will have been away  from
             Afghanistan for a number of years.  His  return  would  be  to
             Kabul. He has  reasonable  health,  is  a  Muslim  and  he  is
             youthful. I am satisfied that the Appellant  could  return  to
             Kabul. He has been able to gain some education in this country
             and that should benefit him in the future in his home country.




      8. The appellant does not  dispute  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  judge  as  regards  his  travel  to  the  UK;  that   the
         appellant's credibility is damaged by his decision to leave the  UK
         to Pakistan for a period of a few months in 2011; that there was  a
         distinct lack of evidence with respect to the disappearance of  his
         father or elder brother; that the  failure  of  the  respondent  to
         undertake tracing of his family and the  lack  of  tracing  results
         from the Red Cross and the trip to  Pakistan  not  leading  to  the
         appellant finding his family did not result in any  enhanced  risk.
         The judge set out the evidence before him in great  detail.  It  is
         plain that he has assessed the appellant's evidence in the round in
         reaching  these  specific  findings  and  that  he  did  not   make
         individual findings in isolation of the evidence  as  a  whole.  He
         deals with the Taliban  letters  in  detail  in  the  determination
         ([60]). Although he could perhaps have phrased  his  findings  more
         felicitously it is plain that he was not seeking  corroboration  of
         the  letters  but  was  firstly   stating   that   there   was   no
         corroboration; secondly that there was no  expert  evidence  before
         him as to the possibility that the letters were of  genuine  origin
         (given that they appeared to be copies) and thirdly that he did not
         find it credible that they would not have been sent to him  earlier
         given their claimed importance and relevance. These were matters he
         was entitled to consider and take into  account;  the  findings  as
         regards the Taliban letters  were  findings  open  to  him  on  the
         evidence before him.


      9. In so far as the lack of evidence of  the  father  and  brother  is
         concerned, the judge has referred earlier to Hekmatayr being out of
         Afghanistan at the time  when  the  applicant  claimed  there  were
         problems. In [63] the judge is merely stating as a fact that  there
         was no other  evidence  than  that  given  by  the  appellant.  The
         evidence was considered as a whole by the  judge  in  reaching  his
         findings.


     10. In so far as the tattoos and his manner and speech  are  concerned,
         the judge did not specifically  refer  to  these  when  making  his
         findings. The submission by Mr Harding to the  First-tier  Tribunal
         was carefully  recorded  in  the  determination  and  there  is  no
         challenge to that record. The finding of the judge was that he  was
         not at risk in his home area but in any event the judge  considered
         return  to  Kabul.  It  is  inconceivable  that,  having  carefully
         recorded the submission, the judge did not take  into  account  the
         submission as regards "westernisation". Other than  this  assertion
         as to potential risks of westernisation, the judge was not directed
         to any background material that supported  that  submission.  There
         was no evidence before the judge as  to  difficulties  or  problems
         faced by other returnees who had previously been in the UK for some
         time. The existence of a tattoo (whether with English words or not)
         cannot be considered, without more, to be an indication of being un-
         Islamic and thus at risk. The background material  referred  to  in
         the schedule of essential reading makes no reference to  those  who
         are westernised or having tattoos of western origin being at  risk.
         Although the grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  refer  to  a
         claimed lack of consideration by the judge of  the  perceived  risk
         factors as set out in the skeleton, the findings of the judge as to
         the  appellant's  claim  were  such  that  there  was  no  need  or
         requirement for him to proceed in a formulaic fashion  through  the
         various risk factors. The findings of  the  judge  as  regards  the
         applicant's account were open to him on the evidence before him and
         the failure to mention each and every submission and each and every
         piece of background material does  not  render  this  determination
         unsafe.


     11. I am satisfied there is no error of law and dismiss the appeal.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


    I do not set aside the decision


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    [pic]
         Date 9th April 2015
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
