
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08174/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2017                   |On 30 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     tK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood of Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and his  date  of  birth  is  5
    April 1979.  He made a claim for asylum  which  was  dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Kainth  in  a
    decision that was dated 8 November 2016 following a hearing on 26  July
    and 3 October 2016.  Permission was granted to the appellant by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald on 5 December 2016.

2.   The appellant was initially  interviewed  in  relation  to  his  asylum
    claim and he gave an account that he had been arrested and detained  in
    1994 and that he had joined the LTTE on a permanent basis in 1995.   He
    was appointed an administrator and he  was  responsible  for  supplying
    weapons, food and first aid and he helped remove injured fighters  from
    fighting zones.  He left the LTTE in 2009 and  has  not  been  involved
    since with the LTTE or in any political activity.  The appellant ran  a
    business in Sri Lanka and was a member of an  organisation  called  the
    Commerce Union and it was attended by members of the CID with  whom  he
    became familiar.  He befriended a CID  officer  called  Upali  and  the
    appellant supplied goods and alcohol to local CID officers for a number
    of years and he was able to borrow money from the  CID  officer  called
    Upali.  Business competitors informed Upali that the appellant had been
    a member of the LTTE.  The account  that  the  appellant  gave  in  his
    interview was that in February 2014 he  was  approached  by  Upali  and
    informed that he had to tell the  central  CID  in  Colombo  about  the
    appellant's past and he gave  him  ten  days  in  order  to  leave  the
    country.  The appellant left Sri Lanka with a passport that he obtained
    with the help of an agent.

3.   The appellant in his witness statement of 14 February 2016 changed  his
    evidence stating that he had been detained and tortured in January 2014
    and that he did not  reveal  this  during  the  course  of  his  asylum
    interview because it was one of the conditions of his release  that  he
    would not disclose this, otherwise his family would be "wiped out".  It
    was only after taking advice here in the  UK  that  the  appellant  was
    reassured that the information relating to this incident would  not  be
    made known to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.   He  had  first  made  a
    reference to the detention to a  therapist,  Margaret  Watson,  of  the
    Refugee Council in December 2014.   The  appellant's  account  that  he
    relied on at the hearing  was  arrested  on  2  January  2014  and  was
    detained for 27 or 28 days.  He was released by way of a bribe.  Whilst
    he was detained he gives an account of very serious physical and sexual
    mistreatment.      He states that 17 or 18 days after he  was  released
    he left Sri Lanka. He claimed  asylum  when  he  arrived  here  at  the
    airport. The reason why he did not disclose the information  about  his
    detention in 2014 at an earlier stage  was  in  order  to  protect  his
    family.

Grounds of Appeal

4.   The grounds  of  appeal  before  me  are  very  lengthy  and  at  times
    repetitive but I heard  extensive  oral  submissions  from  Mr  Haywood
    (which were fortunately more focused) and Mr Clarke on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The grounds can be summarised.  The  Judge  failed
    to take into account in the context of the  evidence  as  a  whole  the
    evidence of the country expert (Frances Harrison), the  medical  report
    of Dr Sinha of 4 January 2016, a letter from Freedom from Torture of  9
    February 2016, a referral from Margaret Watson Therapist at the Refugee
    Council of 25 July 2016 and an update letter from  Freedom  of  Torture
    dated 22 July 2016.  It is  argued  that  the  Judge  made  credibility
    findings without taking into account the above-mentioned  evidence  and
    did not consider the evidence in the round.  It is also argued that the
    Judge gave inadequate reasons for finding that the appellant's  account
    was not credible in the light of Dr Harrison's report in whose  opinion
    the appellant's account was consistent with  her  expert  and  detailed
    knowledge.

5.   In relation to Dr Sinha, his qualifications were  accidentally  omitted
    from the appellant's bundle that was before the Judge, but this was not
    made known to the appellant's representative at the hearing. The  Judge
    concluded that the doctor was not qualified to express  an  opinion  on
    the appellant's mental health diagnosis or suicide risk, but  this  was
    based on an erroneous assumption.

6.    It  is  argued  that  the  Judge  failed  to  adequately  reason   the
    credibility findings.  He focused on the inconsistent accounts (in  his
    asylum interview and the evidence in  his  witness  statement  that  he
    relied on at the hearing) and inaccurately and  unfairly  characterises
    the difference in the accounts as  being  a  substantial  and  material
    deficit in the appellant's account and a "glaring conflict" but this is
    acknowledged by the appellant who relied on the second account and  not
    the first and had explained why he changed his account.

7.   It is further argued that  the  Judge  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    report of Dr Sinha was not compliant with the guidance in KV  (scarring
    - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 230 because Dr  Sinha  failed
    to  consider  whether  the  appellant's  scars  could  have  been  self
    inflicted by proxy (SIBP) or to give reasons for not doing so.   It  is
    argued that this is  a  misunderstanding  of  KV  which  only  requires
    experts to comment on the possibility that scars may be  self inflicted
    if "there is  a  presenting  feature  of  the  case  that  raises  self
    infliction by  proxy  as  a  more  than  fanciful  possibility  as  the
    explanation for scarring" and this was absent in this case.

8.   It is further argued that the Judge failed to  identify  or  apply  the
    correct legal test in relation to the risk of suicide.   There  was  an
    application to amend the grounds which was  not  opposed  and  which  I
    granted  arguing  that  the  Judge  erred  in  the  treatment  of   the
    appellant's wife's witness statement and specific reference was made to
    [60] of the decision.  It was argued that the Judge  did  not  properly
    consider the reason why  the  appellant's  wife  was  not  giving  oral
    evidence and there was  insufficient  analysis  of  the  evidence  when
    concluding that little weight should be attached to it.

Conclusions

9.   I have taken into account Mr Clarke's submissions and  whilst  I  agree
    that when making credibility findings a Judge  has  to  start  at  some
    point and no arguable error of law arises from a Judge starting at  the
    consideration of the  appellant's  evidence  and  then  following  with
    findings in relation to the medical evidence or other expert  evidence,
    the crucial point is that the evidence must be considered  as  a  whole
    and that findings must be made following a holistic  assessment.  I  do
    not accept that this has been done by the Judge in this case.  At  [48]
    of the decision the Judge engages with the change  in  the  appellant's
    evidence and he concludes that there  is  a  substantial  and  material
    deficit in the appellant's account because of the  failure  to  mention
    the 2014 detention in his asylum interview where he had stated that  he
    had befriended Upali who advised him that he would have to  notify  the
    authorities in Colombo and he gave the appellant ten days to leave  the
    country.  The  Judge  made  reference  to  "glaring  conflict"  in  the
    appellant's updated account noting that it is substantial  and  affects
    his  credibility  to  a  high  degree  and  he  concludes  that  it  is
    inconceivable that the appellant had a conversation with Upali post his
    arrest in January 2014 and that the two accounts cannot  be  consistent
    with each other.  The Judge at the end of the  paragraph  asks  himself
    whether either account is plausible or credible and concludes  that  in
    his judgment neither is.  It is at that point that the Judge finds  the
    appellant not credible and rejects his account of having been  arrested
    and detained in 2014. It clear to me that the rejection of his evidence
    is based on the  inconsistencies  between  the  first  and  the  second
    account and the failure of the appellant to  mention  when  interviewed
    that he was arrested in 2014. Whilst the change in his  evidence  is  a
    real problem for the appellant, the Judge reached  unequivocal  adverse
    credibility findings and rejected his account without consideration  of
    the other evidence including the medical evidence.

10.  The Judge concludes at  [59]  when  considering  Dr  Sinha's  evidence;
    "there are however a substantial number of reasons as to why I have not
    accepted the appellant's explanation/claim.  They have been set out  in
    comprehensive terms within the body of this decision".  In my view this
    wholly support the ground of appeal that credibility was considered  on
    the basis of the appellant's evidence only. The judge materially  erred
    for this reason alone.

11.  I heard extensive submissions from both parties and I  will  deal  with
    most of these.  Whilst it is material to credibility that the appellant
    changed his account, it was never his  case  that  he  relied  on  both
    accounts that he has given. The judge attached  significant  weight  to
    the fact that the  accounts  are  inconsistent,  but  this  was  not  a
    material matter because the appellant's case was not  advanced  on  the
    basis that the first account (in  respect  of  Upali  warning  him  and
    giving him 10 days to leave) reflected what had happened.

12.  Dr Sinha does not consider self infliction but what he does  do  is  go
    through each and every scar and his overall evaluation is  at  [16]  of
    his report.  Dr Sinha's evidence is that a number of scars are  typical
    of the cause, others are highly consistent and others  consistent  with
    the torture as described by the appellant.  He concludes that there are
    no groups of scars that are inconsistent with the stated  mechanism  of
    injury and he concludes that the clinical picture of  the  quantity  of
    scars distributed on different parts of his  body  and  with  different
    appearances and the presence of scarring on sites not commonly  injured
    accidentally (the backs of legs,  knee  and  feet)  is  overall  highly
    consistent with the torture he has described.  There was no  suggestion
    by the respondent that the report does not  comply  with  the  Istanbul
    Protocol  and  by  any   account   the   expert   considered   possible
    alternatives.  The Judge  makes  an  assessment  of  this  evidence  at
    paragraphs 55 to 59:

         "55.  Dr  Sinha  examined  the  appellant  on  25th   August   2015
             approximately eighteen months after the appellant  arrived  in
             the United  Kingdom.   The  doctor  does  not  in  his  report
             consider  the  potential  of  self-infliction  by   proxy   as
             highlighted in the case of KV (Sri  Lanka)  [2014].   Although
             the doctor utilises paragraph 186 of  the  Istanbul  Protocol,
             nowhere within his report does he make reference as to why  he
             felt it appropriate not to  consider  the  question  of  self-
             infliction by proxy.  The report is not compliant with respect
             to the observations made in KV.  I have considered Dr  Sinha's
             full report and comment on the 'highly consistent' finding  as
             follows.  The doctor makes reference to some of  the  scarring
             being highly consistent with the trauma described.  Scar 7  is
             attributed to being burnt (photograph 5).   The  doctor  makes
             reference to possible alternative causes but goes on to  state
             that the appellant has not stated history or current  evidence
             of a skin condition such as eczema.   This  tends  to  suggest
             that the  author  of  the  medical  report  has  accepted  the
             appellant's account as opposed to  going  into  grater  detail
             with respect to possible  alternatives.   The  fact  that  the
             appellant does not give any other  possible  explanation  does
             not remove the obligation upon the doctor  to  consider  other
             possible reasons.

         56.   Scars  16  and  17  (photographs  11)  are  noted  as  highly
             consistent with respect to the appellant being  burnt  with  a
             cigarette during his torture.  The doctor makes  reference  to
             potential various alternative causes such as infected boil  or
             inset bite or other skin wound or lesion.  A similar reference
             is made with regards to  scar  18  (photograph  12)  cigarette
             burns.  It remains unclear whether the mark is attributable to
             the 2014 or 1994 detention or whether  it  is  the  result  of
             SIBP.

         57.  Photograph 14 relates to scar 20 the loss of a  toenail.   The
             appellant's explanation is that it was removed by metal  nails
             having been pushed under the toenail.  Dr Sinha considers  the
             appellant's account as highly consistent.  Alternative  causes
             were dismissed on the basis that there was no evidence of  any
             fungal infection involving other nails on either foot and that
             there was no reported accidental trauma  or  any  occupational
             history that would put him at risk of such trauma.  The doctor
             does not  however  consider  whether  the  absence  of  fungal
             infection on other nails could be an alternative cause for the
             loss  of  the  nail.   No  reported   accidental   trauma   or
             occupational history given by the appellant in itself does not
             address the question of alternative potential causes.

         58.  In conclusion, Dr Sinha is of the opinion  that  the  clinical
             picture of the quantity  of  scars  distributed  on  different
             parts of the appellant's body and with different  appearances,
             and the presence of scarring on  sites  not  commonly  injured
             accidentally is overall highly  consistent  with  the  torture
             described by the appellant.  The  injuries  sustained  by  the
             appellant in 1994 to those claimed to have been  inflicted  in
             2014 could not be  distinguished.   This  was  the  conclusion
             reached by Dr Sinha at paragraph 139.  I note the quantity  of
             scarring and Dr Sinha's medical opinion,  however,  I  do  not
             accept that the appellant was detained in the manner  and  for
             the reasons he  had  given.   The  scarring  does  not  in  my
             judgment confirm when and in what  circumstances  the  alleged
             attack/torture had taken place.  Detention and torture by  the
             army/security services was  one  possibility,  but  there  are
             others as well.  It is not possible to say when  the  injuries
             were inflicted.  He could have been the victim of an attack by
             people  with  a  grudge  or  detained  and  tortured  by   the
             authorities under other circumstances or  the  injuries  could
             have been inflicted with his consent to improve his claim  for
             asylum.  No reference has  been  made  to  self-infliction  by
             proxy.  Dr Sinha at paragraph 131 of his report  attempted  to
             explain (unprompted) that the appellant's poor health  at  the
             time of his SEF interview may have given rise to some  of  the
             discrepancies and inconsistencies.  The doctor makes reference
             to the appellant  complaining  that  he  had  a  fever  during
             interview.  The doctor does not however go on to explain as to
             what type of fever would impact upon individuals'  ability  to
             give answers to questions asked.  The  doctor  does  not  make
             reference to what he would expect by way  of  an  individual's
             body temperature to have  an  adverse  impact  upon  answering
             questions.

         59.  Dr Sinha then makes reference with regards to the  appellant's
             mental health and has diagnosed  the  appellant  as  suffering
             from PTSD and a major depressive  disorder  in  light  of  his
             history  of  torture.   At  paragraph   119-121   the   doctor
             considered the possibility of feigning or  exaggeration.   The
             doctor concluded that there was no evidence in the appellant's
             presentation to suggest that he was trying  to  exaggerate  or
             feign  any  psychological  distress.   He  commented  on   the
             appellant's delay in disclosing the rape and sexual abuse that
             he  claimed  to  have  suffered.   He   concluded   that   the
             explanation given  by  the  appellant  with  respect  to  non-
             disclosure were clinically plausible, i.e., that they may have
             been in order to protect his family who remained in Sri Lanka.
              If disclosed to authorities in Sri Lanka his family may  well
             have been targeted.  I do  not  agree  with  respect  to  this
             assessment.  The observations made by Dr Sinha are based  upon
             the account given by the appellant.  The appellant  had  every
             option to give information with respect to the torture that he
             now complains of which he openly  gave  with  respect  to  the
             claimed detention in 1994.  He was aware that  coming  to  the
             United Kingdom would offer safe sanctuary for him.  It  was  a
             country of choice and arrangements had been made  to  come  to
             the United Kingdom specifically.  Although I accept that there
             may be a whole host of reasons as to why allegations  of  male
             rape are not reported immediately, the appellant's explanation
             for non-report I do not accept.  He claims the sexual violence
             towards him took place in  January  2014.    He  came  to  the
             United Kingdom towards the end of February 2014  so  within  a
             matter of a month of his claimed sexual violence.  He had  the
             option of making reference  to  the  torture  element  of  the
             January 2014 detention without making direct reference to  the
             sexual violence.  Neither was reported.  Dr Sinha at paragraph
             170 stated that the  appellant  had  previously  had  suicidal
             thoughts but did not describe any current  thoughts  of  self-
             harming or suicidal intent.  He went on to explain that it was
             possible for the appellant to develop a risk of suicide if  he
             knew he was going to be returned to Sri Lanka.   At  paragraph
             178 of his report, he determined that the appellant was a high
             risk of self-harm and  suicide.   I  do  not  agree  with  the
             doctor's  interpretation.   Unusually  and  surprisingly,   no
             curriculum vitae was attached for Dr Sinha and  there  was  no
             documentary evidence  to  identify  whether  Dr  Sinha  was  a
             specialist in mental health and approved under Section  12  of
             the Mental Health Act 1983.  Ms  McGovern  in  her  submission
             stated that  Dr  Sinha  had  experience  of  acute  psychiatry
             although there was no  documentary  evidence  to  identify  or
             support this.  The front  page  of  the  medical  report  made
             reference to Appendix A (notes and references) and Appendix  B
             (biographical details  of  Dr  Ritesh  Sinha).   Neither  were
             attached to the report at Appendix B Bundle  A.   Ms  McGovern
             made reference to an  extract  from  the  British  Journal  of
             Psychiatry (page 121 Tab D Bundle A) which commented upon late
             or non-disclosure during Home Office interviews  with  respect
             of victims of sexual torture.  Under the sub-heading  Results,
             it was noted '...Those  with  a  history  of  sexual  violence
             reported more difficulties in disclosing personal  information
             during Home Office interviews, were more likely to  dissociate
             during these interviews and  scored  significantly  higher  on
             measures of post traumatic  stress  symptoms  and  shame  than
             those with a history of  non-sexual  violence'.   I  read  the
             document very carefully and noted the importance not  to  make
             an adverse credibility finding solely on  the  basis  of  late
             disclosure.  There are however a substantial number of reasons
             as   to   why   I   have   not   accepted   the    appellant's
             explanation/claim.  They have been set  out  in  comprehensive
             terms within the body of this decision."

13.  The evidence of Dr Sinha  is  comprehensive  and  whilst  he  does  not
    consider  self-infliction  of  injuries  he  does   consider   possible
    alternatives (which is accepted by the Judge at [55]  and  [57]).   The
    Judge  concluded  that  consideration  of  alternative  causes  is  not
    sufficient.  There was no  suggestion  from  the  respondent  that  the
    injuries  were  self-inflicted.   The  respondent  was  aware  of   the
    appellant's change in evidence by  the  time  of  the  hearing  as  his
    statement had been served, on my understanding, eight months  prior  to
    the substantive hearing.  There was nothing in my view  in  Dr  Sinha's
    report or the evidence  generally  which  would  suggest  more  than  a
    fanciful possibility of self-infliction.

14.  Mr Clarke submitted that the fact that the appellant had been  arrested
    and detained in 1994 and that he had now changed his  account  together
    with the doctor being unable to accurately date the  scarring  injuries
    was in itself sufficient to oblige the expert and the Judge to consider
    self-infliction, but I do not agree with him.  There is nothing unusual
    about an experts considering this type  of  evidence  being  unable  to
    reliably date scarring.  That the appellant changed his account was not
    in my view sufficient to suggest  self-infliction  of  injuries  was  a
    matter that should have been investigated by the doctor and  determined
    by the Judge and in any event. If I am wrong about that, at no time was
    the appellant put on notice that self-infliction was an issue  in  this
    case.

15.  I have now had sight of Appendix B of the medical report which for  one
    reason or another was not placed before the Judge. I accept  that  this
    was not  known  to  the  appellant's  representative  at  the  hearing.
    Appendix B contains biographical detail relating to Dr Sinha who  is  a
    general practitioner and it sets out his experience and training.   His
    training  included  six  month  rotations  at  St.  George's   Hospital
    including the emergency department and the acute medical  unit  and  he
    has worked in acute psychiatry at Queen  Mary's  Hospital,  Roehampton.
    He is currently working as a GP registrar at a GP practice in Battersea
    where he offers a full range of general practice. The Judge noted  that
    there was no documentary  evidence  that  identifies  Dr  Sinha  having
    experience of acute psychiatry. He found that the lack of experience in
    acute psychiatry to significant.  Dr  Sinha  is  not  a  specialist  in
    mental health and the judge correctly recorded that he is not  approved
    under Section 12 of the Mental Health Act 1983, but the Judge  was  not
    right about Dr Sinha having no experience of acute psychiatry.

16.    I have taken on board Mr Clarke's  submissions  that  the  Judge  was
    concerned  that  the  appellant  had  given  two  completely  different
    accounts.  In my view the account is not wholly different, but  he  has
    significantly added to it and by  any  account  he  failed  to  mention
    material evidence when he was initially interviewed and this presents a
    problem for the appellant. A judge is entitled to  conclude  that  this
    damages his  credibility  and  to  reject  his  account.  However,  the
    findings must be reasoned and grounded in the evidence.  It is  a  fact
    that the judge made adverse credibility findings which  have  not  been
    challenged in the grounds, in particular the finding  relating  to  the
    appellant having fled Sri  Lanka  using  his  own  passport  and  other
    findings at paragraphs 67, 69 and 70. These have not been challenged in
    the grounds. However, the judge did not take into account  all  of  the
    evidence and in any  event,  did  not  properly  consider  the  medical
    evidence. The findings are as a result unsafe.



Notice of Decision

17.  The judge materially erred and the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds, Art 2, 3 and 8 is set aside. No findings are  preserved
    and the matter is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 27.01.17

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

