
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08891/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2015                             |On 6 May 2015                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                     JJ
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. R. Jesurum, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity order has previously been made in these proceedings and  I
    direct that it continues.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  9  April  1996.   He
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 14 October 2014  to
    refuse to vary his leave to remain and to remove him under  Section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, having refused his
    asylum, Humanitarian Protection and human rights claims.  The appellant
    claims to be a refugee whose removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
    breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the   1951   Geneva
    Convention relating to the status of refugees  and  the  1950  European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.



 3. He left Sri Lanka on 11 May 2011 and arrived in the United  Kingdom  on
    13 May 2011 aged 14.  He travelled  with  a  false  passport  and  visa
    provided by an agent.  The plan for him to link up  with  two  maternal
    uncles in the United Kingdom failed and he was placed in  the  care  of
    Social Services.  The appellant  claimed  asylum  on  arrival  but  his
    application was refused on 13 July 2011.  He was granted  discretionary
    leave as an unaccompanied minor asylum seeking child  until  9  October
    2013.  He appealed against the refusal of asylum  but  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pedro in a  determination
    promulgated on 30 December 2011.  Permission to appeal his decision was
    refused on 1 February 2012.

 4. On 9 October  2013  the  appellant  made  an  application  for  further
    discretionary leave through his former solicitors.  The covering letter
    sent with the application emphasised the private life built up  by  the
    appellant in the United Kingdom through his studies and also his family
    life with the relative with whom he was residing.  Finally, the  latter
    relied on asylum and Articles 2 and 3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention
    without giving further reasons.  It is the refusal of this  application
    which led to the appeal hearing within the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. That hearing took place on 8 January 2013 before Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Froom who, in a decision promulgated on 16  January  2015
    dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,  human  rights   and   Humanitarian
    Protection grounds.

 6. Within his decision the judge gives at paragraphs 14 to 18 reasons  for
    refusing an application made at the hearing to adjourn for the purposes
    of obtaining a medical report in relation to  the  appellant's  claimed
    PTSD.

 7. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  5
    February 2015 by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Chambers.   His
    reasons for so doing were:-

         "1.  Permission is sought in time, to appeal against  the  decision
             of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Froom  promulgated  on  14
             January 2015.

         2.   A late application for an adjournment was made  on  the  basis
             that the appellant had experienced a bombardment and its after-
             effects  and  may  be  suffering  from  the  effects  of  PTSD
             (paragraph 15).   The  judge  concluded  the  application  was
             unduly speculative  because  other  people  dealing  with  the
             appellant  had  not  found  it  necessary  to  refer  him  for
             psychiatric assistance (paragraph 18).

         3.   It is apparent on medical evidence only  now  available,  that
             the appellant  was  suffering  from  mental  illness  and  the
             symptoms  of  major  depression  secondary  to  post-traumatic
             stress disorder which may have affected his  recollection  and
             had a bearing on the reception of his evidence.

         4.   Permission is granted."

 8. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 9. It became  apparent  that  there  was  a  dispute  as  to  whether  the
    adjournment application had been made on  two  strands,  the  need  for
    medical evidence and the need to obtain evidence from Social  Services.
    Ultimately it was not necessary for  me  to  determine  this  issue  as
    having listened to the competing arguments  in  relation  to  the  core
    assertion of "procedural fairness" I was able to indicate that  any  of
    the other grounds relied on became otiose by reason of  my  conclusions
    relating to this central issue.

10. Mr. Jesurum relied heavily on the combination of  the  judge  not  only
    refusing the adjournment application, but doing so in the context of  a
    subsequent fettering of the appellant's examination-in-chief.

11. Mr. Clarke urged me to accept that there was no material error and that
    Judge Froom had directed himself  appropriately  when  considering  the
    application for an adjournment which was based on speculation following
    a conference between the appellant and his representative the day prior
    to hearing.  The medical report which is now available was not in front
    of the judge which, it is asserted is a factor  that  should  not  have
    been taken into account when permission to appeal was granted.  In  any
    event the judge clearly analysed and  concluded,  taking  into  account
    appropriate country guidance case law that the appellant would  not  be
    at risk if returned to his country of origin.  The ultimate remedy  for
    the appellant would be to make a fresh  application  relying  upon  the
    newly obtained medical evidence.

12. It is fundamental the parties should be able to answer adverse material
    by evidence as well as argument - SH Afghanistan v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ
    1284.  It is the position that psychiatric evidence was relevant as  it
    was capable of supporting the appellant's account, went to the issue of
    proportionality of his removal and as to his ability to  recall  events
    and give evidence.  For the reasons that I have said there is  no  need
    for me  to  make  reference  to  the  Social  Services  evidence.   The
    appellant was entitled to obtain a medical report.   I  appreciate  the
    argument that he had had ample opportunity to do so, but on  the  facts
    of this particular adjournment application  it  was  only  following  a
    conference with his representative prior to hearing that the  need  for
    such a report arose.

13. Had the refusal to adjourn been the only issue in play then perhaps  it
    could be argued the  judge  had  not  materially  erred.   However,  at
    paragraph 21 of his decision the judge records that during examination-
    in-chief  his  representative  began  to  ask  the  appellant  detailed
    questions about his experiences of the bombardment during the last days
    of the civil war.  The judge asked why such  questions  were  necessary
    and was told that in the circumstances of the  refused  application  to
    adjourn the  representative  needed  to  establish  the  appellant  had
    undergone these experiences.  The judge, although clearly with the best
    intentions, erred in concluding  that  the  representative's  questions
    were unnecessary and were primarily calculated to  provoke  a  reaction
    from the appellant.  Having come to that conclusion the judge requested
    the representative to focus his questions on other issues.

14. It is the combination of the refusal of the adjournment application and
    the fettering of examination-in-chief which causes me to conclude  that
    the judge has fallen into  material  error  and  that  there  has  been
    procedural unfairness,  thereby  depriving  the  appellant  of  a  fair
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. For these reasons I  find  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains errors of law and has to be set aside in  its  entirety.   All
    parties were agreed that, in the circumstances, it was appropriate  for
    the appeal to be considered and all matters determined  afresh  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

16. I therefore set aside the decision.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to  be  dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant  to  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
    practised at statement 7.2(b) before any judge aside from Judges  Pedro
    and Froom.



Signed   Date 5 May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

