
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08169/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30th April  2018                     |On 08th May 2018                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Rutherford, Counsel instructed on behalf of
                    the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  11th
    December 2017, dismissed his claim for protection.

 3.  The basis of the Appellant's claim is set out within the determination
    at paragraphs 10-20, and in the papers before the Tribunal, namely that
    he had been involved with an organisation [xxxx] and  attended  classes
    run by them  which subsequently had been raided which had  led  to  his
    arrest, detention an ill-treatment. After release he  returned  to  the
    same organisation and began to recruit others. His home was  raided  by
    the authorities but as the applicant was not  there,  his  brother  was
    arrested and remains in detention having  been  sentenced  to  5  years
    imprisonment. His sister had been executed some years earlier.

 4. The Appellant left Iran illegally on the 2 February 2015 and arrived in
    April 2015. Whilst in the United Kingdom he had been  attending  church
    and had been involved in various face book postings which were critical
    of the regime.

 5. He made a claim for asylum and attended a substantive interview on  the
    6th May 2015. A decision was made refusing that application on the 12th
    May 2015 and the Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a
    determination promulgated on  the  5th  October  2015  the  appeal  was
    allowed. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal was lodged. The Upper Tribunal
    found the First-tier Tribunal had made an error of law and remitted the
    appeal.

 6. He appeal came before the FTT for a second time  on  the  7th  November
    2017 and in a decision promulgated on the 11th December 2017 his appeal
    was dismissed. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that  decision
    and permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Adio)  on
    the 9th January 2018.

 7. At the hearing before the  Tribunal,  Ms  Rutherford  relied  upon  the
    grounds and supplemented them with her oral submissions. The Respondent
    had provided a Rule 24 reply on the 20th February 2018 which  Ms  Aboni
    placed reliance upon and she therefore also made oral submissions.

 8. After having taken into  account  the  respective  submissions  by  the
    parties, I reached the conclusion that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law and gave  my
    reasons for reaching that decision. I shall set out below my reasons by
    reference to the parties' respective submissions.

 9. The grounds assert that the judge erred in reaching an adverse  finding
    of credibility at paragraph [38]. I have reached  the  conclusion  that
    contrary to the grounds at paragraph 4(d), that the judge's findings of
    fact made at [38] that  it  was  not  credible  he  had  rekindled  his
    interest in the [xxxx] organisation, were open to the judge to make and
    were entirely sustainable as  submitted  by  Ms  Aboni.  Ms  Rutherford
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account   his
    explanation and evidence that he had received significant  comfort  and
    support from the organisation following the execution of his sister and
    that this was a material matter alongside the explanation  provided  at
    paragraph 36  of  his  statement.  However  those  submissions  can  be
    properly characterised as a disagreement with the findings made by  the
    judge at [38]. The judge was entitled to consider his claim  of  having
    rekindled his interest in the context of his account  of  the  previous
    circumstances in Iran, which included having been the subject of severe
    physical and mental abuse. The judge took into account  when  assessing
    the credibility of this issue, that his life had now become more stable
    having remarried and lived quietly with his wife daughter  and  parents
    and that it would not be plausible that he would place himself at  risk
    of further arrest and detention at this time.  Furthermore,  the  judge
    was entitled to consider his account of his  claimed  activities  which
    the judge found to be inconsistent with his concern for the  safety  of
    his family including his younger daughter. This was in  fact  supported
    by material in the  bundle  (see  page  69;  paragraph  27)  where  the
    Appellant gave details about how he had reacted when in  detention  and
    had been thinking of his family members. Consequently  I  am  satisfied
    that those findings of fact were open to the judge.

10. The grounds also challenged the finding at [40] on the basis  that  the
    judge made a misdirection in law in requiring corroboration in the form
    of documentary evidence. Whilst there is  no  requirement  for  someone
    seeking protection or asylum to provide corroboration in  the  form  of
    documentary evidence, the judge did not reach the conclusion at [40] in
    isolation. In the preceding paragraphs, the judge rejected his claim to
    have rekindled his interest in the [xxxx] organisation and at [39]  did
    not find it reasonably likely that the authorities would suddenly  raid
    his house, more than two years after his release  from  detention.  The
    judge also made the point that he had provided documentation to support
    his claim relating to his sister. Consequently I am satisfied that  the
    findings when read together were open to the judge to make.

11. The grounds also do not challenge the findings of fact that  were  made
    at  paragraphs  46  -  48  relating  to  his  claimed   conversion   to
    Christianity.

12. The grounds at paragraph 4(a) relate to the findings made by the  judge
    at [49] which relate to the tattoo on his forearm. The  grounds  assert
    that the judge fell into error by failing to put into context  how  and
    why the tattoo had been put on his arm and  that  as  it  was  a  clear
    outward manifestation of faith, the judge failed to  consider  this  in
    the light of HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 and that he should not  be
    expected to have his tattoo removed to avoid persecution, which is  the
    finding made by the judge.  In  addition  it  was  submitted  that  the
    finding that  he  could  cover  the  tattoo  by  long  sleeves  was  an
    irrational finding. Ms Aboni  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    submitted that the findings at paragraph [49] were open to the judge to
    make having found that he was not a genuine Christian convert and  that
    he would therefore take steps to remove the tattoo or wear long sleeves
    on return.

13. I am satisfied the judges' consideration of the Appellant's  tattoo  at
    [49]] discloses an error of law. Notwithstanding the  observation  made
    by the judge that it "appears to be an amateur application  with  faded
    colours" and that the judge was unable to make a finding as to  whether
    it was permanent, the evidence before the Tribunal was that it had been
    on his arm for a considerable period of time. It  was  present  at  the
    time a medical examination took place in September 2017 (see  paragraph
    41; page 80 AB) and also  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  some  months
    afterwards. Consequently it would be reasonable to reach the conclusion
    that it was not a transfer  or  one  that  would  wash  off.  That  was
    particularly so  bearing  in  mind  the  medical  evidence  which  made
    reference to the tattoo as covering up  substantial  scarring  in  that
    area.

14. The judge went on to find that because she had formed an  adverse  view
    of his interest in Christianity (as set out in  the  findings  at  [46-
    48]), she was satisfied that the "tattoo  was  obtained  for  the  sole
    purpose of enhancing his chances of a successful  appeal"  (see  [49]).
    She went on to find that he had the option of having the tattoo removed
    or in the alternative it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant to keep his arm covered by "long sleeved  clothing"  so  that
    the tattoo was not visible.

15. In my judgement that finding runs contrary to the decision of HJ (Iran)
    (as cited). In that case the Supreme Court was concerned with the issue
    as to whether an individual can  be  required  to  modify  his  conduct
    (including what he says and does) if that conduct or what  he  says  or
    does, would otherwise put him  at  risk  of  serious  ill-treatment  or
    persecution. In other words, whether an individual can be  expected  to
    act differently from how he would  otherwise  act,  including  what  he
    would say  or  do)  in  order  to  avoid  persecution.  The  underlying
    rationale of that decision is that an individual cannot be required  or
    expected to behave in a way that is inconsistent with the exercise of a
    fundamental right of freedom reflected in the  Convention  reason,  for
    example his religious beliefs. The decision is not concerned  with  how
    the individual will in fact behave but it is concerned with whether, if
    he would behave in a way that would expose him to persecution,  whether
    they can be reasonably expected to modify their behaviour in  order  to
    avoid persecution.

16. When applied to the circumstances  of  this  particular  Appellant,  he
    cannot be expected to remove the tattoo to avoid persecution and  there
    was no evidence before  the  judge  to  demonstrate  that  he  had  any
    intention of doing so. Furthermore, the finding that he could cover  up
    the tattoo  by  wearing  long  sleeves  fails  to  properly  apply  the
    jurisprudence relating to the circumstances of an individual on  return
    to Iran.

17. In the decision AB (and others) Internet activities-state of  evidence)
    Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 at paragraphs 451, 455-457, 460,464 and 467,  the
    Tribunal set out its consideration of the evidence relating to risk  on
    return.  The Tribunal said this:

         "451.    It cannot be the case that a real risk of  persecution  is
         generated simply by making some unsavoury remark or mild  criticism
         of the government of Iran. We  make  it  clear  that  this  is  not
         because the government of Iran  is  tolerant  of  mild  criticisms.
         There is evidence that it is not. Mild concerns can  be  enough  as
         can association with western music  or  western  ideas  or  western
         fashions. All of these  things  attract  disapproval  and,  we  are
         satisfied, might attract persecution.


         ...


         455. We do reject Mr Rawat's  submission  that  a  high  degree  of
         activity is necessary to attract persecution. It  is  probably  the
         case that the more active persons are the more likely they  are  to
         be persecuted but the reverse just does not apply. We find that the
         authorities do not chase everyone who just might be an opponent but
         if that opponent comes to their attention for some reason then that
         person might be in quite serious trouble for conduct, which to  the
         ideas of western liberal society seems of little consequence.



         456. It was accepted that being resident in the UK for a  prolonged
         period may lead to scrutiny and screening on arrival.



         457. We accept the evidence that some people who have  expected  no
         trouble have found trouble and that does concern us. We also accept
         the evidence that very few people seem to be  returned  unwillingly
         and this makes it very difficult to  predict  with  any  degree  of
         confidence what fate, if any, awaits them. There is clear  evidence
         that some people  are  asked  about  their  internet  activity  and
         particularly for their Facebook password. We can think of no reason
         whatsoever to doubt this evidence.  It  is  absolutely  clear  that
         blogging and activities on Facebook are very common amongst Iranian
         citizens and it is very clear  that  the  Iranian  authorities  are
         exceedingly twitchy about them. We cannot  see  why  a  person  who
         would attract the authorities sufficiently to be  interrogated  and
         asked to give account of his conduct outside of Iran would  not  be
         asked what he had done on the internet. Such a person could not  be
         expected to lie, partly because that is how the  law  is  developed
         and partly because, as is illustrated in one of the examples  given
         above, it is often quite easy to check up and expose such a person.
         We find that the act of returning someone creates a  'pinch  point'
         so  that  returnees  are  brought  into  direct  contact  with  the
         authorities in Iran who have  both  the  time  and  inclination  to
         interrogate them. We think it likely that they will be asked  about
         their internet activity  and  likely  if  they  have  any  internet
         activity for that to be exposed and if it is less  than  flattering
         of the government to lead to a real risk of persecution.


         ...


         460. We find that our main concern is the pinch-point of return.  A
         person who is returning to Iran after a reasonably short period  of
         time on an ordinary  passport,  having  left  Iran  legally,  would
         almost certainly not  attract  any  particular  attention  at  all.
         However, very few people who come before the Tribunal are in such a
         category. At the very least people who would be before the Tribunal
         can expect to have had their ordinary leave to  be  in  the  United
         Kingdom to have lapsed and may well  be  travelling  on  a  special
         passport. Nevertheless, for the small number of people who would be
         returning on an ordinary passport having left lawfully  we  do  not
         think that there would be any risk to them at all.
         464. We do not find it at all relevant if a  person  had  used  the
         internet in an opportunistic way. We are aware of examples in  some
         countries where there is clear evidence that  the  authorities  are
         scornful of people  who  try  to  create  a  claim  by  being  rude
         overseas. There is no evidence remotely similar  to  that  in  this
         case. The touchiness of the Iranian authorities does not seem to be
         in the least concerned with the motives  of  the  person  making  a
         claim but if it is interested it makes  the  situation  worse,  not
         better because seeking asylum is being rude about the government of
         Iran and whilst that may not of itself be  sufficient  to  lead  to
         persecution it is a point in that direction.


         ...
         467. The mere fact of being in the United Kingdom for  a  prolonged
         period does not lead  to  persecution.  However,  it  may  lead  to
         scrutiny and there is clear evidence that  some  people  are  asked
         about their internet activity and particularly for  their  Facebook
         password. The act of returning someone creates a 'pinch  point'  so
         that a person is brought into direct contact with  the  authorities
         in Iran who have both the time and inclination to interrogate them.
         We think it likely that they will be  asked  about  their  internet
         activity and likely if they have any internet activity for that  to
         be exposed and if it is less than flattering of the  government  to
         lead to at the very least a real risk of persecution."


18. The country guidance decision of SSH and HR (illegal exit-filed  asylum
    seeker) Iran CG UKUT 00308 (IAC) reached the following conclusions from
    the evidence;  that  returnees  without  passports  are  likely  to  be
    questioned (see paragraph 22), only if concerns  arise  about  previous
    activities in Iran, or where ever they have returned from, would  there
    be any risk of  further  questions,  detention  or  ill-treatment  (see
    paragraph 23). At paragraph 25, the Tribunal accepted  the  submissions
    that the evidence showed a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment in
    breach of Article 3 for a person who was  imprisoned  in  Iran  on  the
    basis that the conditions in prisons and detention facilities are harsh
    and potentially life-threatening and are likely to reach the Article  3
    threshold. At paragraph 31, the Tribunal found that a person guilty  of
    another offence may additionally be imprisoned  for  illegal  exit  but
    that the mere fact of illegal exit  or  having  made  an  asylum  claim
    abroad did not create a risk of ill-treatment (because there  were  not
    enough examples of cases of ill-treatment  about  which  sufficient  is
    known (see paragraph 32). At paragraph  34,  the  Tribunal  found  that
    Kurdish  ethnicity  may  be  an  exacerbating  factor  for  a  returnee
    otherwise of interest.

19. In SSH (as cited) the Upper Tribunal recognised that there was  a  two-
    stage questioning process on return. At the first stage, they would not
    be at a real risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment. However,  if
    that first stage of questioning, "any particular concerns arising  from
    their previous activities either in Iran or in the  United  Kingdom  or
    whichever country they have returned from" arose, they would be a  risk
    of further questioning,  detention  and  potential  ill-treatment  (see
    paragraph 23).

20. When applied to the circumstances of  this  Appellant's  case,  it  was
    common ground that the Appellant had left Iran illegally  and   he  had
    been absent from there since 2015. At the "pinch point "of  return  the
    Appellant is likely to be questioned and the evidence demonstrates that
    there was a reasonable likelihood that particular concerns arising from
    his previous activity in Iran and his family circumstances  would  lead
    to the risk  of  further  questioning,  detention  and  potential  ill-
    treatment. The FFTJ found as a fact that  the  Appellant's  sister  had
    been executed in Iran for converting to Christianity.  The  judge  also
    accepted that the Appellant had been arrested  and  detained  and  ill-
    treated by the Iranian  authorities.  The  grounds  (at  4(e)  seek  to
    challenge the further finding at [37] that the reason for his detention
    might have been because he was "alcohol dependent", I am satisfied that
    this was speculative when  set  against  the  medical  report  and  the
    clinical letter and in the light of the Appellant's evidence. The judge
    considered the medical evidence in the light of the Appellant's account
    which was supportive and consistent with his claim that he had physical
    injuries and how they had been sustained.  The  expert  rejected  other
    causes and was satisfied that the  Appellant  had  not  exaggerated  or
    embellished his account. The judge therefore concluded that the medical
    report taken with the other supporting evidence demonstrate that he was
    tortured  mentally  and  physically  during  detention.  It   was   the
    Appellant's  account  that  he  had  signed  a  confession  during  his
    detention.

21. Against that background and having a tattoo depicting Jesus, the  cross
    and the  Virgin  Mary  would  be  likely  to  be  seen  as  an  outward
    manifestation of the Christian faith  and  in  my  judgement  would  be
    likely to lead to the second stage of  questioning  identified  by  the
    Tribunal.

22. This leads me to the second issue which relates to the Facebook  posts.
    The judge considered his sur place activities at paragraphs 44 - 45. In
    respect of his posts, they were in support of the release of Dr Taheri.
    It is common ground that this man was in detention  awaiting  execution
    as a result of his belief in  interuniversalism.  The  judge  concluded
    that the  Facebook  account  would  not  bring  the  Appellant  to  the
    attention of the authorities, because there was no evidence whether the
    Facebook account was "open" or "closed" and was therefore not satisfied
    that they would be able to  browse  the  Facebook  pages  and  see  the
    content and also because the judge was aware that it  was  possible  to
    manipulate Facebook pages by posting comments, copying  them  and  then
    deleting the page. Thus the judge  will  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    postings could continue to appear on Facebook.  Furthermore  she  noted
    that the name of the account  was  incorrectly  spelled  and  that  the
    authorities would not associate the postings on the Facebook pages with
    the Appellant.

23. At paragraph  45,  the  judge  made  reference  to  his  attendance  at
    demonstrations  in  support  of  Dr  Taheri's   release.   There   were
    photographs attached to the Appellant  statement  at  an  extract  from
    YouTube. The judge accepted that the photographs depicted the Appellant
    with others holding banners relating to his release but  they  did  not
    appear on the YouTube extract. The judge was therefore not satisfied he
    could be identified as being a protester and as it  was  such  a  small
    scale protest the judge was not satisfied that it would have  attracted
    the attention of the authorities.

24. The grounds assert that  the  judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  that
    particular evidence failed to  consider  it  in  the  light  of  AB(and
    others)(as cited) when the case  was  provided  before  the  FTT.  Miss
    Rutherford also submitted that the judge erred in  considering  whether
    the account was "open" or "closed"  and  that  there  was  evidence  of
    previous  postings  within  the  bundle   and   current   posts   which
    demonstrated that  the  postings  continued  to  be  present  upon  his
    Facebook page. Ms Aboni on behalf of the Respondent submitted that  the
    judge  adequately  addressed  the   Facebook   evidence   and   reached
    conclusions that were open to her that he was not likely to come to the
    attention of the authorities  and  would  therefore  be  at  risk.  She
    submitted that the judge was not satisfied of the evidence of sur place
    activities nor was the judge satisfied that he was a genuine  Christian
    convert for the reasons given at paragraphs 46 - 48.

25. I have made reference to the decision of AB  (and  others)  earlier  in
    this decision. There is  no  reference  in  the  FTT  decision  to  the
    findings made by the Upper Tribunal in that case. I take  into  account
    that that was not a country guidance decision and the findings  of  the
    Tribunal were made on the basis of the particular  evidence  before  it
    but nonetheless some of those findings made which relate to the  "pinch
    point" of return were also referred to in the country guidance case  of
    SSH (as cited).

26. Whilst Miss Aboni submits that the judge was  entitled  to  reject  his
    claim of risk on return due to his Internet activity because he was not
    found to be credible relating to his conversion, at paragraph 464 of AB
    (and others) the Tribunal stated as follows:

         "We do not find it at  all  relevant  if  a  person  had  used  the
         Internet in an opportunistic way. We are aware of examples in  some
         countries where there is clear evidence that  the  authorities  are
         scornful of people  who  try  to  create  a  claim  by  being  rude
         overseas. There is no evidence remotely similar  to  that  in  this
         case. The touchiness of the Iranian authorities does not seem to be
         in the least concerned with the motives  of  the  person  making  a
         claim but if it is interested it makes  the  situation  worse,  not
         better because seeking asylum is being rude about the government of
         Iran and whilst that may  not  of  itself  be  sufficient  to  lead
         persecution it is a point in that direction."

27. At paragraph 472, the Tribunal also stated  (in  the  context  of  risk
    arising from Internet activity) that "it is not relevant  if  a  person
    has used the Internet in an opportunistic way. The authorities are  not
    concerned with the person's motivation."

28.  I recognise that in the CG decision of SSH (at  paragraph  30)   which
    stated that "one can expect a degree of reality on  (the  part  of  the
    Iranian authorities) in relation to people who,  in  the  interests  of
    advancing their economic circumstances, would make the story  in  order
    to secure economic betterment in a wealthier country." However  on  the
    factual findings of the judge, the profile of the  Appellant  was  such
    that there was a real risk of further interrogation.  This  related  to
    his previous arrest and detention and the execution of his sister.

29. The decision of AB (and others) demonstrates that an individual will be
    asked for their Facebook password upon returned to Iran and thus it  is
    likely their Internet activity will become known (see  paragraph  457).
    When looking at  the  judge's  findings,  it  is  therefore  irrelevant
    whether the Facebook account is "open" or "closed". Furthermore  whilst
    the judge found that she could not be satisfied that the postings would
    continue to be present on the  page,  there  was  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal of previous posts made but also current posts which were  only
    printed three days before the hearing. There remains a question  as  to
    the name of the Facebook account which is spelled slightly  differently
    and does not have his last name. It does not appear that he  was  asked
    about this issue and does not feature  in  the  judge's  determination.
    However in the light of the case  law,  and  the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal I am satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood that  the
    authorities would check the Facebook page that he in fact uses.

30. At the hearing the advocates were given the  opportunity  to  make  any
    further submissions relating to  the  re-making  of  the  decision.  Ms
    Rutherford reiterated her submissions which related to risk  on  return
    based on the facts as found and in the light of the errors of law  that
    I had already made reference to. Ms Aboni made no further submissions.

31. Having reached those conclusions and for the  reasons  set  out,  I  am
    satisfied  that  the   determination   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    demonstrates the making of an error on a point  of  law  and  that  the
    decision should therefore  be  set  aside.  In  my  assessment  of  the
    evidence that was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  relevant
    jurisprudence, and in the light of the findings of fact that were  made
    by the judge, I am satisfied that the Appellant has demonstrated to the
    lower standard of proof that there is a reasonable likelihood that upon
    return to Iran he will be the subject of ill-treatment and  persecutory
    harm.

32. In particular, I find that by applying the country guidance case of SSH
    (as cited) that having left illegally and having been out of Iran since
    2015 he is likely to be questioned on return. He cannot be expected  to
    remove the tattoo for the reasons  I  have  already  stated  and  I  am
    satisfied that this would be viewed as  a  manifestation  of  Christian
    faith and would be readily seen by the authorities, even if he does not
    hold a genuine belief.  This would be likely to be of specific interest
    in the light of the accepted evidence that the Appellant's  sister  had
    been executed in Iran for converting to Christianity.  The  Appellant's
    previous profile someone had been arrested, detained and ill-treated on
    account of previous activities with the [xxxx] organisation would  also
    become known. In addition, there is the likelihood  that  his  Facebook
    pages would be scrutinised on return. In  my  judgement  these  factors
    when placed together indicate that the Appellant has demonstrated  that
    there is reasonable likelihood that he would be at risk  on  return  to
    Iran. Even if it could be said, as Ms Aboni submits that his motivation
    for his conduct is in issue, it is the perception  of  the  authorities
    which is of relevance. The CG case  makes  it  plain  that  the  prison
    conditions in Iran would lead to treatment contrary to Article 3.

33. Accordingly the appeal against the refusal of his protection  claim  is
    allowed on asylum and human rights grounds.



Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The appeal is re-
    made as follows- the appeal is  allowed  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds (Article 3).



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]
                                Date: 1st May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds







