
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08375/2011
                                                AA/01251/2010, AA/12321/2011
                                                AA/12302/2011, AA/11697/2009
                                                AA/01316/2010, AA/12039/2011
                                                AA/01500/2010, AA/14533/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 March 2019                      |On 14 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                    a a s
                                     t s
                        K A (formerly known as) (a s)
                                     m s
                                    m n s
                                    n u m
                                     m k
                                     a g

                                     and

                                     ku
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Seddon & Mr P Jarro, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    & Co, Solicitors.
For KU   Mr C Jacobs, instructed by Hammersmith and Fulham Community Law
                    Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr A Payne, instructed by the Government Legal
                    Department


Anonymity
We make an order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 whereby the disclosure or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the  appellant  KU  is
prohibited.  Any breach of the terms of this order may  result  in  contempt
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION


 1. On 6 February 2000 the appellants and others took control of an  Ariana
    Afghan Airlines Boeing 727 during an  internal  flight  from  Kabul  to
    Mazar-e-Sharif in Afghanistan, their country of nationality.  The plane
    flew to Tashkent where it refueled and then to Kazakhstan for  a  minor
    repair, before reaching Moscow.  It is believed  that  some  passengers
    were released at a point prior to the aircraft reaching Moscow where  a
    further number were  released.   The  plane  continued  to  the  United
    Kingdom where it landed in the early hours on the following  day.   The
    appellants were accompanied by several of their  family  members.   The
    complement of those on board by the time the plane landed  in  Stansted
    included the flight crew, some 50 passengers being the  appellants  and
    their family members and about 100  other  passengers.   A  handful  of
    those passengers were released after arrival.   Some of the flight crew
    escaped but otherwise the appellants,  their  family  members  and  the
    other passengers remained on board for upwards of 70  hours  until  the
    hijackers surrendered to the UK authorities on 10  February  when  they
    claimed asylum.


 2. Prior to a decision on their asylum claims, charges were  laid  against
    the appellants who were remanded to HMP  Belmarsh  Prison.   They  were
    subsequently  released  on  bail  by   the   Crown   Court   and   from
    administrative detention  by  the  immigration  authorities  under  the
    Immigration Act 1971.


 3. Their appeals are before us in order to decide whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the 2015 Panel) erred in law in their decision dated  7  July
    2015 that the appellants are excluded from the Refugee Convention under
    Article 1F(b).  Any reference to 'the appellants' is to all.  Reference
    to 'the eight appellants' does not include KU. We have both contributed
    in equal part to this decision.


THE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS


 4. The first criminal trial ended inconclusively on 18  April  2001  after
    the jury could not agree verdicts.  A second trial presided over by Sir
    Edwin Jowitt commenced in late 2001 when three of the  appellants  gave
    evidence.


 5. On 6 December 2001 the appellants, apart from  KU,  were  convicted  of
    hijacking.  KU was unfit to stand trial and was formerly  acquitted  of
    all charges on 26 June  2003  upon  the  Crown  electing  to  offer  no
    evidence against him unconditionally.


 6. The sentences imposed by Sir Edwin on 18 January 2002 were  60  months'
    imprisonment for [AAS] and [MNS] (who are brothers) with an order  that
    they should serve half their sentences in custody before being eligible
    for parole.  The remainder of the eight appellants were sentenced to 30
    months' imprisonment on the  basis  that  they  would  be  released  on
    licence after serving half their sentences.  The eight  appellants  had
    been on bail but returned to custody after their conviction.


 7. On 22 May 2003 the Court of Appeal quashed all of  the  convictions  on
    the basis of a "crucial misdirection" given by the trial  judge  as  to
    their defence of duress.  By this time six of the eight appellants  had
    already been released from custody on licence and as a  result  of  the
    court's decision the remaining two brothers were released having served
    respectively 22 months and 24 months of their 60 months sentences.


 8. The Court of Appeal did not direct a retrial.  The Crown did not seek a
    retrial after unsuccessfully applying  for  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision.


HISTORY OF THE PROTECTION APPEALS


 9. On 25 June 2003 the eight appellants were refused asylum and  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom.  Their appeals  were  heard  by  a  panel  of
    immigration adjudicators (the 2004 Panel) between 26 April and  10  May
    2004.  In a lengthy and  detailed  decision  dated  3  June  2004,  the
    appeals of the eight appellants together with an  additional  party  to
    the hijacking, DD, who had subsequently absconded,  were  dismissed  on
    asylum grounds.  Each of the appeals  however  were  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds on the basis that their return to Afghanistan  would  be
    in breach of Article 3.


10. The 2004 Panel heard evidence from the eight appellants.  Their  claims
    had been based on  their  involvement  in  a  group  called  the  Young
    Intellectuals of Afghanistan (YIA), an organisation whose  leaders  all
    had direct or indirect connections with the previous communist  regime.
    The  appellants'  fears  were  based  on  hostility  from  the  Taliban
    Government who had taken control of Kabul in 1996  and  extended  their
    control over most of the country.  The YIA  had  been  founded  by  the
    brothers [S] in 1997.  Members of the group had been  arrested  by  the
    Taliban in January 2000 and as a result, the group's security had  been
    compromised.  This led to the decision by the appellants to escape from
    Afghanistan by hijacking the aircraft on 6 February.


11. The issue of exclusion under Article  1F(b)  had  been  raised  by  the
    Secretary of State late in the day.  The 2004 Panel conclusions on this
    aspect were in terms that:-


   i) There was no doubt in the appellants' minds that hijacking by its very
      nature was serious.


  ii) The panel agreed with the submissions by the Secretary of  State  that
      the hijacking was not a political crime.


 iii) The appellants could have attempted an alternative means of escape  to
      a neighbouring country and could have chosen to travel to Pakistan.


  iv) That there were no serious grounds for concluding that the  appellants
      were placed in such a position that they were compelled to  carry  out
      the hijacking or that they were under such pressure as to justify  the
      hijacking.


12. Having regard to the narrow ambit of  the  issue  we  are  required  to
    decide, there is no need to dwell on  why  the  eight  appellants  were
    successful  on  Article  3  grounds  except  to  observe  that  it  was
    essentially because the 2004 Panel found there was  a  real  risk  they
    would be targeted for assassination by the Taliban  who  had  condemned
    them to death in absentia.  The 2004 Panel considered  that  the  eight
    appellants could be at risk because of their particularly high  profile
    and their unique position as the main actors in the hijacking.


13. The eight appellants  did  not  appeal  the  exclusion  decision.   The
    Secretary of  State  however  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision on Article 3 grounds.  Permission was refused  by  the  Deputy
    President  of  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  who  introduced  his
    analysis of each of the grounds with the following remarks:-


         "The determination appears  to  me  to  be  a  careful  and  proper
         examination of all the evidence in its proper  context.   It  could
         not be said that the evidence compelled the findings:  but  looking
         at them generally and in the light of the  grounds  I  can  see  no
         error of law.  The adjudicators were entitled to reach the findings
         they did, and in general the grounds amount only to differences  of
         opinion arising out of preferences of emphasis."


14. The Secretary of State did not grant  the  eight  appellants  leave  to
    remain despite their success under  Article  3.   Following  successful
    proceedings by way of judicial review, each was  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom for a period of six months on  19
    May 2006.  They applied on 15 November 2006 for further leave to remain
    including the basis that they were refugees and entitled to  protection
    under the Refugee Convention.


15. A decision on KU's application (made  six  years  previously  with  the
    eight appellants) was not given until 12 October 2009.  In essence, the
    Secretary of State reviewed  the  decision  on  18  November  2009  and
    decided to exclude KU from the Refugee Convention  by  a  supplementary
    decision letter dated 18 January 2012.


16. The remaining  eight  appellants'  applications  were  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on dates between 15 September 2009  and  25  October
    2011.  The First-tier Tribunal heard their appeals in 2009;  they  were
    unsuccessful and  were  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal who in 2010 set aside the decision after concluding the  First
    tier had erred in law.   The  case  was  remitted  to  the  First  tier
    Tribunal who decided the appeals in three stages.


   i) The first hearing was to decide the issue whether the appellants would
      be at risk of persecution or subject to serious harm  if  returned  to
      Afghanistan.  In a decision dated 15 October 2013 a  panel  of  First-
      tier Tribunal judges (DJ FtTJs Campbell and Peart) concluded that  all
      the appellants had demonstrated that their removal would put  them  at
      risk of persecution and of ill-treatment in breach of Article 3 of the
      Human Rights Convention.


  ii) A second hearing was by what we have referred to as the 2015 Panel  in
      order to decide whether the appellants were properly  to  be  excluded
      from the Refugee Convention under Article 1F(b).  In a decision  dated
      7 July 2015 the same panel concluded that the appellants including  KU
      were excluded under Article 1F(b).  Our task is to decide whether this
      panel erred in law.


 iii) The third hearing was to decide whether the co-appellants (the  family
      members) of the appellants were at real risk of being  persecuted  and
      thus entitled to refugee status.  A single judge  (DJ  FtTJ  Campbell)
      decided that they were for reasons given  in  his  decision  dated  20
      December 2017.


17. Each of the appellants sought permission to appeal the decision of  the
    2015 Panel to the Upper Tribunal.  Upper Tribunal Judge Martin  granted
    permission to  appeal  in  a  decision  dated  18  January  2018.   The
    President of the Upper Tribunal and UTJ Dawson decided  on  2  November
    2018 that the proper construction of the grant  of  permission  by  UTJ
    Martin was entirely unrestricted, see Safi and  others  (permission  to
    appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388.


THE GROUNDS OF CHALLENGE.


18. KU is separately represented and we shall refer to  his  grounds  after
    setting out those relied on by the first eight appellants which are  as
    follows:-


         Ground 1


         Having been acquitted of committing the asserted crime of hijacking
         the aircraft,  it  is  argued  that  Article  1F(b)  is  manifestly
         inapplicable to the appellants.  It  is  contended  that  the  2015
         Panel erred by concentrating exclusively on the differing standards
         of proof in rejecting  the  appellants'  submission  based  on  the
         acquittal and inapplicability and by failing to consider adequately
         or at all the principal basis for applying exclusion under  Article
         1F(b) in the first place.  It is argued that the ground  raises  an
         important point of principle that has not been considered or tested
         in the higher courts.


         Ground 2


         In rejecting the appellants' submission that there were no  serious
         reasons for considering the offence to  have  been  committed,  the
         2015 Panel had misdirected itself in law by  applying  too  high  a
         standard to the duress test for the purposes of determining whether
         there were serious  reasons  for  considering  the  appellants  had
         committed a crime with the necessary mens rea by applying the  test
         for duress under international criminal  law  as  set  down  in  MT
         (Article 1F(a) - aiding and abetting) Zimbabwe  [2012]  UKUT  00015
         (IAC).  Further, and/or in the  alternative,  the  2015  Panel  had
         misdirected itself in law by erroneously conflating  the  issue  of
         "whether there was or may have been, as a matter  of  fact  and  as
         found to be the case by the  2004  Panel,  an  alternative  to  the
         hijack of the aeroplane as a means for  the  appellants  to  escape
         from the Taliban ... and the correct legal question of whether  the
         appellants could reasonably have  believed  that  their  only  safe
         means of escape was to do as they did".


         Ground 3


         With reference to  the  appellants'  political  opposition  to  the
         Taliban controlled government,  their  hijacking  of  the  aircraft
         fitted clearly within the meaning of a political crime as per  Lord
         Diplock's definition in R v  Governor  Pentonville,  exparte  Cheng
         [1973] AC 931 that was citied with approval by the House  of  Lords
         in T v Immigration Officer [1996] AC 742 when  directly  addressing
         Article 1F(b).  But for the 2015  Panel's  error  over  the  proper
         approach to duress, the Panel would and should have  concluded  the
         appellants' case fell squarely within "a political  crime"  as  per
         the position of the Polish seaman in R v  Governor  of  Brixton  ex
         parte Kolczynski & Others [1955] 1QB 540.


         Ground 4


         The appellants reserved their position on their submission that any
         criminal liability was expiated and inapt to exclude the appellants
         in the light of the judgment in AH (Algeria) v SSHD (No. 2)  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 1003.


19. At the hearing we granted the  appellants  permission  to  amend  their
    grounds.  They applied to do so after Mr Payne argued that they had not
    challenged the 2015 Panel's decision over the second limb to  the  test
    of whether a crime was political by reference to its remoteness.


20. The amendment was in the following terms (in relation to ground 3):-


         "In particular with reference to paragraph 47 in the  determination
         it is submitted that the [2015 Panel] erred in law by finding  that
         [a] there was insufficient political motive  and  [b]  for  finding
         that any actions taken brought them outside a  political  crime  by
         reference to remoteness and proportionality."


21. Mr Jacobs on behalf of KU adopted and sought the same amendment to  his
    grounds which we refer to below.


22. Mr Payne opposed the application with reference to its timing  (on  day
    3) and the significant prejudice to the Secretary of State  as  it  was
    not well articulated with  reference  to  the  second  limb  and  still
    unclear.


23. In deciding to permit the amendment we observed the length of time  the
    case had been running and that it was one in which the  representatives
    had been involved for at least a decade.  They were very familiar  with
    the facts and the legal issues.  We had heard argument on the  previous
    day in relation to the issue  of  remoteness  and  there  had  been  no
    intervention at that stage on the basis that  it  was  not  encompassed
    within ground 3.  Accordingly, Mr Payne was aware of the extent of  the
    appellants' challenge before  he  came  to  make  his  own  submissions
    towards the end of day 2.  The ground as initially pleaded brought into
    scope the correctness of the application of the test by the 2015 Panel.
     The amended grounds were in general terms but we were satisfied  that,
    when considered in the light of the arguments  raised  on  day  2,  the
    respondent knew well the case the appellants had advanced.  It was open
    to Mr Payne to launch an attack on the amended grounds  reflecting  the
    concerns expressed in this opposition, but they were not a  reason  not
    to grant.  It was in the interests of justice and having regard to  the
    overriding objective of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 that we considered it appropriate to accede to the application.


24. In  an  exchange  that  followed,  Mr  Jorro,  on  behalf  of  all  the
    appellants, confirmed that they were not challenging  the  findings  of
    the 2004 Panel and there was no need for further submissions  based  on
    the amended grounds.  Mr Payne was content to make his  submissions  on
    the amended grounds at the conclusion of his arguments which had opened
    with his concerns that the remoteness aspect had not been a  ground  of
    challenge on which permission had been granted.


KU


25. KU adopted and relied on the grounds of challenge  set  out  above  and
    specifically adds and develops the following points:-


         Ground 1


         The 2015 Panel erred in failing to apply a  purposive  approach  to
         the determination of the exclusion issue and failed to consider the
         position of the UNHCR set out in its note on the exclusion  clauses
         dated 30 May 1997.  Having been formally acquitted of all  criminal
         charges relating to the hijacking KU did not meet the  rational  of
         exclusion in that he is not a criminal who presents a danger to the
         security of the UK and therefore does not abuse  the  integrity  of
         the concept of asylum through recognition as a refugee.


         In addition, the 2015 Panel erred in applying the  obiter  comments
         of Blake J in AH.  The UNHCR view that the exclusion  clauses  must
         be restrictively interpreted and cautiously applied  were  endorsed
         by the Supreme Court in Al-Sirri.


         Ground 2


         Whilst  the  medical  expert  found  that  KU  was  aware  of   his
         involvement in the hijacking, his finding of a very  severe  duress
         amounted to a  material  issue  which  the  2015  Panel  failed  to
         consider properly or at all.  The  accepted  medical  evidence  was
         that KU had been severely tortured by the Taliban and suffered from
         severe trauma in that he saw no option other than going along  with
         the hijacking plan in order to  save  his  life.   The  2015  Panel
         therefore erred when finding that KU was not  acting  under  duress
         and failed to apply the correct test  and  failed  to  address  the
         medical evidence on this aspect.


         Ground 3


         The 2015 Panel made no finding  whether  KU's  involvement  in  the
         hijacking arose a from political persecution and therefore  outside
         the scope of Article 1F(b).  The hijack was  clearly  political  as
         opposed to criminal for the purposes of that provision.  The hijack
         was the means  by  which  KU  fled  persecution  arising  from  his
         political activity with the YIA.  There was  no  other  motivation.
         Fleeing from persecution  amounts  to  a  political  purpose  under
         Article 1F(b).


         Ground 4


         As with the other appellants, KU reserves his position on the issue
         of expiation in the light of AH (Algeria).


         Ground 5


         The 2015 Panel erred in failing to apply a discretion in KU's  case
         by reference to a passage from The  Refugee  in  International  Law
         (Third Edition) by Professor Goodwin-Gill and which was accompanied
         by an extract from page 176.


26. Finally, the 2015 Panel had erred in failing  to  reach  fact  specific
    findings in relation to KU whose appeal had come before  them  for  the
    first time and in respect of whom there  were  compelling  reasons  for
    applying the approach brought forward by Professor Goodwin-Gill.


MATTERS ARISING AT THE HEARING


27. The hearing took place over three days  and  we  are  grateful  to  the
    parties for their written submissions and  the  care  with  which  they
    advanced their respective cases.


28. In response to our query during Mr Seddon's submissions  on  the  first
    ground in which he referred to autrefois acquit  being  a  bar  to  any
    further prosecution we were provided in due  course  with  a  statement
    from Mark Summers QC who had represented the appellants  at  the  time.
    Our enquiry had come about  as  the  result  of  an  assertion  by  the
    appellants' solicitor to the 2004 Panel that no retrial was pursued  by
    the Crown because the appellants had largely  served  their  sentences.
    Neither the 2004 nor the 2015 Panels were given evidence on the  matter
    and accordingly any new evidence will only be relevant should we decide
    to set aside the decision of the 2015 Panel.


29. Similarly, we hold in abeyance the application under  r.15(2A)  by  the
    appellants to adduce new evidence.


30. We were provided with  versions  of  Home  Office  guidance:  Exclusion
    (Article 1F) and Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and  the
    European Asylum Support Office Judicial Analysis:  Exclusion:  Articles
    12 and 17.  No reliance was placed on this material.


LEGAL FRAMEWORK


31. Article 1F of the Refugee Convention provides:


         'F.  The provisions of this  Convention  shall  not  apply  to  any
             person with respect to whom  there  are  serious  reasons  for
             considering that:


             (a)  he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a
                  crime against humanity, as defined  in  the  international
                  instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of  such
                  crimes;


             (b)  he has committed a serious  non-political  crime  outside
                  the country of refuge  prior  to  his  admission  to  that
                  country as a refugee;


             (c)  he has been guilty of acts contrary to the  purposes  and
                  principles of the United Nations.'


32. Article 12 of the  Qualification  Directive  2004  provides  under  the
    heading exclusion:


         '1.  A third country national or a  stateless  person  is  excluded
             from being a refugee, if:


      a) he or she falls within the scope of  Article 1 D  of  the  Geneva
         Convention, relating to protection or  assistance  from  organs  or
         agencies of the United Nations other than the United Nations  High
         Commissioner for Refugees. When such protection or assistance  has
         ceased for any reason, without the position of such  persons  being
         definitely settled in  accordance  with  the  relevant  resolutions
         adopted by the  General  Assembly  of  the  United Nations,  these
         persons shall ipso facto  be  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  this
         Directive;


      b) he or she is recognised by the competent authorities of the country
         in which he or she has taken residence as  having  the  rights  and
         obligations which are attached to the possession of the nationality
         of that country; or rights and obligations equivalent to those.


         2.   A third country national or a  stateless  person  is  excluded
             from being a refugee  where  there  are  serious  reasons  for
             considering that:


             (a)  he or she has committed a  crime  against  peace,  a  war
                  crime, or a crime against  humanity,  as  defined  in  the
                  international instruments drawn up to  make  provision  in
                  respect of such crimes;


             (b)  he or she has committed  a  serious  non-political  crime
                  outside  the  country  of  refuge  prior  to  his  or  her
                  admission as a refugee; which means the time of issuing  a
                  residence permit based on the granting of refugee  status;
                  particularly cruel actions,  even  if  committed  with  an
                  allegedly  political  objective,  may  be  classified   as
                  serious non-political crimes;


             (c)  he or she  has  been  guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the
                  purposes and principles of the United Nations as  set  out
                  in the Preamble and Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the
                  United Nations.


         3.   Paragraph 2 applies to persons  who  instigate  or  otherwise
             participate in the commission of the crimes or acts  mentioned
             therein.'


33.  The  Refugee  or  Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006  provide  in  paragraph  7  under  the
    heading exclusion:


         '7.  (1) A person is not a refugee, if he falls within the scope of
                Article 1 D, 1E or 1F of the Geneva Convention.


            (2)   In the construction and application of Article  1F(b)  of
                the Geneva Convention:


                (a)    the reference to serious non-political crime includes
                    a particularly cruel action, even  if  it  is  committed
                    with an allegedly political objective;


                (b)    the reference to the crime  being  committed  outside
                    the country of  refuge  prior  to  his  admission  as  a
                    refugee shall be taken  to  mean  the  time  up  to  and
                    including the day on which a residence permit is issued.


            (3)   Article 1F(a) and (b)  of  the  Geneva  Convention  shall
                apply to a person who instigates or  otherwise  participates
                in the commission of the crimes or acts specified  in  those
                provisions.'





THE 2015 PANEL'S SURVEY OF THE FINDINGS BY THE 2004 PANEL


 1. The 2015 Panel took the findings of fact by the  2004  Panel  as  their
    starting point noting the agreement of the parties that  there  was  no
    need  to  displace  those  findings.   That  remains  the  case  today.
    Although KU was not a party to those proceedings, the 2015 Panel  noted
    the parties' agreement that he was in a similar position to  the  other
    appellants with regard to exclusion  as  he  was  in  relation  to  the
    assessment of risk on return.  Mr Jacobs's position is recorded at  [4]
    of the 2015 Panel's decision as follows:-


         "Mr Jacobs submitted on [KU's] behalf that although he was involved
         in a hijack in the sense that he boarded the plane and was aware of
         the intentions of the hijackers, he played a minimal  role  due  to
         trauma related ill-health on the flight.  In his  particular  case,
         exclusion under 1F(b) was not justified."


34. None of the appellants gave evidence before the 2015 Panel.   With  the
    exception of KU, all gave evidence in 2004.  The  2015  Panel  was  not
    persuaded to have any regard to  the  findings  including  the  adverse
    credibility findings by the Tribunal in 2009.


35. As we have observed above, the decision of 2004 Panel is a lengthy  and
    very detailed one.  The 2015 Panel surveyed the findings in relation to
    exclusion in various passages as follows:-


         "17. ... The 2004 Panel found that the appellants and their  family
             members could have attempted an alternative means of escape to
             a neighbouring country.  The 2004 Panel made a  clear  finding
             that there was not such an immediacy of danger  of  arrest  or
             lack of opportunity to move away from the Kabul area such that
             the appellants would have been left with no alternative to the
             hijack.  They found that the appellants could have  chosen  to
             travel to Pakistan and if they had  travelled  there,  it  was
             most unlikely that they would have experienced any  particular
             difficulties moving on from there to another destination.  The
             further they travelled away from Afghanistan and the  Peshawar
             area, the less likely  they  would  have  been  to  fall  into
             danger.  The  appellants  could  have  remained  elsewhere  in
             Pakistan or, having travelled from there, could  have  claimed
             asylum in another country.


         18.  ... There is nothing to displace the clear  findings  of  fact
             made by the 2004 Panel that there was  no  such  immediacy  of
             danger of arrest, or lack of opportunity  to  move  away  from
             Kabul.  We have taken into account the 2004  Panel's  findings
             that the appellants had ample access to finance  and  contacts
             with expertise, to assist in the planning  and  implementation
             of the  hijack.   They  had  access  to  military  skills  and
             weapons.  There was a prolonged period of preparation for  the
             hijack which involved the collection of weapons from  Pakistan
             and the gathering of family members in Kabul,  ready  for  the
             flight.  ...


         ...


         26.  ... The Panel found that it was evident that hijacking poses a
             grave threat to the life and safety of innocent passengers and
             crew and it is for that reason that there is  such  opprobrium
             attached to acts of hijacking.  The Panel found that hijacking
             is, by its very nature, serious and, overall, that  a  serious
             crime was committed.


         ...


         28.  ... Important factors leading us to conclude  that  the  crime
             was a serious one  are  the  extent  of  the  prior  planning,
             involving as it did trips to Pakistan to purchase weapons, the
             threats and violence towards the crew and the  passengers  and
             the fact that there was clearly more than one manifestation of
             the armed seizure and control of  the  aircraft,  the  journey
             from Kabul to London consisting as it did  of  more  than  one
             landing  and  take-off.   There  was   significant   physical,
             psychological and emotional harm to others  on  the  aeroplane
             and, as we make clear below, we agree with  the  2004  Panel's
             conclusion that the hijacking was not a last  and  unavoidable
             recourse to escape danger.


         ...


         30.  ... The individual accounts  which  emerged  in  evidence  [in
             2004] reveal the extent of the planning of the hijack and  two
             of the appellants travelled to Pakistan to  purchase  weapons.
             In summary, the 2004  Panel  found  that  the  appellants  had
             alternative means available to them other than  hijacking  the
             Ariana aircraft and that  travel  to  Pakistan  (including  to
             Peshawar) to escape Afghanistan  was  possible,  although  not
             free from risk ...


         ...


         39.  The 2004 Panel found as a fact that the appellants had time to
             consider their options.  Between  them,  they  had  skills  in
             military and commando training, military intelligence, the use
             of  weapons,  communications   surveillance   and   undercover
             surveillance (paragraph 71 of the determination).   They  were
             able to purchase guns and grenades in advance of  the  hijack.
             The Panel found that there was a large measure of support  for
             the  view  that  the  funds  and  weapons  available  to   the
             appellants  could  have  been  used  to  effect  escape   from
             Afghanistan  by  means  other  than  hijacking  a  plane.   In
             relation to one appellant, the Panel found that if the Taliban
             were really looking to arrest him, it  would  have  been  more
             dangerous to go to the  airport  at  Kabul  rather  than  slip
             across the border into Pakistan.


         40.  ... Having left Afghanistan, the plane landed in Tashkent  and
             then again in Moscow.  On each occasion, it was hijacked again
             to the next destination and although there was  a  possibility
             of surrendering  to  the  authorities  on  each  landing,  the
             appellants chose not to  do  so  (paragraph  84  of  the  2004
             Panel's  determination).   In  considering  whether  a  viable
             alternative to hijacking existed the Panel took  into  account
             the extensive business links outside Afghanistan that a number
             of the appellants had in the period before  the  hijack.   The
             Panel  found  that  the  appellants  were   resourceful   with
             substantial links to Pakistan, access to large sums of  money,
             the wherewithal to purchase weapons and the ability  to  bribe
             at least one higher ranking official.


         41.  The 2004 Panel accepted that the appellants would  have  faced
             challenges in travelling to a neighbouring  country  and  that
             there was a  danger  that  they  would  have  been  found  and
             thereafter arrested. Accepting that the Taliban  or  at  least
             those members to whom the arrest warrant had been  distributed
             would have  been  aware  that  some  of  the  appellants  were
             "wanted", the 2004 Panel rejected the  contention  that  there
             was effectively a ring  round  Kabul  so  that  there  was  no
             alternative to leaving by means of  a  hijack.   Many  of  the
             appellants, in giving evidence showed that they were  able  to
             move around Afghanistan at a time when they were wanted by the
             authorities and therefore in danger.   The  2004  Panel  noted
             that the borders of Afghanistan were porous and found that the
             appellants could have attempted an alternative means of escape
             to a neighbouring country.  There were routes  into  Pakistan,
             notwithstanding a strong Taliban and radical Islamic  movement
             presence there.  If the appellants crossed the border, it  was
             most unlikely that they would  have  experienced  any  further
             difficulties moving on, further away from Afghanistan and  the
             Peshawar area.   They  could  have  remained  in  Pakistan  or
             travelled onto another country to claim asylum and they  could
             have claimed asylum in Tashkent or in Moscow."


THE 2015 PANEL SYNOPSIS OF THE SENTENCING REMARKS BY SIR EDWIN JOWITT


36. Specifically in respect of Sir Edwin Jowitt's sentencing  remarks,  the
    2015 Panel observed at [35] and [36]:-


         "35. ... Sir Edwin Jowitt's sentencing remarks were, of course made
             entirely in the context of the criminal trial, and included  a
             clear finding that he had not heard the whole truth about  the
             decision to hijack from the three defendants who gave evidence
             and  those  defendants  lied  in  parts  of  their   evidence.
             Importantly, Sir Edwin Jowitt sentenced on the basis that  the
             planning of the hijack took  at  least  some  days.   This  is
             consistent with the 2004  Panel's  assessment,  regarding  the
             extent of the prior planning and  the  sophistication  of  the
             arrangements put in place before the hijack began.


         36.  Sir Edwin Jowitt sentenced on the basis that it had  not  been
             proved that the hijack was criminal from the outset.   He  was
             sure that it became criminal at the latest from the  time  the
             aircraft took off from Moscow, as those who  wished  to  leave
             were not given the opportunity to do  so.   He  accepted  that
             there was a risk of the identities of the defendants  becoming
             known to the Taliban, as members of the  YIA  with  a  further
             risk of arrest and torture or worse.  As Mr Payne   submitted,
             Sir Edwin Jowitt was clear that the hijack caused  great  fear
             and anxiety to those who shared no cause  with  the  hijackers
             and their family members.  There were about 100 passengers and
             the flight crew in this category.  They were  all  taken  from
             Moscow onto Stansted and kept for more than 70 hours save  for
             a handful released on arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.   This
             displayed a callous disregard for the interests, anxieties and
             fears for the passengers and crew.   The  hijackers  patrolled
             the isle of the aircraft armed with handguns and knives.   Sir
             Edwin Jowitt accepted  the  [S]  brothers  wished  to  make  a
             political point about conditions in Afghanistan  and  Pakistan
             but found that this did not excuse the continuing detention of
             the passengers, who had nothing to do with the YIA  and  their
             families.  He found that the threats made to  those  on  board
             must have been terrifying  to  a  significant  number  of  the
             passengers although he accepted that the hijackers had no wish
             or intention to harm them.  The flight crew  escaped  at  some
             point and this resulted in violence inflicted by the hijackers
             on the stewards."


2015 PANEL FINDINGS IN RELATION TO KU


37. The 2015 Panel explained how it took into account the medical  evidence
    in particular that of Dr Silver who provided reports in 2001  and  2010
    and who also reviewed KU's circumstances in 2002.  The  Panel  observed
    at [50] and [51]:-


         "50. ... The conclusion he reached in the  most  recent  report  is
             that [KU] was suffering from a mental disorder at the time  of
             hijacking,  which  caused  severe  distress,  incapacity   and
             disability.  On the other hand, Dr Silver did not believe that
             the  psychiatric  disorder   itself,   post-traumatic   stress
             disorder affected [KU's] culpability and he  did  not  believe
             that [KU] was acting in effect due  to  automatism.   Although
             too unwell to participate to the extent  that  his  colleagues
             were able to, [KU] knew what he was doing when he boarded  the
             aeroplane in order to hijack it.


         51.  We find that the evidence shows that [KU] was able to  play  a
             substantial role of  the  planning  and  organisation  of  the
             hijack including taking part in  collection  of  weapons  from
             Pakistan.  As Mr  Payne  submitted  [KU]  was  able  to  leave
             Afghanistan for this purpose and return, at a time when he was
             by his own account taking medicines to control his symptoms."

DID THE 2015 PANEL ERR IN LAW?

  38. The parties relied  extensively  on  case  law  in  support  of  their
      submissions as to the correct approach in  relation  to  each  of  the
      issues raised in each ground.  Our task at this  stage  is  to  decide
      whether the decision of the  2015  Panel  is  legally  sustainable  by
      reference to the grounds of challenge set  out  above  and  which,  in
      summary, are the effect of the acquittal for the appellants (including
      KU),  on  whether  there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering  the
      appellants committed a  serious  non-political  crime,  the  issue  of
      duress and finally (since we are bound to dismiss the appeals  on  the
      issue of expiation) on  whether  the  hijacking  was  a  non-political
      crime.  We need in addition to specifically  consider  the  discretion
      point discreetly raised for KU.  There is unsurprisingly no dispute as
      to the 2015 Panel's conclusion that the  hijacking  was  serious.   We
      begin our analysis of each of  the  grounds  with  a  summary  of  the
      authorities followed by a summary of the submissions  before  reaching
      our  conclusions.   Some  of  the  authorities  overlap  the   grounds
      particularly those where the courts considered the overall purpose  of
      1F(b).  To the extent that KU warrants  different  treatment  we  have
      done so.


THE EFFECT OF THE ACQUITTAL ON ARTICLE 1F(b).


 1. The starting point  is  what  is  understood  by  Article  1F(b).   The
    interpretation of international treaties is governed by  Art  31(1)  of
    the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.  This requires good faith
    interpretation in accordance with the "ordinary meaning" of a treaties'
    terms, the context, and the object and  its  purpose  as  the  starting
    point.


39. In R v Asfaw (Appellant) [2008] UKHL 31, a case concerning  a  decision
    to prosecute an individual with an offence that  was  not  included  in
    s.31(3) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, but which  clearly  and
    unambiguously fell  into  the  ambit  of  Article  31  of  the  Refugee
    Convention (dealing with the prohibition of penalties for illegal entry
    by refugees), the House of Lords, adopted a construction of Article  31
    that was consistent  with  the  humanitarian  purpose  of  the  Refugee
    Convention (paras 26).  This purposive construction has  been  recently
    re-articulated in F v M [2017] EWHC 949 (Fam), at para 32.


40. Al-Sirri (FC) and DD (Afghanistan)  (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2012] UKSC 54 concerned  an
    Egyptian whom the SSHD  excluded  from  the  Refugee  Convention  under
    1F(c).  The exclusion was  based  on  several  matters,  including  his
    alleged  participation  in  a  conspiracy  to  murder  a  military  and
    political leader, although the charges in respect of which he had  been
    indicted in the UK were dismissed by the Crown Court on the ground that
    the evidence would be insufficient for a jury to properly convict.


41.  The  Supreme  Court  accepted  that  1F(c)   should   be   interpreted
    restrictively and applied with caution (at [16]  &  [75]).   The  Court
    also held that the guidance given by  the  UNHCR,  while  not  binding,
    should be accorded considerable weight in light of  the  obligation  of
    Member States under Article 35 of the Convention to facilitate its duty
    of supervising the application of the provisions of the Convention (see
    R v Asfaw [2008] AC 1061, per Lord Bingham at para 13, and R v Uxbridge
    Magistrates' Court, Ex p Adimi [2001] QB 667, 678).  Moreover, in  R  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Adan [2001]  2  AC
    477,  520,  Lord  Steyn  described  UNHCR   guidance   concerning   the
    application of  the  Refugee  Convention  as  having  "high  persuasive
    authority".  The guidance in the  Handbook  however  remains  advisory.
    While assistance may be derived from the Handbook, it is not a lawgiver
    or a source of law (the view of the Court of Appeal in AH  (Algeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department & Anor [2015] EWCA Civ 1003,
    at [12] & [13]).


42. The Supreme Court in Al-Sirri considered the issue of the  standard  of
    proof, what was meant by  "serious  reasons  for  considering"  that  a
    person committed the crimes in question.  The Court concluded  that  it
    was not appropriate to apply the criminal standard of proof.  The Court
    reached the following conclusions at [75]), in  light  of  the  UNHCR's
    view that the Refugee Convention must be restrictively interpreted  and
    cautiously applied:


         "(1) "Serious reasons" is stronger than "reasonable grounds".


         (2)  The evidence from which those  reasons  are  derived  must  be
             "clear and credible" or "strong".


         (3)  "Considering" is stronger than "suspecting". In our view it is
             also stronger than "believing".  It  requires  the  considered
             judgment of the decision-maker.


         (4)  The decision-maker need not  be  satisfied  beyond  reasonable
             doubt or to the standard required in criminal law.


         (5)  It is unnecessary to import our domestic  standards  of  proof
             into the question. The circumstances of  refugee  claims,  and
             the  nature  of  the  evidence  available,  are  so  variable.
             However, if the decision-maker is satisfied that  it  is  more
             likely than not that  the  applicant  has  not  committed  the
             crimes in question or has not been guilty of acts contrary  to
             the purposes and principles  of  the  United  Nations,  it  is
             difficult to see  how  there  could  be  serious  reasons  for
             considering that he had done so. The reality is that there are
             unlikely to be sufficiently serious  reasons  for  considering
             the applicant to be guilty unless the  decision-maker  can  be
             satisfied on the balance of probabilities that he is. But  the
             task of the decision-maker  is  to  apply  the  words  of  the
             Convention (and the Directive) in the particular case."


43. In AH (Article 1F(b) - 'serious') Algeria [2013] UKUT 00382  (IAC)  the
    appellant, an Algerian, was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  two  years'
    imprisonment in France in respect of an offence of participation  in  a
    criminal association with a terrorist enterprise (the offence  involved
    his close contact  with  others  implicated  in  terrorist  attacks  in
    France, although he was also convicted of a lesser charge of possession
    of false ID documents).  After the appellant claimed asylum in  the  UK
    the SSHD considered that he was excluded from  the  Refugee  Convention
    under Art F1(b).  The central issue  was  whether  his  offence  was  a
    serious  one.   In  considering  this  question,  the  Upper   Tribunal
    considered the purpose of 1F(b) and at [85], the Upper Tribunal stated,




         "It seems clear that the exclusion clause was intended to have  two
         purposes: first, the prevention of abuse of the  asylum  system  by
         undermining extradition law or the mutual interest  amongst  states
         in prosecuting serious offenders.  This first reason  can  have  no
         purchase where the offence has been  prosecuted  and  the  offender
         served his punishment.  The second is to  exclude  from  protection
         those who have demonstrated by their conduct they are not worthy of
         it. It is this purpose that is relevant here."


    The Upper Tribunal therefore  recognised  a  dual  purpose  in  Article
    1F(b).


 1. At [97] The Tribunal  made  obiter  remarks  when  considering  whether
    events subsequent to the acts that constituted the basis for  exclusion
    were relevant when considering whether exclusion was justified:


         "The examination of seriousness should be directed at the  criminal
         acts when they were committed, although events in  the  supervening
         passage of time may be relevant to whether exclusion is  justified:
         a  formal  pardon,  or  subsequent  acquittal,   or   other   event
         illuminating the nature of the activity may  be  relevant  to  this
         assessment.  Despite  suggestions  to  the  contrary  by  respected
         commentators, it does not appear to be the case that service of the
         sentence, or indeed a final acquittal, brings  the  application  of
         the exclusion clause to an end. It may be that the passage of  time
         may serve to remove any basis for exclusion of protection but if so
         we have no basis for deciding how long a period is appropriate  and
         in reality a claimant  who  has  protection  against  expulsion  is
         likely to be eligible for  settlement  on  long  residence  grounds
         before being able to expiate culpability  sufficiently  to  acquire
         refugee status."


44. In Febles v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) [2014] SCC
    68 Mr Febles, a Cuban national, was admitted to the USA  as  a  refugee
    from Cuba.  Whilst in the USA he  was  convicted  and  served  time  in
    prison for two assaults.  His refugee status was revoked in the USA and
    he fled to Canada.  He  maintained  that  Art  1F(b)  was  confined  to
    fugitives from justice and,  as  he  had  already  been  convicted  and
    jailed, he was not a fugitive.  The Supreme Court (SCC)  considered  in
    detail authorities from various jurisdictions and from academic writers
    and held, by a majority,  that  the  ordinary  meaning  of  1F(b),  its
    context when considered with  1F(a)  and  1F(c),  and  the  object  and
    purposes of the Refugee Convention, did not support the contention that
    1F(b) was confined to fugitives.  A majority of the SCC rejected obiter
    dicta to the contrary in Canada (Attorney  General)  v  Ward  [1993]  2
    S.C.R. 689 and Pushpanathan  v  Canada  (Minister  of  Citizenship  and
    Immigration) [1998] 1 SCR 982.


45. The SCC considered that post-crime events, such  as  rehabilitation  or
    expiation, were not relevant.  The  Refugee  Convention  had  the  twin
    purposes of needing to  ensure  humane  treatment  of  the  victims  of
    oppression on the one  hand,  and  the  wish  of  sovereign  states  to
    maintain control over those seeking entry to  their  territory  on  the
    other.  The SCC concluded that Article 1F(b) serves one main purpose  -
    to exclude persons who have committed a serious crime.


         "This exclusion is central to the balance  the  Refugee  Convention
         strikes between helping victims of oppression by allowing  them  to
         start new lives in other countries and protecting the interests  of
         receiving countries.  Article  1F(b)  is  not  directed  solely  at
         fugitives and neither is it  directed  solely  at  some  subset  of
         serious criminals who are undeserving at the time  of  the  refugee
         application.  Rather, in excluding all claimants who have committed
         serious  non-political  crimes,   Article   1F(b)   expresses   the
         contracting states' agreement that such persons by definition would
         be undeserving of refugee protection by  reason  of  their  serious
         criminality" (para 35).


 2. In reaching its decision, the SCC relied on a number of decisions  from
    different jurisdictions, including the Upper Tribunal  decision  in  AH
    (Algeria) and the House of Lords decision in T v SSHD [1996] 2 All E.R.
    865, which discussed the purpose of Article 1F generally and  indicated
    that the purpose of Article 1F(b)  was  not  limited  to  exclusion  of
    fugitives, but that it recognised that there were those whose  criminal
    habits made it unreasonable for them to be forced on to a  host  nation
    against its will. The SCC also considered Germany v B and D C-57/09, C-
    101/09, [2010] ECR I-10979, a case  concerning  the  interpretation  of
    Article 12 (2)(b) &  (c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  (Directive
    2004/83/EC) involving two Turkish nationals who had  been  involved  in
    proscribed  terrorist  organisations  prior  to  their  admittance   to
    Germany.


 3. The CJEU concluded in B and D  that  the  grounds  for  exclusion  were
    intended as a penalty for acts committed in  the  past,  and  that  the
    relevant  grounds  for  exclusion  were  introduced  with  the  aim  of
    excluding  from  refugee  protection  persons  who  are  deemed  to  be
    underserving of  the  protection  which  that  status  entails  and  of
    preventing that status from enabling those who have  committed  certain
    serious crimes to escape criminal liability.  In its conclusion the SCC
    stated, at para 60,


         "Article 1F(b) excludes anyone who has ever committed a serious non-
         political  crime  outside  the  country  of  refuge  prior  to  his
         admission to that country as a refugee.   Its  application  is  not
         limited to fugitives, and neither is the seriousness of  the  crime
         to be balanced against factors extraneous  to  the  crime  such  as
         present  or  future  danger  to  the  host  society  or  post-crime
         rehabilitation or expiation."


 2. As was the case before us, the SCC considered its earlier decisions  in
    Ward and Puspanathan and the contribution by Professor Hathaway to  the
    interpretation of Article  1F(b)  (being  confined  to  fugitives  from
    justice).  The Court also considered the  shift  by  Professor  Goodwin
    Gill in his position from 1996 (The Refugee in International Law -  2nd
    Ed 1996- "ordinary  criminals...extraditable  by  treaty)  to  the  3rd
    edition in 2017 ("fugitives from justice  ...  appears  to  be  on  the
    wain").  McLachlin CJ began his review of case law with this conclusion
    at [43],


         "Courts around the world have suggested various rationales for  the
         inclusion of Article 1F(b)  in  the  Refugee  Convention  and  have
         interpreted  the  provision   in   different   ways.    While   the
         jurisprudence is inconclusive as to the precise scope  and  all  of
         the rationales, there  is  agreement  that  Article  1F(b)  is  not
         limited to fugitives.  After reviewing the foreign jurisprudence, I
         conclude that the interpretation  adopted  by  the  German  Federal
         Administrative Court  and  the  European  Court  of  Justice,  that
         Article 1F(b)  excludes  anyone  who  has  previously  committed  a
         serious non-political crime, is the most consistent with  both  the
         prevailing trend in the case law and the text of the provision."


 3. With respect we agree with  the  reasoning  of  the  SCC  and  are  not
    persuaded that Professor Hathaway is correct in his interpretation that
    Article 1F(b) is confined to fugitives from justice and includes  those
    who have been convicted and  in  certain  cases  those  who  have  been
    acquitted.  The UNHCR has published a Background Note on Application of
    the Exclusion Clauses and Guidelines have been provided  by  the  UNHCR
    Executive Committee (No 82(XLVIII) 1997).  These set out the  rationale
    for exclusion under 1F.  With relevance to 1F(b) the objective is  that
    the refugee framework should not stand in the way of serious  criminals
    facing justice.  The exclusion clauses should be  applied  scrupulously
    to protect the Convention's integrity and to prevent abuse.


 4. The UNHCR Handbook raises the question at [159]  whether  hijacking  to
    escape from persecution constitutes a non-political crime and at  [160]
    the alternatives given to Contracting States of extradition (which  was
    not available in this case) or instituting proceedings domestically (as
    if fact happened).  [161] concludes  with  the  observation  that  "the
    question of exclusion under Article  1F(b)  of  an  applicant  who  has
    committed an unlawful seizure of an  aircraft  will  also  have  to  be
    carefully examined in each individual case."


 5. The submissions from Mr Seddon under this heading, supplemented  by  Mr
    Jorro on behalf of the eight appellants can be summarised as follows:


      a) When a conviction is quashed in the Court  of  Appeal  without  any
         order for retrial, with reference to  Archbold  at  4-195  and  the
         Criminal Appeal Act 1968 s.2(3),  an  appellant  is  "in  the  same
         position for all purposes as if he had  actually  been  acquitted":
         per Lord Reading CJ in R v  Barron  10  Cr.App.R.  81  at  88.  The
         submissions made to the 2015 Panel were correct as a matter of law.


      b) Article  1F  falls  to  be  restrictively  and  cautiously  applied
         supported by the authorities above.


      c) The views of UNHCR are to be given "considerable weight": Al-Sirri.


      d) The 'extradition' based rationale for  1F(b)  is  apparent  in  its
         temporal and geographic restriction when compared  with  1F(a)  and
         (c) consistent with the Universal Declaration of Human  Rights  and
         with the travaux preparatoires to the Refugee Convention.


      e) Criminal liability for the hijacking was  justiciable  outside  and
         within the UK given that the alleged  offence  covered  the  period
         from the taking of the aircraft in Kabul, a scenario engaged in the
         Handbook.


      f) Although it was accepted that exclusion might still apply to  those
         who have been  convicted  of  a  serious  crime  and  served  their
         sentence, the appellants cannot be regarded as "serious  criminals"
         because the legal process had led to an outcome that they were  not
         guilty. As a consequence, the  institution  and  integrity  of  the
         Convention is neither undermined or abused.


      g) The 2004 Panel determination did not provide a basis for  exclusion
         and its passages from Goodwin- Gill do not  address  the  situation
         where a criminal process has been discharged  with  no  finding  of
         guilt.


      h) Although in most exclusion cases, the nature of the evidence  would
         render it impractical for the receiving state to be  able  only  to
         exclude where a criminal prosecution could  be  brought,  here,  it
         would be contrary to the principle of a  restrictive  and  cautious
         application of Article 1F where exclusion was considered  (applying
         the lower standard of proof) on the basis  of  a  crime  for  which
         there had been an acquittal. Equal  treatment  requires  those  who
         have been acquitted to be treated the same as those  who  have  not
         committed an offence.


      i) The burden was on the Secretary of State to justify exclusion where
         there has been an acquittal. A restrictive approach required a halt
         to exclusion in the light of the acquittal.


 6. Mr Jacobs reminds us in his  submissions  that  KU  had  been  formally
    acquitted of all charges as the Crown had elected to offer no  evidence
    against him.  He was involved in the preparation for the hijacking  and
    was aware of the intentions of the group when he boarded but had become
    unwell and the medical evidence established that he was suffering  from
    a mental disorder at the time of hijacking.


 7. He emphasised that the absence of any  authority  for  the  proposition
    that exclusion could still apply where there had been an acquittal  and
    exclusion would be  inconsistent  with  the  restrictive  and  cautious
    approach the Secretary of State was  required  to  take  and  with  the
    principles in Al-Siri.  KU has received an absolute acquittal and there
    had been no findings made against him.  The 2015  panel  had  erred  in
    relying on Blake J's obiter observations in AH;  there  was  never  any
    issue before the tribunal as to the  approach  to  be  adopted  towards
    1F(b) in AH which was concerned with 1F(c).


 8. Mr Jacobs argued that the facts in Al-Sirri were  very  different.   He
    had been acquitted in the central criminal court on an  indictment  for
    the murder but the charge had been dismissed  on  the  basis  that  the
    evidence would not be sufficient for the jury to properly convict.   In
    the absence of that conviction the Secretary of State chose to  proceed
    under 1F(c).  There was no consideration in the case of  whether  1F(b)
    applied.


 9. The 2015 Panel had erred in relying on the  passage  from  Al-Sirri  at
    [75] of the judgment as authority for the proposition that an acquittal
    does not prevent the application of 1F(b); the issue was  never  before
    the Supreme Court.


10. The 2015 Panel had failed to apply the requisite purposive approach  to
    its determination of the exclusion issue: AH (Algeria) and  had  failed
    to consider the UNHCR position.


11. Mr Payne's written submissions on  the  issue  of  the  effect  of  the
    acquittal addressed the object of 1F(b) with reference to Febles  which
    considered the intervention by UNHCR.  He argues  that  appellants  had
    repeated arguments that had been considered and rejected  by  the  2004
    and  2015  Panels  without  engaging  with   the   reasoning   in   the
    determinations.  The appellants  had  failed  to  refer  either  to  AH
    (Algeria) or Febles.  There was no  engagement  with  the  findings  in
    those cases that 1F(b) was not extradition based and/or  has  the  sole
    purpose of ensuring that refugee claimants  are  held  accountable  for
    their past conduct.


12. The appeal against conviction in the Court of Appeal was allowed due to
    a misdirection and the Court commented  on  the  seriousness  of  their
    actions and the force of the suggestion that the misdirection  was  not
    material in relation to the hijacking  in  Moscow  and  Stansted.   The
    decision not to prosecute subsequent to the Court  of  Appeal  decision
    reflected the fact that they had largely served their sentences.


13. Although it was correct to say that they had not been convicted, it  is
    clear that there was compelling evidence to suggest that the appellants
    had committed serious crimes.  At no stage did their evidence result in
    an acquittal.  Even if they had been  acquitted  this  would  not  have
    prevented application of 1F(b) which does not require a conviction,  an
    acquittal can  be  for  procedural  reasons  and  there  are  different
    standards of  proof  between  criminal  proceedings  and  exclusion  as
    recognised by Lady Hale in Al-Sirri.  The decision not to prosecute  KU
    had nothing to do with the strength of  evidence  against  him  but  it
    reflected an assessment that he was not fit to stand trial.   The  2015
    Panel had given compelling reasons why leading up to the  hijacking  he
    had aided and abetted the commission of a serious crime.


14. In his oral submissions, Mr Payne engaged with  a  point  that  we  had
    raised during the appellants' submissions with regard to the  mandatory
    nature of the provisions in 1F reflected in the Qualification Directive
    and the 2006 Regulations.  He argued that the decision whether  someone
    was entitled to be recognised as a refugee remained a  matter  for  the
    Secretary of State.  In determining whether exclusion was  appropriate,
    it was irrelevant that someone had finished  serving  a  sentence.   Mr
    Payne referred to the mandatory provisions of 1F and the absence of any
    mention in 1F(b) of any reference to whether an acquittal or conviction
    was determinative of an application for protection.  If it is  accepted
    that there is no requirement for a conviction in 1F(a) and (c) or there
    is no bar to (a) and (c) being engaged if there is an acquittal,  there
    was no reason why an acquittal should be a bar to  (b).   He  contended
    that the appellants had sought to extend and rewrite the words of 1F(b)
    in  a  manner  inconsistent  with  its  mandatory   nature.    It   was
    inappropriate to  have  criminal  proceedings  being  determinative  of
    refugee proceedings in reliance on M.  It was clear from  a  consistent
    line of cases (being AH and Febles) that there is  a  dual  purpose  to
    1F(b) and that it was not confined as contended by  the  appellants  to
    extradition principles but included consideration  of  whether  someone
    was entitled to refugee protection for which there did not need to be a
    conviction.


15. Mr Payne also argued that it was clear that  there  may  be  compelling
    reasons for applying 1F(b) even where there has been an acquittal given
    the wide variety of reasons for such  a  result  which  ranged  from  a
    finding by the jury to technical grounds such as  non-attendance  of  a
    witness.  There were very  different  rules  of  evidence  in  criminal
    proceedings.


16. By way of reply, Mr Jorro with Mr Seddon submitted  that  there  was  a
    clear distinguishing feature between a person who has committed a crime
    and where a person has been  convicted  or  acquitted  of  crime.   The
    proper place for determining whether someone has committed a  crime  is
    the criminal court.  Febles dealt with a person  convicted  in  another
    country and the observations in B and D and AH were  not  part  of  the
    ratios in those decisions. There was no binding authority that a person
    convicted can be excluded. The use of the lower standard as referred to
    in AH was unprincipled and inconsistent with the restrictive  approach.
    Al-Sirri was not such an example as the Secretary of State  has  chosen
    to rely on 1F(c).


17. Mr  Jacobs  added  that  the  Laws  LJ  in  AH  had  not  endorsed  the
    observations by Blake J which had been referenced in Febles.  As to his
    fourth ground relating to  discretion,  courts  must  be  able  to  act
    judicially and should not be overly restrictive.


18. Both sides argued that the absence of authorities supports the strength
    of their respective positions.  By way  of  conclusion,  we  accept  Mr
    Payne's  submission  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  a   positive
    obligation to consider exclusion in relation to each of  the  limbs  of
    Article 1F.  That obligation is expressed also in  Article  12  of  the
    Qualification Directive and in paragraph  7  of  the  2006  Regulations
    transposing the  Directive.   Applying  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the
    Convention's terms, exclusion is a mandatory requirement where  someone
    has committed a serious non-political  crime  outside  the  country  of
    refuge prior to admission as  a  refugee.   We  also  accept  that  the
    decision-maker on whether someone  is  in  need  of  protection  or  is
    excluded is the Secretary of State.  As observed by Hayden  J  in  F  &
    Others v SSHD [2018] 2 WLR 178 at [27]:


         "In the UK, in  compliance  with  this  framework  of  requirements
         Parliament has, through the immigration rules (HC  395),  appointed
         the Secretary of State for the Home Department  as  the  designated
         single 'determining authority'.  As such it is the SSHD who is  the
         sole responsibility for investigating and  determining  claims  for
         international protection. ... For the  sake  of  completeness,  the
         Immigration Rules are made pursuant to  the  Immigration  Act  1971
         ('the 1971 Act').  Accordingly and  given  that  these  powers  are
         rooted within this statutory framework, the  SSHD  submits,  and  I
         agree, that the grant of asylum  is  not  made  pursuant  to  Royal
         Prerogative but reflects and exercise of statutory  authority.   No
         party has sought at this hearing, to argue to the  contrary.   This
         discrete question has, to my mind now been comprehensively resolved
         by the Supreme Court: Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32.


         ..."


19. Further at [33] Hayden J observed:


         "I agree with Mr Payne's analysis, it follows, from the above  that
         the governmental, administrative, judicial bodies of Member  States
         are required to adopt an  approach  to  those  seeking  or  granted
         asylum that furthers  the  objectives  of  the  Convention,  to  do
         otherwise would frustrate its primary purpose, ..."


20. It is unarguable as a matter of law that  the  first  eight  appellants
    have been acquitted of the five counts on which they were charged.   In
    these proceedings we are concerned only with the  first  count  in  the
    light of the geographical restriction in Article 1F(b) which relates to
    the hijacking from its inception and  as  a  continuing  offence  until
    arrival within the territory of the United Kingdom.


21. Longmore LJ describes count 1 in  paragraph  [2]  of  his  judgment  as
    follows:


         "Count 1 charged the appellants with hijacking the aircraft,  using
         various weapons to threaten those on board and  making  threats  to
         blow it up, and covered the  period  from  taking  over  the  plane
         shortly after take-off, to the time of its landing at Stansted."


    As he observed counts 2 to 5 arose  out  of  events  after  landing  at
    Stansted.


22. The Court of Appeal was satisfied that there was a misdirection by  the
    trial judge  in  the  case  which  Longmore  LJ  would  not  agree  was
    inconsequential.  As explained at [29] of his judgment:


         "For these reasons, we were satisfied that there was a misdirection
         in this case.  Mr Houlder submitted that the misdirection  did  not
         matter because the Crown always accepted that, if  the  defendants'
         evidence were believed, there was a sufficient threat  in  fact  to
         enable them to raise the defence of duress.  We cannot  agree  that
         the misdirection was inconsequential in that  sense.   First,  once
         the ruling had been made at a  comparatively  early  stage  of  the
         trial on 26th October, before the close of  the  prosecution  case,
         the belief of the defendants, if the jury were sure that there  was
         no threat, became legally irrelevant.  The jury may  have  rejected
         the evidence, say, about the list of 35 named, but were never  able
         to take the defendants' actual fear into  account.   Secondly,  the
         Crown always put their case of  hijacking  on  two  bases  (a)  the
         hijacking of the aircraft in Afghanistan and (b)  the  continuation
         of the hijacking in Moscow.  The Crown never  accepted  that  there
         were threats in fact in Moscow but  the  defendants  asserted  that
         they believed they would be sent back to their death in Afghanistan
         (directly or via Pakistan) by the Moscow authorities and also  that
         they believed that, if they allowed the passengers  to  leave,  the
         authorities would storm the plane.  That  was  evidence  which  the
         jury was unable to take into account, if again, if they  were  sure
         there was no threat.  We were informed by  counsel  that,  when  it
         came to sentencing, the judge observed that he could  not  be  sure
         that the defence of duress had not succeeded  in  relation  to  the
         initial hijacking.  The  5  year  sentence  imposed  by  the  judge
         reflected, therefore, what  happened  in  Moscow  rather  than  the
         original hijacking."


23. Longmore LJ however also observed in his concluding remarks at [33]  as
    follows:


         "In the light of some of the newspaper comments on the announcement
         of our decision, we think it right to add that  we  do  not  for  a
         moment accept that the success of this  appeal  is  a  charter  for
         future hijackers.  The only reason why this appeal has succeeded is
         that there was a misdirection in relation to the law  as  explained
         to the jury.  As earlier jury was given a direction  that,  in  one
         respect may have been too  generous  to  the  defendants,  and  was
         unable to agree.  We have every confidence that future juries given
         a correct direction, in accordance with the law  set  out  in  R  v
         Graham in 1982, will convict in appropriate cases and acquit, if it
         is right to do so."


24. KU was acquitted on all five counts as a consequence of the  Crown  not
    offering evidence.  It is not in dispute that this was because  he  was
    not fit to enter a plea.


25. The established authorities have  endorsed  the  UNHCR  view  that  the
    Refugee Convention must be  restrictively  interpreted  and  cautiously
    applied as explained in Al-Sirri.


26. The appellants' principal point is that their acquittals, by  taking  a
    cautious and restrictive approach to the exclusion,  meant  that  there
    were no longer serious reasons for considering  they  had  committed  a
    serious non-political crime.


27. In our judgment the Supreme Court in Febles correctly  interpreted  the
    purpose  behind  Article  1F(b)  having  had  regard  to  the   travoux
    preparatoires and the authorities including the CJEU in B  and  D.   As
    explained by the court at [35]:


         "I cannot accept the arguments of Mr Febles and the  UNHCR  on  the
         purposes of Article 1F(b).  I conclude that  Article  1F(b)  serves
         one main purpose - to exclude persons who have committed a  serious
         crime.  This exclusion  is  central  to  the  balance  the  Refugee
         Convention  strikes  between  helping  victims  of  oppression   by
         allowing them to start new lives in other countries and  protecting
         the  interests  of  receiving  countries.   Article  1F(b)  is  not
         directed solely at fugitives and neither is it directed  solely  at
         some subset of serious criminals who are undeserving at the time of
         the refugee application.  Rather, in excluding  all  claimants  who
         have  committed  serious  non-political   crimes,   Article   1F(b)
         expresses the contracting states', agreement that such  persons  by
         definition would be underserving of refugee protection by reason of
         their serious criminality."


28. It follows that the Secretary of State would  not  be  discharging  his
    legal obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention  by  simply  treating
    without more an acquittal in the criminal courts as an  answer  to  the
    question whether there are serious grounds for believing  a  crime  has
    been committed.  Even when taking a cautious and restrictive  approach,
    it  is  incumbent  upon  the  Secretary  of  State   to   examine   the
    circumstances of the acquittal to decide  whether  his  obligation  has
    been discharged and that the mandatory exclusion provisions  have  been
    satisfied.  We readily accept that in  most  cases  an  acquittal  will
    provide a compelling answer  to  the  question  of  whether  there  are
    serious reasons.  This would usually be so where a jury had returned  a
    verdict of not guilty on counts based on  offending  that  would  other
    give rise to exclusion.  However, we agree with  Mr  Payne  that  there
    will be cases where an acquittal arises for  procedural,  technical  or
    other reasons as was the case for the first eight  appellants.   KU  is
    another example of where an acquittal may not provide a complete answer
    to the enquiry.


29. In our judgment, the 2015 panel did  not  err  in  looking  beyond  the
    acquittal to see whether the appellants were to be excluded.  They gave
    legally sustainable reasons for doing so and correctly  identified  the
    issue at [10] where they  summarised  the  arguments  that  were  fully
    developed before us and at [11] where they addressed the  Secretary  of
    State's position.  The 2015 Panel correctly  identified  the  basis  on
    which the Court of Appeal had allowed the eight appellants' appeals and
    did not err in taking into account the remarks of Blake J in  AH  which
    they correctly acknowledged were overturned.  We do not  consider  that
    the fact that Blake J was referring to the operation of  Article  1F(c)
    undermined  the  relevance  of  his  remarks  to  the  articles   other
    provisions.  Furthermore, we do not accept that the  reference  by  the
    2015 Panel at [14] to the lower standard identified by Baroness Hale in
    Al-Sirri was erroneous.  Although the Panel did not make  reference  to
    the mandatory nature of the exclusion provisions and the  cautious  and
    restrictive  approach  required,  in  our  view  they  were  rationally
    entitled and legally correct in reaching their conclusion that:


         "... Notwithstanding the appellants' acquittal and the  absence  of
         any finding beyond reasonable doubt that they committed  the  crime
         of hijack, it remains open  to  us  to  assess  whether  there  are
         "serious reasons"  for  considering  that  they  have  committed  a
         serious, non-political crime, so  as  to  justify  exclusion  under
         Article 1F(b).  We conclude that the appellants' acquittal does not
         prevent the application of Article 1F(b)."


30. Specifically in respect of KU,  the  2015  Panel  correctly  noted  his
    formal acquittal and the basis for that at [49].  Nevertheless,  taking
    account of their approach to the eight appellants, we are not persuaded
    that they erred in considering whether there were also serious  reasons
    for  considering  KU's  position  notwithstanding  his   acquittal   by
    reference to the nature of the medical evidence and the  fact  that  KU
    was not fit to plea.  This aspect is adequately reasoned and reflects a
    correct legal approach.





DURESS


31. The appellants accept that if the  2015  Panel  was  entitled  to  look
    beyond the acquittal it is necessary to consider the  issue  of  duress
    which has the same potential to arrest  any  further  consideration  of
    1F(b) if made out.  In Graham [1982] 1 WLR  294  the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered the elements of the defence of duress.  The case concerned a
    gay man who participated in the murder of his wife because, he claimed,
    he was in fear of his co-accused and lover,  a  man  called  King.   At
    issue was whether the judge gave a lawful  direction  to  the  jury  by
    requiring the jury to consider whether a  reasonable  person  with  the
    appellant's characteristics would have behaved in the way the appellant
    did, importing an objective element. Lord Lane stated that,


         "As a matter of public policy, it seems to us  essential  to  limit
         the defence of duress by means of an objective criterion formulated
         in terms of reasonableness.  The  correct  direction  to  the  jury
         should have been:


          1) Was the defendant, or may he have been, impelled to act as  he
             did because, as a result of what he reasonably  believed  King
             had said or done, he has good cause to fear that if he did not
             so act King would kill  him  or  cause  him  serious  physical
             injury?


          1) If so, have the prosecution made the jury sure  that  a  sober
             person of reasonable firmness, sharing the characteristics  of
             the  defendant,  would  not  have  responded  to  whatever  he
             reasonably believed King said or did by  taking  part  in  the
             killing?"


32. In R v Safi (Ali Ahmed) and Ors  [2003]  EWCA  Crim  1809,  a  decision
    arising from the prosecution of the current appellants,  the  Court  of
    Appeal  concluded  that  Sir  Edwin  Jowitt  misdirected  the  jury  by
    requiring that there must be a threat in fact,  rather  than  something
    the appellants reasonably believed to be a threat, before  the  defence
    of duress could  be  invoked.   The  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the
    suggested direction in Graham continues to be the law  in  relation  to
    duress.  The  Court  of  Appeal  considered  a  number  of  authorities
    including Abdul-Hussain (noted in [1999]  Crim.  L.  Rev.  570),  which
    involved another hijacking of a plane by Shiite Muslims from  Iraq.  In
    this case the Court held that imminent peril of death or serious injury
    had to operate on the defendant at the time he committed the act so  as
    to overbear his will, but the execution of the threat did not  need  to
    be immediately in prospect.  Rose LJ V-P said,


         "If Anne Frank had stolen a car to escape from  Amsterdam  and  had
         been charged with theft, the tenets of English law  would  not,  in
         our judgment, have denied her a defence of duress of circumstances,
         on the ground that she should have waited for the  Gestapo's  knock
         on the door."


46. According to the Court of  Appeal  in  Safi  the  relevant  authorities
    stressed the need for great and imminent danger  and  required  that  a
    defendant's response  to  the  situation  be  judged  by  an  objective
    standard of reasonableness and proportionality.


47. R v Z [2005] UKHL 22 was concerned with the issue whether  the  defence
    of duress was available to  someone  who  voluntarily  associated  with
    known criminals.  The House  of  Lords  noted  that  duress  affords  a
    defence which, if raised and not disproved,  exonerates  the  defendant
    altogether.  "Where the evidence in the proceedings  is  sufficient  to
    raise an issue of duress, the burden is on the prosecution to establish
    to the criminal standard that the defendant did not  commit  the  crime
    with which he is charged under duress" (at [20]).  The House  of  Lords
    did not suggest that the Graham direction, approved in R v Howe  [1987]
    AC 417, was inappropriate.  Their Lordships stated,


         "It is of course essential that  the  defendant  should  genuinely,
         i.e. actually, believe in the efficacy of the threat  by  which  he
         claims to have been compelled. But there is no warrant for relaxing
         the requirement that the belief  must  be  reasonable  as  well  as
         genuine."


48. The respondent and the 2015 Panel relies on MT (Article 1F (a) - aiding
    and abetting)  Zimbabwe  [2012]  UKUT  00015  (IAC),  where  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that a person falls to  be  excluded  under  1F(b)  where
    there are serious reasons for considering that he or she has aided  and
    abetted the commission of a  serious  non-political  crime.   The  case
    concerned a Zimbabwean policewoman whom  the  SSHD  excluded  from  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention under Articles 1F(a) and (c)  (the
    case did not concern Art 1F(b) and the Upper Tribunal  only  considered
    1F(b) on an obiter basis - see [96]) because of  her  participation  in
    various incidents involving serious human rights  abuses.   She  argued
    that she was entitled to the defence of duress.


49. The issue of duress was  considered  with  respect  to  Art  1F(a)  and
    Article 31(1)(d) of the ICC Statute.  While  recognising  that  it  was
    unclear whether duress provided a complete defence in all cases in  the
    context of the exclusion clauses, the Upper Tribunal  in  MT(Zimbabwe),
    stated, at [106]:


         "We believe we can dispose of the duress claim relatively  briefly.
         Article 31(1)(d) of the ICC Statute makes clear that duress can  be
         a defence  to  international  criminal  responsibility.   In  draft
         Article  9  (dealing  with  'Exceptions   to   the   principle   of
         responsibility') the International Law  Commission  (ILC)  UN  GAOR
         Supp.No.10: UN doc. A/42/10/ (1987) at 18 noted that for  'coercion
         to  be  considered  as  an  exception,  the  perpetrator   of   the
         incriminating act must be able to show that he  would  have  placed
         himself in grave imminent and irremediable peril if he had  offered
         any resistance'.  Whether it is a complete defence and  whether  it
         can apply in all types of cases remains unsettled:  see  the  Trial
         Chamber discussions in Prosecutor v Endermovic  (IT-96-22)  7  June
         1997 (a case, like all the other overseas cases to which  we  refer
         elsewhere in this decision -unless otherwise specified- decided  by
         the International Criminal Tribunal for the  Former  Yugoslavia  or
         ICTFY).  It appears uncontroversial, however, that such  a  defence
         is confined to situations where the defendant's freedom of will and
         decision is so severely limited that there is eventually  no  moral
         choice  of  counter  activity  available;  and  that  it  has  four
         components: the threat must be of imminent death or  continuing  or
         imminent serious bodily harm; the  threat  must  result  in  duress
         causing the crime; a  threat  results  in  duress  only  if  it  is
         otherwise avoidable (i.e. if  a  reasonable  person  in  comparable
         circumstances would have submitted and would have  been  driven  to
         the relevant criminal conduct); and the act  directed  at  avoiding
         the threat must be necessary in  terms  of  no  other  means  being
         available and reasonable for reaching the desired effect."


 4. The submissions on behalf of the eight appellants identifies the  issue
    for determination  as  whether  they  could  reasonably/genuinely  have
    believed that their only safe means of escape was as they did.  If they
    could so have believed, then the Secretary of State has failed to  make
    out the necessary criminal intent for the purposes of  exclusion  under
    Article 1F(b) on application of the balance of probabilities  standard.
    Our attention is drawn to the sentencing remarks and Sir Edwin Jowitt's
    reasoning and findings which were made on the  unlawfully  strict  test
    which applied a standard to  the  appellants'  conduct  that  was  more
    rigorous than the criminal law applied.  That test did not require  the
    appellants in fact to be in imminent peril before the defence of duress
    was capable of succeeding by reference to R v Graham.


50. With reference to the Graham test, it is submitted that if  the  answer
    to the first question set out in paragraph 79 above is 'no',  guilt  is
    established.  If the answer  is  'yes'  the  second  question  requires
    answering.  If the answer to that question is 'no' guilt is not  proved
    but if 'yes', guilt is established.  The appellants also  rely  on  the
    conclusion of the Court of Appeal in Safi as to the  immediacy  of  the
    threat.


51. The eight appellants' submissions then turned to the  findings  of  the
    2004 Panel.  It is argued that the appellants  reasonably  as  well  as
    genuinely believed that taking the aircraft was  their  only  realistic
    option to avoid the danger.  The findings by the 2004 Panel read  as  a
    whole positively underline such a belief.  Whether speaking objectively
    they could have attempted another means and whether in fact the  danger
    was not such that they could not have found an alternative is  not  the
    point.  With the 2004  Panel  having  found  that  had  the  appellants
    travelled overland, there was a danger they  would  be  identified  and
    thereafter arrested and tortured or worse.   It  is  argued  that  this
    aspect of itself given that  family  members  were  also  involved  was
    sufficient  to  underline  a  reasonable/genuine  belief  whatever  the
    ultimate reality in the appellants' mind that such was not a  realistic
    choice and taking the aircraft was the only realistic option.


52. Applying the second stage of Graham, it was very hard to see how such a
    person could have acted in any different way from the appellants in the
    light of their reasonably/genuinely held beliefs in the very particular
    circumstances of a group of men facing arrest, torture and death at the
    hands of a notoriously cruel and ruthless ruling authority.


53. As to the 2004 Panel's finding that the hijack  engaged  Article  1F(b)
    from the outset (the taking of the aircraft in Kabul) the  findings  of
    the Criminal Court were to be preferred having heard days  of  evidence
    directed to the point.


54. Specifically in respect of the 2015 Panel's findings it is argued that-


   i) The First-tier Tribunal had misdirected itself in law  by  approaching
      the issue of duress on the basis of whether there were other  possible
      means of escape that, as a matter of fact, the appellants  could  have
      availed themselves of, notwithstanding the risk to them,  rather  than
      whether  they  had  a  reasonable/genuine  belief   of   circumstances
      compelling them to act as they  did  and  whether  it  had  been  very
      clearly shown that reasonable persons, sharing  their  characteristics
      and in those circumstances, would not have behaved in that way.


  ii)  The 2015 Panel had failed to recognise or have regard to the  intense
      dangers and risks of leaving Afghanistan by alternative means.


 iii) Its conclusion was not open to it applying the appropriate and correct
      legal tests.


  iv) The 2015 Panel had misdirected itself in law by applying  too  high  a
      standard to the duress test.


55. For KU, Mr Jacobs argued that where there was prime facie  evidence  of
    duress that alone should suffice to render Article  1F(b)  inapplicable
    by reference to the text in the Law of Refugee Status, Second  Edition,
    Hathaway and Foster.  The 2015 Panel  had  misdirected  itself  on  the
    medical evidence which relating to KU would set out a plausible defence
    of duress.


56. Mr Payne's submissions identify aspects of the  2015  Panel's  findings
    with reference to the appellants' military experience, access to funds,
    ability to travel to Pakistan for preparation and the  absence  of  any
    sufficient immediacy of danger or the availability of alternative means
    for leaving Kabul.  The  appellants  were  resourceful  with  links  to
    Pakistan and the borders were relatively porous to many countries.   It
    is contended that the appellants have not challenged  the  findings  by
    the 2004 Panel that there was no sufficient immediacy of  danger  which
    he contended is fatal to their appeal.


57. Mr Payne also argued that it was significant the appellants  chose  not
    to give evidence before the 2015 Panel  on  these  issues.   Sir  Edwin
    Jowitt commented in his sentencing remarks that he could  not  be  sure
    (Mr Payne's emphasis) that the hijacking was criminal from  the  outset
    reflecting an assessment applying the criminal  standard  to  the  more
    limited evidence considered during the criminal trial.


58. Specifically in respect  of  KU,  Mr  Payne  argued  that  he  had  not
    established that he was acting under duress during the weeks  when  the
    preparations were made for the hijacking and the 2015 Panel  had  noted
    that he had played a substantial role in the preparation.


59. We reach the following conclusions under this heading.  We  were  drawn
    in oral submissions to a detailed analysis of the findings by the  2015
    Panel with reference to those reached by the Panel in 2004 as  well  as
    argument on whether the Panel applied the correct  test  to  the  facts
    found in 2004.  It is important to our mind to note that the grounds do
    not challenge the rationality of the 2015 Panel's  conclusions  on  the
    earlier findings in the  absence  of  any  further  evidence  from  the
    appellants.  Accordingly, if we  are  satisfied  that  the  2015  Panel
    proceeded on the basis of the correct test or in substance did  so  the
    only question that would arise is whether the 2015 Panel erred  in  its
    understanding of the evidence and the findings by the 2004 Panel.


60. Drawing upon the above authorities, the questions the  2015  Panel  was
    required to ask themselves  may  be  framed  in  this  way.   Were  the
    appellants impelled to hijack a plane as a result of  their  reasonably
    and genuinely held belief that the  Taliban  authorities  were  pursing
    them and whether, if they did act in this way was there was  a  serious
    and imminent (as opposed to an immediate) threat to their  lives  or  a
    risk of serious harm?  This is the subjective element which also has an
    objective component as to the reasonableness of the belief.  The second
    question, if the first is  answered  in  the  affirmative,  is  whether
    others in the same position, with the same  characteristics,  with  the
    same reasonably held fears of a serious imminent threat would not  have
    hijacked a plane to avoid the threat  but  would  have  chosen  another
    course of action.  This is the objective analysis that requires  to  be
    answered for the defence to be made out.


61. The 2015 Panel explained in [15]:


         "... The correct approach is to consider whether the appellants had
         a reasonable belief of circumstances compelling them to act as they
         did whereas, in contrast, the 2004 Panel approached the  matter  on
         the basis of whether there were  other  possible  means  of  escape
         that, as a matter  of  fact,  the  appellants  could  have  availed
         themselves of."


62. This is followed by a short analysis of MT and  an  extract  from  that
    decision which identifies four components at [106] of the decision:


         "It appears  uncontroversial,  however,  that  such  a  defence  is
         confined to situations where the defendant's freedom  of  will  and
         decision is so severely limited that there is eventually no  morale
         choice  of  counter  activity  available;  and  that  it  is   four
         components: the threat must be of imminent death or  continuing  or
         imminent serious bodily harm; the  threat  must  result  in  duress
         causing the crime; a  threat  results  in  duress  only  if  it  is
         otherwise avoidable (i.e. if  a  reasonable  person  in  comparable
         circumstances would have submitted and would  have  driven  to  the
         relevant criminal conduct); and the act directed  at  avoiding  the
         threat must be necessary in terms of no other means being available
         and reasonable for reaching the desired effect."


63. Examination of the 2004 Panel's decision shows a  detailed  summary  of
    the evidence given by the eight appellants between [66] and [88].   The
    reference in [91] to the absence of an immediacy of danger  and  arrest
    needs to be considered in context:


         "91. Having heard the evidence of the appellants  and  the  experts
             and having read the objective evidence, we are satisfied  that
             the borders of Afghanistan are and were at the  relevant  time
             porous  relative  to  many  countries.   We  find  that  these
             appellants could have attempted an alternative means of escape
             to a neighbouring country.   There  were  routes  through  the
             mountains and unmanned border posts.  We find that despite all
             of the appellants' statements to the contrary  there  was  not
             such an immediacy of danger of arrest or lack  of  opportunity
             to move away from the Kabul area such that they could not have
             found an alternative to hijacking.  The appellants could  have
             chosen to travel to  Pakistan  although  there  was  a  strong
             Taliban and radical Islamic movement presence there.  If  they
             had gone to Pakistan, it was most  unlikely  they  would  have
             experienced any particular difficulties moving on from  there.
             The further they travelled from Afghanistan and  the  Peshawar
             area, the less likely they would have been  in  danger.   They
             could have remained elsewhere in Pakistan  or  if  they  still
             felt in danger of persecution they could have travelled on  to
             claim asylum in another  country.   They  could  have  claimed
             asylum in Tashkent or in Moscow but chose not to do so."


64. In paragraph [17] of its decision, the 2015 Panel considered  the  2004
    Panel's  assessment  of  the  circumstances  (see  [36]  above).   This
    includes an observation that the 2004 Panel "... made a  clear  finding
    that there was not such an immediacy of danger of  arrest  or  lack  of
    opportunity to move away ...".  The 2015 Panel continued at [18] as  we
    have cited above:


         "... We find that the evidence before the 2004  Panel,  and  before
         ourselves does not show that the threat of  serious  imminent  harm
         was such that a reasonable person  would  have  felt  compelled  to
         hijack the Ariana airplane.  There is nothing to displace the clear
         findings of fact made by the 2004 Panel  that  there  was  no  such
         immediacy of danger of arrest or lack of opportunity to  move  away
         from Kabul."


65. The above passage indicates that the 2015  Panel  came  to  a  negative
    answer on the first question.  This is followed by a further  reference
    to the absence of evidence to replace the "clear findings of fact  made
    by the 2004 Panel" and a repetition of  their  survey  of  the  earlier
    panel's findings in [17].  This is  indicative  that  although  it  was
    unnecessary for them to do so, the 2015 Panel went on to  consider  the
    second question with reference to the time allocated to preparation for
    and the sophisticated planning for the hijack.  Whilst the panel  might
    have structured the approach more clearly, in substance,  its  approach
    was legally sound and open to them on the evidence.


66. It is correct that the 2004 Panel found that there was  an  absence  of
    immediacy of danger.  We do not consider this fatal to the 2015 Panel's
    decision in the light of the later Panel having found that the evidence
    did not show the "threat of serious imminent harm".  The  reference  to
    immediacy is an aspect of the evidence rather than a statement  of  the
    test.  It was a consideration of the  likelihood  of  events  occurring
    which is an essential ingredient of the consideration whether an  event
    was imminent.  In this respect a lack  of  immediacy  might  well  show
    something was not imminent. The 2015 Panel  gave  cogent  reasons  why,
    based on the findings by the 2004 Panel, the threat of serious imminent
    harm was such that a reasonable person would  have  felt  compelled  to
    hijack the Ariana airplane.


67. In concluding that the appellants could have attempted  an  alternative
    means  of  escape,  the  2004  Panel  were  addressing  not  only   the
    reasonableness of their belief asserted after a careful analysis of all
    the evidence but also answering the second question.  In  our  judgment
    the finding that the appellants could  have  chosen  alternative  means
    indicated  that  their  belief  that  hijacking  was  the  only  option
    available to them was not one that was reasonably or genuinely held  or
    one that a person sharing such a belief would  not  have  done  in  the
    light of the alternatives. We conclude  therefore  that  there  was  no
    error by the 2015 Panel on the second ground of challenge.


68. We turn to KU.  Having satisfied ourselves that the 2015 Panel took the
    correct approach to the issue of duress for the eight appellants, there
    was no need for them to repeat their decision in relation to KU.

NON-POLITICAL CRIME

 1. If the appellants are unable to show  that  the  acquittal  provided  a
    complete answer or that they were acting under duress,  the  next  step
    (and basis of challenge) is  whether  there  are  serious  reasons  for
    considering the crime was non-political.  The cases we were directed to
    begin with, R v Governor of Brixton  ex  parte  Kolczynski  and  others
    [1955] 1 QB 540 concerned Polish sailors serving on  a  fishing  vessel
    whose views of the communist  regime  were  overheard  by  a  political
    officer and who thereafter feared they would be prosecuted on return to
    Poland for their political views.  They overpowered the remaining  crew
    (although there  was  not  much  resistance  except  by  the  political
    officer) and brought their vessel to the UK where they  claimed  asylum
    and were arrested.  The Polish  government  sought  their  extradition.
    The case was concerned with the point whether  the  scheduled  offences
    that were the subject of the extradition request were, in reality, of a
    political character.  The Queen's Bench Division found that the sailors
    would be punished as for an offence  of  a  political  character.  Lord
    Goddard C.J. stated,


         "The revolt of the crew was to prevent themselves being  prosecuted
         for a political offence and in my opinion, therefore,  the  offence
         had a political character."


69. Kolczynski was considered in the House of Lords case of R v Governor of
    Pentonville Prison ex parte Cheng [1973]  AC  931.   The  applicant  in
    Cheng was a member of an organisation opposed to the Taiwan regime  and
    was convicted in the USA of attempted murder  of  the  Taiwanese  vice-
    premier.  Having  fled  the  USA  and  entered  the  UK,  the  American
    authorities sought his extradition.  He claimed his offence was "one of
    a political character."  The House of Lords concluded, by  a  majority,
    that political character connoted opposition to the requesting state on
    some issue connected with the political control or government  of  that
    state and, as the offence was committed in the USA and not Taiwan,  the
    offence was not one of a political character.  It was  unnecessary  for
    the purposes of the issue before  their  Lordships,  to  determine  the
    issue of how remote from the physical act the objective had to  be  (at
    [945A-D]), although Lord Diplock was of the view that the robbing of  a
    bank to obtain funds for a political  party  would  be  too  remote  to
    constitute a political offence.


70. Lord Diplock then stated, at 945F,


         "So, even apart from authority, I would hold that  prima  facie  an
         act committed in a foreign state was not "an offence of a political
         character "unless the only purpose sought to  be  achieved  by  the
         offender in committing it were to  change  the  government  of  the
         state in which it was committed, or to  induce  it  to  change  its
         policy, or to enable him to  escape  from  the  jurisdiction  of  a
         government of whose political policies the offender disapproved but
         despaired of altering so long as he was there." [our emphasis]


71. In T v Immigration Officer [1996] AC 742  the  applicant,  an  Algerian
    national, was a  member  of  an  political  movement  prepared  to  use
    violence to achieve its aims.  T had been involved  in  and  had  prior
    knowledge of a bomb attack at an airport that killed 10 people, and had
    been engaged in planning a raid on an army barracks to  obtain  weapons
    that involved a further death.  The issue was whether he  was  excluded
    from the Refugee Convention under Article 1F(b) on the basis  that  his
    offence was not political. Although all members of the House  of  Lords
    agreed that the offence was not political, their reasons differed.  The
    majority agreed with Lord Lloyd of Berwick.   He  stated  that  it  was
    common ground that the words "non-political crime" must bear  the  same
    meaning as they do in extradition law, and said it  appeared  from  the
    travaux  preparatoires  that  the  framers  of   the   Convention   had
    extradition law in mind when drafting the Convention.


72.  Lord  Lloyd  referred  to  a  number  of  decisions   from   different
    jurisdictions, including refugee  cases  from  Canada  ((Gil  v  Canada
    (Minister  of  Employment  and  Immigration)  [1994]  F.C.J  No.  1559,
    concerning an Iranian dissident  who  planted  bombs  on  the  business
    premises of the regime's supporters and which resulted in the deaths of
    many innocent bystanders) and  the  USA  (McMullen  v  Immigration  and
    Naturalization Service, 788 F.2d 591,  concerning  an  application  for
    deportation of a former member of the Provisional IRA), as well  as  to
    Cheng.  Lord Lloyd also referred to the UNHCR  Handbook  on  Procedures
    and Criteria for Determining Refugee Status and the European Convention
    on the Suppression of Terrorism (1977) (Cmnd. 7031), which  represented
    an attempt to limit by agreement among member states  the  availability
    of the political  exception  in  extradition  cases.   Although  member
    states were entitled to enter a reservation at the time of  signing  or
    depositing its instrument of ratification,  such  states  undertook  to
    take into due  consideration,  when  evaluating  the  character  of  an
    offence, any particularly serious aspects of  the  offence,  including,
    "(a) that  it  created  a  collective  danger  to  the  life,  physical
    integrity or liberty of  persons;  or  (b)  that  it  affected  persons
    foreign to the motives behind it: or (c) that cruel  or  vicious  means
    have been used in the commission of the offence."


73. At 786H to 787B Lord Lloyd defined a political crime.


         "A crime is a political crime for the purposes of article 1F(b)  of
         the Geneva Convention if, and only if (1) it  is  committed  for  a
         political purpose, that is to say, with the object of  overthrowing
         or subverting or changing the government of a state or inducing  it
         to change its policy; and (2) there is  a  sufficiently  close  and
         direct link between the crime and the alleged political purpose. In
         determining whether such a link exists, the court will bear in mind
         the means  used  to  achieve  the  political  end,  and  will  have
         particular regard to whether the crime was aimed at a  military  or
         governmental target, on the one hand, or a civilian target  on  the
         other, and in either event whether it was  likely  to  involve  the
         indiscriminate killing or injuring of members of the public."


    At 787C Lord Lloyd provided the following qualification,


         "Although I have referred to the above statement as a definition, I
         bear in mind Lord Radcliffe's warning in Reg. v Governor of Brixton
         Prison, Ex parte Schtraks [1964] A.C. 556,  589,  that  a  question
         which was first posed judicially more than 100 years ago in  In  re
         Castioni [1891] 1 Q.B. 149 is unlikely now to receive a  definitive
         answer.  The most that can be attempted  is  a  description  of  an
         idea. But to fall short of a description would, in Lord Radcliffe's
         words, be to abdicate a necessary responsibility, if the idea of  a
         political crime is to continue to form part  of  the  apparatus  of
         judicial decision-making."


74. The 2015 Panel considered this limb between paragraphs [29] and [48] in
    which they reviewed the "relatively few" authorities (Cheng and T)  and
    the approach of the UNHCR.  The  panel  then  turned  to  the  evidence
    beginning with the remarks by  Sir  Edwin  Jowitt  in  respect  of  the
    political nature of the crime.  Thereafter the panel  returned  to  the
    2004 Panel's findings on the alternative  to  the  hijacking  as  cited
    above in paragraph [99].  The 2015 Panel's conclusions are hinted at in
    the preceding paragraphs but finally reached a full expression in  [47]
    as follows:


         "The 2004 panel's findings show an acceptance of the  existence  of
         the YIA and a political programme and aims which were  similar,  as
         Mr Jorro said, to the programme eventually established by means  of
         the Bonn agreement.  Political demands were made by the  hijackers,
         at Stansted.  Our assessment, however, is that the  hijack  itself,
         preceded by detailed and sophisticated planning, and  amounting  to
         an offence with separate, relevant episodes in Tashkent and Moscow,
         was a non-political  crime.   The  principal  aim  in  seizing  the
         aircraft was to make good the escape of the  appellants  and  their
         family members.  We have adopted the 2004 panel's  finding  that  a
         viable alternative existed, to leave Afghanistan  by  other  means,
         perhaps for Pakistan.  Applying the test identified in T,  we  find
         that the Ariana aircraft was seized in order to  effect  an  escape
         from Afghanistan rather than to achieve a political  purpose,  even
         though the appellants were members of the YIA with  political  aims
         and objectives opposed to those of Taliban.  We also conclude  that
         no sufficiently close and direct link between the  hijack  and  the
         alleged political purpose exists.  The hijack  was  directed  at  a
         civilian target as the aircraft was not a military vehicle  and  it
         contained a wholly innocent flight crew and  about  100  passengers
         not associated with the appellants or  their  families.   Hijacking
         is, by its very nature, to a large extend a chaotic  and  uncertain
         event and, taking into account the weapons taken on board,  it  was
         likely to involve at the very least a risk of injury to members  of
         the public.  In the event, violence was meted out to  the  stewards
         on board."


75. By way of submissions My Jorro on behalf of the eight  appellants,  and
    Mr Jacobs on behalf of KU, reminded us that the appellants were members
    of a  political  organisation  ideologically  opposed  to  the  Taliban
    controlled government, that arrest warrants had been issued in some  of
    their names on the basis that they were traitors, that they  could  not
    'stand their ground' and fight the Taliban, and  that  the  hijack  was
    motivated by a desire to  escape  political  persecution  arising  from
    their political activity with the YIA.  The  political  nature  of  the
    offence was demonstrated by reference to the Taliban's reaction to what
    they perceived as a significant political  humiliation,  and  this  was
    supported by the findings of the panels in  2004  and  2013.  Mr  Jorro
    relied on the excerpt from the judgment of Lord Diplock  in  Cheng  set
    out above at [108] and the decision in Kolczynski, and  invited  us  to
    find that a person can commit a political offence by  escaping  from  a
    regime and that the hijacking of the aircraft  in  Afghanistan  clearly
    fitted within the meaning of a political offence contained in 'T'.


76. Mr Jorro drew to our attention to an extract in T setting out the views
    of Goodwin-Gill  in  The  Refugee  in  International  Law  (1983),  who
    considered it was necessary to examine, inter alia, whether there was a
    close and direct causal  link  between  the  crime  committed  and  its
    alleged political purpose, and who stated that  the  political  element
    should in principle outweigh the common-law character of  the  offence,
    which  may  not  be  the  case  of  the  acts  committed   or   grossly
    disproportionate to the objective, or  of  an  atrocious  or  barbarous
    nature.  Mr Jorro additionally drew our attention to an extract in  'T'
    from the UNHCR handbook on  Procedures  and  Criteria  for  Determining
    Refugee Status which indicated that there should be a close and  direct
    causal link between the  crime  committed  and  its  alleged  political
    purpose and object, that the political element of  the  offence  should
    also outweigh its common-law character, and that this would not be  the
    case if the acts committed are grossly out of proportion to the alleged
    objective.  He also directed us to the Advocate  General's  opinion  in
    Federal Republic of Germany v B & D [2012] 1 WLR 1076 who stated,  with
    reference to article 12(2)(b) of the Qualification Directive  (2004/83)
    ("particular  cruel  actions,  even  if  committed  with  an  allegedly
    political  objective,  may  be  classified  as  serious   non-political
    crimes"), that the term "particularly cruel actions" should be applied,
    not only to the crimes subject to prosecution under  the  international
    instruments for the protection of human rights  and  humanitarian  law,
    but also to crimes which involve the use of abnormal and indiscriminate
    violence, especially when directed at civilian targets.


77. Mr Jacobs reminded us that the appellants made political demands  after
    landing at Stansted and that,  as  they  were  fleeing  from  political
    persecution, there was "unreality" in  concluding  that  their  actions
    were not political.  He also invited us  to  note  how  the  appellants
    actions were viewed by the Taliban.


78. Mr Payne reminded us that at [46] of its decision the 2015  Panel  took
    into account art  12(2)(b)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  and  the
    mention of "particularly cruel actions" but found  that  this  did  not
    substantially assist in their application of the autonomous meaning  of
    Article 1F(b).  The appellants had in any event conceded that the crime
    was a "serious crime".  He  submitted  that  Mr  Jorro  inappropriately
    sought to minimise the seriousness of the crime so that it did not fall
    within art 12(2)(b) of the Qualification Directive.  Mr Payne submitted
    that in Cheng the House of Lords was dealing with the narrow  point  of
    whether an offence committed in the jurisdiction of the  state  seeking
    extradition and which related to a political issue  in  a  3rd  country
    could itself be considered a political offence.   In  stating  that  an
    "offence of a political character" could include, inter alia, an act by
    a person "... to enable him to escape  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the
    government of whose political policies he disapproved but despaired  of
    altering so long as he was there", Lord Diplock was dealing  with  what
    could amount to an offence of a political character, not one  that  did
    amount to an offence of a political character, and was not dealing with
    issues of remoteness because this did not arise in the case.


79. Mr Payne directed us to the definition of political offence in 'T'  and
    to the  2004  Panel's  reliance  on  the  European  Convention  on  the
    Suppression of  Terrorism  1977.  He  submitted  that  the  2015  Panel
    correctly cited the test in 'T' and that it  explained  in  detail  why
    there was a viable alternative available to the appellants  by  leaving
    through Pakistan.  The 2015 Panel were reasonably entitled to find that
    there was no political purpose to the offence for  the  reasons  given,
    but even if this was wrong, the 2015 Panel's conclusion that there  was
    no sufficiently close  link  between  the  offence  and  its  political
    purpose was reasonably open to  it  and  that  it  properly  took  into
    account relevant factors such as the risk of violence and the  civilian
    nature of the target.


80. We are satisfied that a  crime  committed  to  effect  an  escape  from
    political oppression that threatens harm has a  political  nature;  see
    Lord Diplock [108] above, but there  is  a  need  to  assess  the  link
    between the crime and the political object to see whether this resulted
    in disqualification from such status, see Lloyd LJ in T  at  787G.   In
    our view there is a need for  the  crime,  in  order  to  maintain  its
    political character, to be proportionate to the purpose pursued.


33. In our judgment the 2015 Panel erred in  law  in  their  reasoning,  at
    [47], that the offence did not have a political  purpose.   An  offence
    may be of a political character and may be politically  motivated  even
    if it has been the subject of "detailed  and  sophisticated  planning".
    Whilst we have no doubt that the 2015 Panel were  accurate  in  stating
    that the "principal aim in seizing the aircraft was to  make  good  the
    escape of the appellants and their family members", the escape was  due
    to a fear of politically motivated persecution based  in  turn  on  the
    appellants' political activities.  The purpose was to escape  political
    persecution. The 2015 Panel concluded, applying 'T', that  the  seizing
    of the aircraft was not to achieve a political  purpose.   However,  as
    Lord Lloyd explained at 787C, with reference to  his  definition,  that
    "the most that can be attempted is a description of an idea."


34. We are not however persuaded that this error is of material  kind  that
    could have led to a different outcome or that there are other  features
    that require the decision to be set aside.  The critical  passages  are
    in [47].  We are satisfied that the 2015 Panel were unarguably entitled
    on the findings by the 2004 Panel to find, as they did  at  [47],  that
    the second limb of the test for a political offence in 'T' was not met.
     The 2015 Panel gave adequate reasons for their conclusion  that  there
    was no sufficiently close and direct link between the hijacking and its
    political purpose.  The 2015 Panel noted that the hijack  was  directed
    at a civilian target and that the flight contained  a  wholly  innocent
    flight crew and about a hundred  passengers  not  associated  with  the
    appellants or their families.


35. The 2015 Panel also observed that, by its very nature, hijacking was  a
    chaotic and uncertain event and that by taking  weapons  on  board  the
    flight, it was likely to involve at the very least a risk of injury  to
    members of the public.  The 2015 Panel indicated that they had referred
    to the Handbook and although not necessary for our conclusion  we  note
    that the serious nature of a hijacking  of  a  plane  is  reflected  in
    Article 1(a) of the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism
    1977 which provides  that,  for  the  purpose  of  extradition  between
    states, the hijacking of a plane shall not be regarded as  a  political
    offence or as an offence connected with a political offence  or  as  an
    offence inspired by political motives.


36. There is no need for the appellants' actions to amount to "particularly
    cruel actions" within the terms of art 12(2)(b)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive in order for the hijacking of a commercial  airline  carrying
    over hundred innocent passengers, with the concomitant  risk  to  lives
    and safety, to be found a disproportionate and remote response  to  the
    threat  from  the  Taliban  as  perceived  by  the   appellants.    The
    Qualification Directive does not restrict the class  of  offences  that
    may be classified as serious non-political crimes  to  those  involving
    particularly cruel actions.  It is, in any  event,  sufficiently  clear
    from the evidence considered by the 2015 Panel that the hijacking was a
    serious offence (as we have already observed, a point not  disputed  by
    the appellants' representatives) that caused great fear and anxiety for
    the innocent passengers who were detained for a significant  period  of
    time.  Moreover,  it  follows  from  our  earlier  conclusions  on  the
    approach to the issue of duress that the 2015 Panel  were  entitled  to
    find that the hijacking of the plane was too remote/disproportionate to
    the political purpose of  escaping  political  persecution  given  that
    reasonable persons facing the same perceived risk and sharing the  same
    characteristics would not have hijacked the plane.  Their finding  that
    there was no sufficiently close and direct link between  the  hijacking
    and the  political  character  of  the  escape  was  drawn  from  their
    conclusions on duress, an approach properly open to them when assessing
    the remoteness of the connection between the political purpose and  the
    hijacking.


EXPIATION


37. The appellants have reserved their position on this aspect in the light
    of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in AH (Algeria) v  SSHD  (No  2)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 1003 which post-dated the decision of the  2015  Panel.
    We are invited to dismiss the appeal on this ground  as  a  consequence
    although the position of the parties is reserved.


DISCRETION (KU)


38. Mr Jacobs submits that the 2015 Panel erred in failing  to  exercise  a
    discretion not to exclude KU from  the  Refugee  Convention  given  the
    particularly unusual facts of KU's appeal and the evidence  before  it.
    In his skeleton argument prepared for the 2015 Panel, Mr Jacobs  relied
    on the medical evidence relating to KU as well as  his  acquittal,  the
    nine-year delay in making a  decision  in  respect  of  his  protection
    claim, the passage of nearly 15 years, the  issue  of  duress  and  the
    ongoing threat of persecution in Afghanistan as factors relevant to the
    exercise of discretion.  He submitted before us that it  was  incumbent
    on Courts and Tribunals  to  consider  the  question  of  exclusion  in
    relation to context and proportionality, and that the judicial


39. The 2015 Panel did not deal with Mr  Jacobs'  discretion  ground  as  a
    discrete head but it did consider the medical evidence relating  to  KU
    at [49] to [51], when concluding at [52] that KU was  in  substantially
    the same position  as  the  other  hijackers  and  was  therefore  also
    excluded from the Refugee Convention.  The 2015 Panel  also  considered
    the relevance of factors extraneous to the  core  elements  of  Article
    1F(b) in its assessment of the expiation ground (from [20] to [22]).


40. We are not persuaded that the 2015 Panel fell into error in failing  to
    exercise a discretion.  The wording  of  Article  1F(b)  itself  is  in
    mandatory terms ("The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to
    any  person  with  respect  to  whom  there  are  serious  reasons  for
    considering that ... he has committed  a  serious  non-political  crime
    outside the country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as
    a refugee").  The Secretary of  State  has  a  positive  obligation  to
    exclude a person who meets the requirements of each  of  the  limbs  of
    Article 1F.


 1. In his skeleton argument prepared for the 2015 Panel (and his  skeleton
    argument prepared for this appeal) Mr Jacobs relied  on  the  following
    passage from The Refugee in  International  Law,  3rd  Edtn,  Professor
    Goodwin-Gill


         "Each State  must  determine  what  constitutes  a  serious  crime,
         according to its own standards up to a point, but on the  basis  of
         the ordinary meaning of the words considered in  context  and  with
         the objectives of the 1951 Convention. Given that the words are not
         self-applying,  each  party  has  some  discretion  in  determining
         whether the criminal character of the applicant for refugee  status
         in fact outweighs his or her character as bona fide refugee, and so
         constitutes a threat to  its  internal  order.  Just  as  the  1951
         Conference rejected 'extradition crimes' as an a priori  excludable
         category, so ad hoc approaches founded on length of sentence are of
         little help, unless related to the nature and circumstances of  the
         offence. Commentators and jurisprudence  seem  to  agree,  however,
         that  serious  crimes,  above  all,  are  those  against   physical
         integrity, life and liberty." (page 176)


41. Prof Goodwin-Gill's comments on discretion relate  to  an  individual's
    'criminal character' and are made in relation to a discussion  of  what
    constitutes a 'serious crime'.  This is  apparent  not  only  from  the
    extract itself but from the context in which the extract was considered
    by the Court of Appeal in AH (Algeria) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 395 (at [31] & [32]).  We do  not  find
    the extract supports Mr Jacobs' contention that the 2015  Panel  had  a
    discretion whether to exclude KU from the Refugee Convention.


42. Mr Jacobs additionally relied on a further passage from The Refugee  in
    International Law under the heading 'Context and proportionality' which
    considered the UNHCR's 2003 Guidelines on exclusion and  in  which  the
    UNHCR argued that the exclusion clauses must be  applied  in  a  manner
    proportionate to their objective, so that the gravity of the offence in
    question is weighed against the consequences for  exclusion.   He  also
    drew our attention to passages in the  UNHCR  Background  Note  on  the
    Application of the Exclusion Clauses, and to paragraph 161 of the UNHCR
    Handbook


         "While there is thus a possibility of granting asylum, the  gravity
         of the persecution of which the offender may have been in fear, and
         the extent to which such fear is well-founded, will have to be duly
         considered in determining his possible  refugee  status  under  the
         1951 Convention. The question of the exclusion under  Article  1  F
         (b) of an applicant who has committed an  unlawful  seizure  of  an
         aircraft will also have to be carefully examined in each individual
         case".


43.  We  do  not  consider  that  the  passages  assist  Mr  Jacobs.    The
    commentaries  related  to  the  need   to   approach   the   evidential
    requirements of  Article  1F(b)  with  the  most  anxious  scrutiny  in
    circumstances where there is credible evidence of  likely  persecution,
    and the issue of proportionality related  to  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence.  Neither the UNHCR nor Professor Goodwin-Gill were  suggesting
    that there exists a discretion to not exclude once the core elements of
    Article 1F(b) were established.  We remind ourselves in any event  that
    the guidance provided by the UNHCR is  advisory  (AH  (Algeria)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 1003).


44. In support of his submissions, Mr Jacobs also relied in paragraph 73 of
    Pushpanathan v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)  [1998]
    1 SCR 982:


         "Article 1F(b)  contains  a  balancing  mechanism  so  far  as  the
         specific  adjectives  "serious"   and   "non-political"   must   be
         satisfied, while Article 33(2) as implemented in the Act by ss.  53
         and 19 provides for weighing of the seriousness of the danger posed
         to  Canadian  society  against  the  danger  of  persecution   upon
         refoulement. This approach reflects the intention of the  signatory
         states to create a humanitarian balance between the  individual  in
         fear of persecution on the one hand, and the legitimate concerns of
         states to sanction criminal activity on the other."


 2. Pushpanathan was however a case concerned with Article  1F(c)  and  not
    with Article 1F(b).  Moreover, the 'balancing mechanism' within Article
    1F(b) considered  by  the  Supreme  Court  of  Canada  related  to  the
    "serious" nature  of  the  crime,  and  whether  the  crime  was  "non-
    political", and not to whether there existed a  discretion  to  exclude
    from the Refugee Convention once the core elements of Article 1F(b) had
    been established.  The appellants accept  that  the  hijacking  of  the
    plane was "serious",  and,  for  the  reasons  already  given,  we  are
    satisfied  that  the  2015  Panel  were  entitled  to  find  that   the
    appellants' conduct, when considered  in  the  full  context  of  their
    actions, was "non-political".


 3. In assessing whether there  exists  a  discretion  whether  or  not  to
    exclude an individual from the Refugee Convention, we additionally note
    that the majority of the Supreme Court of  Canada  in  Febles,  decided
    after Pushpanathan, found that factors extraneous to the core  elements
    of Article 1F(b) were not relevant to the question of exclusion.


         "18. The mandatory wording  of  the  Article  ("shall  not  apply")
             chosen by the parties to the Refugee Convention  unequivocally
             supports the view that all a subscribing country can  consider
             in determining whether a claimant is  excluded  under  Article
             1F(b) is  whether  the  claimant  committed  a  serious  crime
             outside the country of refuge prior to  applying  for  refugee
             status there.  Nothing in the words  used  suggests  that  the
             parties  to  the  Refugee   Convention   intended   subsequent
             considerations,  like  rehabilitation,  expiation  and  actual
             dangerousness, to be taken into account."


45. Then at [54] the Supreme Court of Canada stated,


         "... Article 1F(b)  is  aimed  at  excluding  from  refugee  status
         persons who have committed a serious crime, regardless of what  may
         have happened since."


46. The above extract  followed  an  assessment  by  the  majority  of  the
    Canadian Supreme Court of the CJEU's decision in Germany v B and  D  C-
    57/09, C-101/09, [2010]  ECR  I-10979.   The  CJEU  stated,  albeit  by
    reference  to  the  Qualification  Directive  and  not  Article   1F(b)
    directly,


         "106.     By  its  third  question  in  each  of  the  cases,   the
             Bundesverwaltungsgericht asks whether exclusion  from  refugee
             status pursuant to Article12(2)(b) or(c) of Directive  2004/83
             is conditional upon a proportionality test being undertaken in
             relation to the particular case.


         107. In that regard, it should be borne in mind that  it  is  clear
             from the wording of Article12(2) of Directive 2004/83 that, if
             the conditions laid down therein are met, the person concerned
             'is excluded' from refugee status and that, within the  system
             of the directive, Article2(c) expressly makes  the  status  of
             'refugee' conditional upon the fact that the person  concerned
             does not fall within the scope of Article12.


         ...


         109.  Since the competent authority has already, in its  assessment
             of the  seriousness  of  the  acts  committed  by  the  person
             concerned and  of  that  person's  individual  responsibility,
             taken into account all  the  circumstances  surrounding  those
             acts and the situation of that person,  it  cannot  -  as  the
             German, French, Netherlands  and  United  Kingdom  Governments
             have submitted - be required, if  it  reaches  the  conclusion
             that Article12(2)  applies,  to  undertake  an  assessment  of
             proportionality, implying as that does a fresh  assessment  of
             the level of seriousness of the acts committed.


         110. It is important to note that the exclusion of  a  person  from
             refugee status pursuant to Article12(2) of  Directive  2004/83
             does not imply the adoption of  a  position  on  the  separate
             question of whether that person can be deported to his country
             of origin."


 1. It is clear that the CJEU did not consider there was any requirement to
    undertake a  proportionality  assessment  once  the  core  elements  of
    Article  12(2)  were  satisfied,  which   supports   the   respondent's
    contention that there was no discretion available to  the  2015  Panel.
    We are not persuaded, for the reasons given, that the 2015 Panel  erred
    on a point of law by failing to exercise a discretion not to exclude KU
    from the Refugee Convention.





NOTICE OF DECISION


We are satisfied that the 2015 Panel did not make  an  error  that  requires
its decision to be set aside.  The appellants'  appeals  are  dismissed  and
the decision of the 2015 Panel stands.



Signed   Date 8 May 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
