
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08330/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30 March 2017                          |On 26 June 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     t k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, Counsel instructed by the Tamil Welfare
Association
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1984.  She  arrived  in
    the UK on 3 April 2012, entering on the basis of a  visit  visa,  valid
    until 24 August 2012.  She claimed asylum on 26 July 2012, having  made
    an appointment to do so on 26 June 2012.

 2. Her asylum claim was refused and a decision made on 25 August  2012  to
    remove her to Sri Lanka.  She appealed against that  decision  and  her
    appeal initially came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman  ("the
    FtJ") in October 2012 and whereby he dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 3. The FtJ's decision was set aside by a Judge of the Upper  Tribunal  and
    the appeal then came before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hall  ("the
    DUTJ") on 17 May and 20 September 2013.  He too dismissed the appeal on
    all grounds.

 4. Ultimately, after an appeal to the Court of Appeal, following agreement
    between the parties Underhill LJ allowed the appellant's appeal and set
    aside the decision of the DUTJ.  He ordered that the appeal  be  listed
    for further hearing in the Upper Tribunal with  preserved  findings  of
    fact as specified in the Statement of Reasons before the court.   Thus,
    the appeal came before me.

 5. It is as well at this  stage  to  set  out  those  preserved  findings.
    Although at first sight it appears that there is some slight  ambiguity
    as to what those preserved findings are, there  was  agreement  on  the
    issue before me.  The Statement of Reasons  states  at  [16]  that  the
    accepted facts found by the DUTJ are to be found at [11],  [61],  [62],
    [63], [64], [66] and [69].  At [11] the DUTJ himself referred to  [81],
    [83] and  [86]  of  the  FtJ's  decision,  summarising  what  could  be
    described as the positive credibility findings.

 6. Thus, the preserved findings are as follows, with references in  square
    brackets to the decision of the DUTJ:

      i) The appellant was arrested, detained  and  mistreated  as  claimed.
         The appellant's brother was known by an LTTE name, and the evidence
         in relation to the older brother being  killed  is  accepted.   The
         appellant has scarring which is consistent with being caused in the
         way that she claimed [11].

     ii) The appellant is of Tamil ethnicity.  She  encountered  no  serious
         difficulties in Sri Lanka until  27  December  2011  when  she  was
         arrested, detained for six days, and tortured.   She  was  released
         following payment of a bribe [61].

    iii) The appellant had two brothers who fought for the  LTTE.   One  was
         killed in February 2008 and the other has not been heard from since
         he joined the LTTE in 2008 [62].

     iv) The death of the appellant's brother has been published in an  LTTE
         newspaper and his obituary notice was downloaded from the  internet
         in May 2013 [63].

      v) A medical report prepared by Mr Martin confirms that the  appellant
         has scars, and that her injuries were caused in the  way  that  she
         has claimed [64].

     vi) The appellant travelled to Colombo following her release  and  with
         the assistance of an agent she applied for and was granted  a  visa
         enabling her to visit the UK.  The visa was valid until  24  August
         2012 [66].

    vii) The appellant supported the LTTE but she was not a member  of  that
         organisation  and  her  support  was  limited  to  the   activities
         described in her asylum interview, attending events such  as  Black
         Tigers Day and Heroes Day.  She may have made some flags for  those
         events as she claimed [69].

 7. It is also to be noted that the respondent has now agreed to grant  the
    appellant leave to remain as the partner of a person, SM, with  limited
    leave as a refugee.  It is not apparent that the appellant had,  as  at
    the date of hearing, received confirmation of the  grant  of  leave  to
    remain, although it was agreed by the parties that it was expected.  No
    issue  arises  in  terms  of  Section  104(4A)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") (appeal  abandoned  if
    an appellant is granted leave) because in the first  place  it  is  not
    apparent that leave has actually  yet  been  granted.   In  the  second
    place, by letter dated 27 January 2017 the appellant's  representatives
    confirmed that the appellant wished  to  pursue  her  asylum/protection
    claim, thus bringing into play s.104(4B) of the 2002 Act  (notification
    of intention to pursue the appeal).

 8. In addition to the material previously before the  Tribunal  a  further
    bundle consisting  of  128  pages  was  relied  on  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  On  the  day  of  the  hearing,  I  was  provided  with  an
    additional witness statement from the appellant dated 29 March 2017.

 9. I heard initial submissions from the parties  when  the  issue  of  the
    additional witness statement came to the fore.  The question  arose  as
    to whether at a Case Management  Review  ("CMR")  on  12  January  2017
    before the President of the Upper Tribunal, directions had been made to
    the  effect  that  the  resumed  hearing  would  be  on  the  basis  of
    submissions only, with no further evidence to be called.  Neither party
    was able to refer me to any written directions that were made following
    that hearing, and there was some divergence of view as to the effect of
    the oral directions that were given.  Ultimately, I concluded  that  it
    was not apparent that the President had directed that the fresh hearing
    proceed by way of submissions only.

10. However, Mr Parkinson, understandably, objected  to  the  admission  in
    evidence of the appellant's additional witness statement on  the  basis
    of its late production, and having regard to the fact that there was no
    application made under rule 15(2A) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 for that evidence to be admitted.

11. In the circumstances, I directed Ms  Jones  to  prepare  a  notice,  in
    manuscript,  pursuant  to  rule  15(2A)  which   I   then   considered.
    Notwithstanding the very unsatisfactory circumstances in which  it  was
    sought to rely on the additional  evidence,  I  decided  to  allow  its
    admission having regard to rule 2, and the fact that it was  not  clear
    that the President had directed that  the  appeal  proceed  by  way  of
    submissions only. I also took into account the lengthy history  of  the
    proceedings and that the appeal had first come  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as long ago as 2012 and that this was a  protection  claim.  I
    considered that it was  in  the  interests  of  justice  to  admit  the
    evidence so that I had all possible information  before  me  so  as  to
    ensure a just determination of the appeal.

12. Mr Parkinson having indicated that he would wish to  cross-examine  the
    appellant on a particular part of her witness statement, she gave  oral
    evidence.

    The oral evidence

13. The appellant adopted the additional  witness  statement  of  29  March
    2017.  She was asked in particular about paragraph 4  of  that  witness
    statement.  It reads as follows:

         "My mother previously informed me that unknown men  called  at  her
         house in Valvettithurai (Jaffna) enquiring about me and my two  (2)
         younger brothers - [P] and [T] who were  LTTE  fighters.   The  men
         came in civilian clothing and they spoke to my mother  because  she
         was the one at home when the men visited.  My mother told  me  that
         she believes that the men are from  CID  from  the  government.   I
         cannot remember the exact date when this visit  took  place  but  I
         believe that my mother informed me about the  visit  sometime  last
         year".

14. In cross-examination Mr Parkinson asked  when  the  appellant's  mother
    informed her of unknown men calling at her home.   The  appellant  said
    that it was in 2016 and that it was in that year also that the men came
    to her home.  She was unable to remember either when the men  are  said
    to have come to her mother's home, or when she was told about it.

15. She said that her mother was asked about one of her  brothers  who  was
    missing and the other one who is deceased.  They also asked about  her,
    the appellant.  The brother who is missing  is  called  [T].   He  went
    missing in 2009, during the war.  Her other brother died in 2008.

16. She had had no contact with her  brother  who  went  missing  after  he
    joined the LTTE.  They tried but without success.  He joined  the  LTTE
    in 2008 after her other brother died in the same year.

17. The authorities were aware of her brother's death.  She agreed that  it
    was eight years after his death that the men made enquiries about  him.
    As to what questions her mother was asked, she said that her mother did
    not tell her too much, just that they asked about hers  and  the  other
    brother's (or other brothers') whereabouts.  Her mother told  her  that
    she said to them that she could not give them any  information  as  she
    had none to give.  She told them that  they  were  not  there.   As  to
    whether her mother told them that her brother had  been  dead  for  the
    last eight years,  she  said  that  her  mother  did  not  divulge  any
    information about her brother being in the LTTE.  She feared  that  she
    might encounter problems if she did so.  She did not say that  she  had
    not seen the other brother for seven years.

18. In answer to my questions she said that she  had  not  mentioned  those
    events (the visit) previously because it had only happened in 2016.

    Submissions

19. The following is a summary of the parties' submissions, including those
    submissions made before the appellant gave oral evidence.

20. Mr Parkinson relied on the  respondent's  skeleton  argument.   It  was
    submitted that the appellant was unable to establish that there  was  a
    real risk of  persecution  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   She  had  been
    completely inactive for five years.  Given  the  approach  of  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities, it is inconceivable that she would be at risk.

21. In  relation  to  the  further  evidence  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement and her oral evidence, it was submitted  that  little  weight
    should be attached to it.  That  evidence  was  produced  at  the  last
    moment but relates to matters  from  some  time  in  2016.   Given  the
    significance of the issue, it was not credible that the appellant would
    not be able to say when the two men apparently  came  to  her  mother's
    house or when she was told about it by her mother.   It  was  unlikely,
    given that there was a death certificate and  the  appellant's  brother
    had died eight years earlier, that the  appellant's  mother  would  not
    have told that to the men that visited.  Likewise  in  respect  of  the
    brother who had been missing for seven years.

22. It is clear that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  have  a  sophisticated
    intelligence network.  The appellant left legitimately with a visa  and
    had done nothing whilst in the UK to give  her  a  profile.   There  is
    nothing to indicate that there would be any continuing interest in her.



23. Ms Jones submitted that all  the  preserved  credibility  findings  are
    positive, there being nothing adverse.  The core  of  her  account  was
    accepted.  One brother is deceased and another brother is missing.  The
    appellant herself was detained and tortured.

24.  The  appellant's  additional  evidence  is  not  decisive  but  it  is
    consistent with her claim that her mother would be greatly in  fear  of
    any enquiries in relation to her children's associations with the LTTE.
     Her additional evidence was important as  it  brackets  the  appellant
    with her brothers.  In that context I was referred to  aspects  of  the
    appellant's asylum interview.

25. Paragraph 339K of the Rules was relevant.  In GJ and others (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)  it  refers  to  a
    shift in focus by the Sri Lankan authorities.  If a  person,  like  the
    appellant, was arrested in 2011, that would have been done on the basis
    of intelligence.  On the other hand, although the  authorities  have  a
    sophisticated intelligence network, that does not always mean that they
    are correct (in terms of the appellant having been inactive in the UK).
     Although the appellant is not in fact a risk to the Sri Lankan  State,
    she may be perceived as such.

26. Furthermore, her partner is a recognised refugee, having  been  granted
    leave to remain as a refugee on 12 November 2013.  The appellant  could
    be questioned about him on return.  That is a factor that would  create
    a heightened risk for her.  In this  context  I  was  referred  to  the
    decision in MP and NT v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829, in particular at [11].  The respondent  was  wrong
    to seek to compare  the  appellant  with  the  appellant  NT,  who  was
    detained in 2002.  This appellant was detained nine years later and two
    years after the end of the civil war.

27. The appellant would additionally be at risk as a single female head  of
    household, having regard to the decision in PP (Sri Lanka) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  1828.   It  is  true
    that, theoretically, she could go to Colombo but on  return  she  would
    need to provide an address in her home area.  It would be unduly  harsh
    to expect her to live alone in Colombo.  It was also submitted that  it
    would be unduly harsh for her to live  alone  and  separated  from  her
    husband  and  child.   It  was  accepted  however,  that  the   primary
    submissions were in relation to GJ and others.

28. In response to the specific  point  about  the  asserted  risk  to  the
    appellant as the spouse of a refugee, Mr Parkinson submitted  that  the
    basis upon which her partner was granted refugee status is  not  known.
    His claim may have been based on matters arising prior to the  decision
    in GJ and others.  There would be no obligation  on  the  appellant  to
    respond to any questions about her partner.  It is not even clear as to
    why she would be questioned.  GJ and  others  does  not  say  that  she
    would.  There is no evidence that she is on  a  watch  list.   She  was
    released on payment of a bribe  and  has  no  profile.   There  was  no
    reasonable likelihood that she would be asked questions.   This  was  a
    matter that was speculative and unsubstantiated.  There was no evidence
    from her husband about his status.

29. Finally, Ms Jones submitted that the appellant could not be expected to
    tell lies (in relation to her partner).  The fact that she was released
    on payment of a bribe did not  mean  that  she  would  not  be  of  any
    interest.  She would be recorded as having escaped as indicated  in  GJ
    and others at [146].  It was accepted however, that being  recorded  as
    an escapee would not be sufficient if a person was detained before  the
    end of the civil war.

    Post-hearing submissions

30. Following the hearing, and after a further review  of  the  documentary
    evidence before me, it was apparent that there was a need to obtain the
    First-tier Tribunal's written decision in the appeal of the appellant's
    partner, SM, which had not been provided.  Following my having obtained
    that decision, I sent further directions to the parties for the  filing
    and service of further submissions in relation  to  it.   Both  parties
    filed submissions  in  response  to  those  directions.   They  can  be
    summarised as follows.

31. The respondent's submissions refer  to  the  decision  in  SM's  appeal
    having been promulgated on 26 June 2013, before promulgation of GJ  and
    others, and that First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio properly had regard  to
    the then country guidance of TK (Tamils -  LP  updated)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00049.  SM's claim was that he was arrested in 2001 by the
    Sri Lankan army because his sister was involved with LTTE  individuals,
    and those individuals used to come to  their  home.   He  was  detained
    until 27 February 2002 when he was released after the peace talks.   He
    was then arrested by the EPDP in Vavuniya, having been forced  to  work
    as a driver for the LTTE between July 2006 and October  2008.   He  was
    detained for five months until his release on payment of a  bribe.   He
    was subsequently detained by the Sri Lankan army in  Colombo  in  April
    2009, held for a month and then released, again on payment of a  bribe.
    Although he was released on reporting conditions, he reported twice and
    left the country assisted by an agent.

32. Judge Adio's decision does not indicate that SM had any involvement  in
    diaspora activities in the UK.  No submissions were made to Judge  Adio
    relating to any such activities and no findings  to  that  effect  were
    made by him.

33. The respondent's submissions contend  that  if  SM's  appeal  had  been
    considered in the light of GJ and others, as opposed to TK, the outcome
    may well have been different.  It is submitted that it was difficult to
    see how SM would have been found to be at risk on return with reference
    to GJ and others.  Accordingly, the fact that SM's appeal  was  allowed
    and he was found to be credible does not assist this appellant  in  her
    asylum appeal.

34. On behalf of the appellant it is submitted that SM's appeal would  have
    been allowed even with reference to GJ and others.  He would come under
    the risk category of those who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to
    the integrity of Sri Lanka because they are, or are perceived to  have,
    a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism.

35. Reference is again made to the decision in MP and NT.   Following  that
    decision, involvement in diaspora activities is not a necessary  factor
    for inclusion in the first risk category in GJ and others.

36. The appellant's written submissions provide a more detailed summary  of
    the basis of SM's claim and the findings of fact made  by  Judge  Adio.
    It is  submitted  that  his  history  brings  him  within  the  UNHCR's
    Eligibility Guidelines in relation to  Sri  Lanka,  dated  21  December
    2012.  It is submitted that SM's recorded  escape  from  detention  and
    breach of his bail conditions would also increase the risk arising from
    the perception that he is a terrorist sympathiser.

37. It is submitted that  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities would perceive the appellant and her  partner  as  together
    forming a new  LTTE-supporting  family  unit.   Information  about  the
    appellant would, if  not  already  known,  be  established  during  her
    interview or monitoring on return.  The appellant could not be expected
    to lie about her marriage to SM in order to avoid persecution, nor  can
    she be expected to lie about her own and her original family's  support
    for the LTTE.

38. There were cumulative risk factors which apply to  the  appellant,  not
    only relating to her own personal circumstances  and  previous  adverse
    interest by the authorities but as a result of her association with her
    husband.

    Conclusions

39. There is, to some degree, an air of unreality in the determination of a
    protection claim in relation to this appellant given that it seems that
    she will be granted leave to remain on Article 8 grounds  in  terms  of
    her family life with  her  partner,  SM,  a  recognised  refugee.   The
    unreality of the situation is particularly sharply focused in terms  of
    the contention that the appellant would be  at  risk  on  return  as  a
    single  female  head  of   household.    The   hypothetical   situation
    contemplated is that the appellant would be returning to Sri  Lanka  on
    her own, without her partner, and  (according  to  her  latest  witness
    statement) with her daughter, born on 8 August 2014.

40. Nevertheless, that is the basis upon which her protection claim  is  to
    be assessed.

41. The current country guidance, from GJ and others, is as follows:


                   "(1)    This determination replaces all existing  country
guidance on Sri Lanka.


         (2)   The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.


         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.


         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.


         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.


         (6)   There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only those
             whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.


         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:


             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.




             (b)      Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                  human  rights  activists,  who,  in  either   case,   have
                  criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its
                  human  rights  record,  or   who   are   associated   with
                  publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.


             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes
                  witnesses.


             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.


         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.


         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is
             not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport  but  will
             be monitored by the security services after his or her return.
             If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person  is  a
             Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan
             state or revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in
             question is not, in general, reasonably likely to be  detained
             by the security forces.  That will be a question  of  fact  in
             each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by
             such an individual.


         (10)     Consideration must always be  given  to  whether,  in  the
             light  of  an  individual's  activities  and  responsibilities
             during the  civil  war,  the  exclusion  clauses  are  engaged
             (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of the
             Qualification  Directive).   Regard  should  be  had  to   the
             categories  for  exclusion  set  out   in   the   "Eligibility
             Guidelines For Assessing the International Protection Needs of
             Asylum-Seekers from Sri  Lanka",  published  by  UNHCR  on  21
             December 2012."

42. On behalf of the appellant the risk category said to apply  to  her  is
    contained in (7)(a) of the guidance, that is, individuals who  are,  or
    are perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single
    state etc.

43. It is accepted on behalf of the appellant that she is  not  in  fact  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a state.  It is also  the  case
    that she does not claim to have been involved  in  post-conflict  Tamil
    separatism.  She has  not  undertaken  'diaspora  activities'.   It  is
    contended however, that the risk to her is in terms of how she will  be
    perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities.

44. Furthermore, as was said in MP and NT (the Court of Appeal decision  in
    GJ and Others), at [50], diaspora activism is not the only  basis  upon
    which a returning Tamil might be regarded as posing a current or future
    threat to the Sri Lankan state, although  that  would  usually  be  the
    principle basis.  It was said that there may be other, untypical, cases
    where the evidence shows particular grounds for concluding that the Sri
    Lankan government might regard an individual as posing a current threat
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence  of
    evidence that the person has been involved in diaspora activism.

45. It is worth emphasising the guidance in GJ and others in terms  of  the
    approach of the Sri Lankan authorities  being  based  on  sophisticated
    intelligence, both as  to  activities  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
    diaspora.  An individual's past history will be relevant  only  to  the
    extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating
    a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state  or  government.   Thus,
    the appellant's own background of having been  persecuted  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities is not at all determinative of her appeal.  However,
    as always, past persecution is a relevant factor to take  into  account
    in accordance with paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules, quite apart
    from authority.

46. In addition to the preserved positive findings to which I have referred
    at [6] above, there was further evidence from the  appellant  asserting
    relatively recent interest in her by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.   I
    have also set out that evidence above.  The appellant's recent  witness
    statement in which she describes contact by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
    forces with her family in 2016, asking as to  her  whereabouts  is,  to
    reiterate, dated 29 March 2017.

47. I bear in mind the positive credibility findings which  are  preserved.
    The core of the appellant's account has previously  been  found  to  be
    credible.  However, I do not accept that the  appellant's  evidence  of
    this recent interest in her by the Sri Lankan authorities is reasonably
    likely to be true.

48. Although not determinative of the credibility of that evidence,  it  is
    in my view significant that the evidence  is  contained  in  a  witness
    statement dated the day before the hearing before  me.   The  appellant
    said that a visit by the people that her mother thought were  from  the
    CID was in 2016, although she could not remember when in  2016.   I  do
    not attach much significance to the fact that the appellant was  unable
    to remember when in 2016 she was informed by her mother of the visit by
    the CID, but I do regard it  as  significant  that  the  evidence  only
    emerged as recently as it  did.   It  is  to  be  remembered  that  the
    appellant was represented by solicitors in  2016  in  relation  to  her
    appeal to the Court of Appeal in respect of the decision  of  the  DUTJ
    who dismissed her appeal.  The skeleton argument  in  support  of  that
    appeal is  dated  3  May  2016.   In  the  manuscript  application  for
    permission to rely on the additional evidence before  me,  made  at  my
    direction on the day of the hearing, it  is  not  suggested  that  that
    evidence was notified to the appellant's solicitors  earlier  than  the
    date of her  most  recent  witness  statement.   It  is  similarly  not
    suggested that at the CMR that took place before the  President  on  12
    January 2017 any further evidence from the appellant was to be adduced,
    suggesting again that the appellant had not notified her solicitors  of
    those events by that date.

49. Furthermore, the appellant's evidence  is  that  the  authorities  were
    aware of the death of her brother P, who died in 2008. The  appellant's
    oral evidence before me was ambiguous in terms of whether the enquiries
    made of the appellant's mother included enquiries as to the whereabouts
    of the appellant's deceased brother.  Of course, such an enquiry  would
    not be reasonably likely given the authorities' knowledge of his  death
    and what is now accepted as the sophisticated intelligence of  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities.

50. Furthermore, although the appellant said in evidence  that  her  mother
    did not tell her too much about the enquiries made by those individuals
    who are said to have spoken to her, the fact of the matter is that  the
    appellant's evidence in relation to their  visit,  and  in  respect  of
    which the burden of proof is on her, was vague in terms of what she was
    told by her mother.

51. In all the circumstances, I am not satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    given a credible account of recent interest in her by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

52. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that her association  with  her
    partner, SM, would increase the risk to her.   I  have  summarised  the
    post-hearing submissions in relation to Judge Adio's conclusions in his
    appeal.  It is argued that even under GJ and others  his  appeal  would
    still have been allowed.  On behalf of the respondent it  is  contended
    that not only would SM's appeal not have been successful under  current
    country guidance, her association with him would not create or  enhance
    any risk to her.

53. The appellant's skeleton argument  in  response  to  my  directions  in
    relation to SM's  appeal,  by  and  large,  accurately  summarises  the
    findings made by Judge Adio.  My summary below of Judge Adio's findings
    in SM's appeal however,  is  drawn  directly  from  his  decision.   He
    concluded  that  SM's  sister  had  joined  the  LTTE  in  1994.    The
    authorities in Sri Lanka were interested in  SM's  household.   He  was
    arrested and detained in 2001 by the authorities and released in  early
    2002.

54. Judge Adio found that SM had given a credible account of how  the  LTTE
    forced him to work for them and when he decided not to engage  in  arms
    training he was required to work  for  them  as  a  driver.   The  LTTE
    themselves detained him in November 2006 because  he  refused  to  join
    arms training.  He escaped from that detention and  it  was  thereafter
    that he became a driver for the LTTE.  That was when he returned to the
    house where he had been living.

55. He was accused by paramilitary organisations of having connections with
    the LTTE and when he was working in his uncle's shop  the  LTTE  forced
    him to help them.   He  was  arrested  in  October  2008  by  the  pro-
    government group PLOTE, and detained in a camp.  During  his  detention
    which lasted a period of five months he was tortured.  He was  released
    in March 2009 after his uncle paid a bribe.

56. Judge Adio found at [57] that once the authorities became interested in
    him in 2001 "he was always going to  be  a  target".   His  sister  had
    joined the LTTE and he concluded that it was reasonable  to  find  that
    the authorities would be likely to know about that.  His  uncle's  shop
    and his own home "could have been noticed with  the  presence  of  LTTE
    members".

57. Two of SM's brothers fled Sri Lanka because of harassment  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities.  One of his  brothers,  who  gave  evidence  before
    Judge Adio, had claimed asylum in the UK.  He found that  there  was  a
    reasonable likelihood that the  authorities  were  interested  in  SM's
    family which led the  authorities  constantly  to  check  on  him,  and
    thereafter to arrest him.  His account of being arrested  in  2009  was
    consistent with the other evidence that he had given.

58. He also found that the interest of the authorities in SM was more  than
    random and was connected to the history of SM's family and SM  himself.
    SM was arrested in 2009 and released on payment of  a  bribe.   He  was
    required to report but failed to do so and Judge  Adio  concluded  that
    this was would be recorded as an escape "of some sort".

59. Deciding the appeal with reference to the then country guidance in  TK,
    he concluded, amongst other things, that SM had a previous record as  a
    suspected LTTE supporter and had been detained but had failed to comply
    with reporting "restrictions".  There was a perception therefore,  that
    he would be  regarded  as  someone  who  is  not  complying  with  bail
    conditions.  The authorities would perceive SM as being linked  to  the
    LTTE.

60. There is plainly an air of artificiality in seeking to  assess  whether
    SM would, if his appeal were heard today on the basis  of  the  current
    country guidance of GJ and others, be found to be  a  person  who  came
    within that guidance and would thus be at risk on return.   Judge  Adio
    quite properly decided the case on the basis of the country guidance as
    it then was, and there is no difficulty in  understanding  why  it  was
    that he decided to allow the appeal on the basis of the evidence before
    him and in the light of that guidance.

61. In the respondent's submissions, a comparison is made  between  SM  and
    the appellant NT who  was  the  second  appellant  in  GJ  and  others.
    However, each case is fact specific  and  I  do  not  believe  that  my
    assessment of this appellant's appeal would benefit from  a  comparison
    of SM's circumstances with that of one of  the  appellants  in  GJ  and
    others. That is quite apart from the fact of the differences  in  their
    circumstances.

62. The focus for my deliberations must be the facts and  circumstances  of
    this appellant with reference  to  the  current  country  guidance  and
    background material. I can see however, that  a  definitive  conclusion
    that SM would, even now, succeed in his appeal would be  a  significant
    factor in the assessment of risk to this appellant, by  reason  of  her
    association with him. The converse is not the case.

63. On the basis of the information before me, and taking into account  the
    findings in his appeal with reference to current  country  guidance,  I
    cannot see that the evidence would establish that SM, considered alone,
    comes within the risk category contended for in the guidance, namely at
    (7)(a), being individuals who are or are perceived to be  a  threat  to
    the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state etc.   The  evidence  does
    not lead to a conclusion that he is or would be  perceived  to  have  a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism  within
    the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka. In  this
    I assume that everything relevant to his  circumstances  has  been  put
    before me, particularly bearing  in  mind  the  opportunity  for  post-
    hearing submissions.

64. I used the expression "considered alone" in  the  preceding  paragraph.
    That means that I do not however, rule out  the  reasonable  likelihood
    that, considered with the appellant, his case in terms of risk may,  in
    the hypothetical exercise of considering whether he would succeed in an
    appeal on the basis of existing country guidance, derive  support  from
    hers (and as explained below, hers from his).

65. As already indicated, I reject the appellant's evidence of  any  recent
    adverse interest in her in terms of visits by security  forces  to  her
    home.  This puts into context the contention that the  appellant  would
    be at risk as a lone female head of household in  a  militarised  zone.
    The fact is, she has her parents in Sri Lanka.  There is no basis  from
    which to  conclude,  in  its  own  right  absent  an  established  risk
    otherwise, that the appellant would be a lone female head of household.
     She could live with her parents and younger sister.  Accordingly, I do
    not consider that the decision in PP (Sri Lanka) assists the  appellant
    in that respect.

66. I should also say that since the hearing of this appeal before me,  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal gave guidance on the same issue on  the
    remittal of the case of PP to the Upper Tribunal, now  reported  as  PP
    (female headed household; expert duties) Sri Lanka  [2017]  UKUT  00117
    (IAC).  In that case, to summarise, he concluded that  a  Tamil  female
    single head of household  residing  in  the  former  conflict  zone  of
    northern and north eastern Sri Lanka, may  be  at  risk  on  return  in
    various ways by members of the security forces.  Factors  to  be  taken
    into account are also  the  subject  of  guidance.   However,  for  the
    reasons I have given, I do  not  consider  that  this,  as  a  distinct
    factor, is significant in this appellant's case.

67. A person's previous involvement with the LTTE, or even  their  family's
    involvement, on its own is unlikely to lead the Sri Lankan  authorities
    to a conclusion that  such  an  individual  would  be  a  risk  to  the
    integrity of the Sri Lankan state.  The objective of the authorities is
    now to identify those working for Tamil separatism and  to  destabilise
    the state, as  explained  in  GJ  and  others.   To  that  extent,  the
    appellant's reliance on her historic links  with  the  LTTE  is  not  a
    sufficient basis from which to conclude that she would be  at  risk  on
    return.  Past persecution is plainly a factor to be taken into account,
    as I have already made clear.   But  the  decision  in  GJ  and  others
    establishes the context within which an assessment of terms  of  future
    risk in Sri Lanka is to be made with reference to past persecution.

68. In the respondent's skeleton  argument  it  is  suggested  that  it  is
    difficult to see on what basis the Sri Lankan authorities would see the
    appellant as a threat now, given that she does not claim to have  taken
    part in  any  pro-Tamil  activities  since  arrival  in  the  UK.   The
    authorities' sophisticated intelligence would have  turned  up  nothing
    that would cause her to be of further interest, it is argued.

69. However, it is also important to bear in mind the UNHCR guidelines  for
    risk factors which in  MP  and  NT  are  said  to  be  relevant.   This
    appellant is a person with former family links to the  LTTE.   Although
    historic association as  I  have  indicated  would  not  of  itself  be
    sufficient,  the  death  of  one  of  the  appellant's  brothers   was,
    relatively recently, published in an LTTE newspaper  and  his  obituary
    notice seems to have been on the internet  in  May  2013.  That,  as  I
    understand it, is the meaning of the DUTJ's finding that  his  obituary
    notice was downloaded from the  internet  in  May  2013,  although  the
    source of that finding was not referred to by either party  before  me,
    and it is to be remembered that he died in 2008.

70.  Returnees  are  routinely  asked   about   LTTE   links   during   the
    redocumentation process at the Sri Lankan High Commission, according to
    evidence recorded at [137] of GJ  and  others.  That  paragraph  states
    that:

           "He [Professor  Rohan  Gunaratna]  confirmed  that  it  was  his
           understanding that when being re-documented for  return  to  Sri
           Lanka at SLHCs abroad, applicants  were  routinely  asked  about
           past LTTE links. There  were  no  detention  facilities  at  the
           airport; if a returnee was of interest by reason  with  past  or
           current links with known LTTE front organisations  abroad,  they
           would be invited for interview  once  they  had  returned  home,
           rather than at the airport.

71. At [306]-[310] the following evidence is set out:

           306.   President Rajapaksa has stated repeatedly that the GOSL's
                  approach to security is now intelligence-led. The security
                  services debriefed thousands of Tamils at the end  of  the
                  civil war and the GOSL has available to it  sophisticated,
                  high quality intelligence, enabling  it  to  evaluate  and
                  assess the  risk  posed  by  particular  individuals  both
                  within and without Sri Lanka.

           307.        Sri Lankans returning without a Sri  Lankan passport
                  will require an Emergency Travel Document for  which  they
                  need to apply at the SLHC in London.  Full  disclosure  of
                  all relevant identity information is given in the  process
                  of obtaining a  TTD.  An  applicant  completes  a  lengthy
                  disclosure form and is then interviewed at the Sri  Lankan
                  High Commission in London;  the  information  received  is
                  sent  to  the  Ministry  of  External  Affairs   and   the
                  Department of Immigration and Emigration in Colombo. Files
                  are created and records verified; if the authorities agree
                  to issue a TTD, the MEA in Colombo emails the document  to
                  the Sri Lankan High Commission in London where the TTD  is
                  stamped, a photograph added, and issued to the applicant.

           308.              During  the  re-documentation  process  in the
                  United Kingdom, or at the  airport  on  return,  a  forced
                  returnee can expect to be asked  about  his  own  and  his
                  family's LTTE connections and sympathies.

           309.            Those with  Sri  Lankan  passports  returning on
                  scheduled flights will be able  to  walk  through  Colombo
                  airport without difficulty, unless their names  are  on  a
                  "stop" list, by reason of an outstanding  Court  order  or
                  arrest warrant. Those on a "watch" list are not stopped at
                  the airport but will be monitored and if considered to  be
                  a destabilisation risk, may be picked up from  their  home
                  area.

           310.              There  are  no  detention  facilities   at the
                  airport. Although individuals may be  interviewed  at  the
                  airport by the security forces, the Sri Lankan authorities
                  now aim to move returnees relatively quickly  out  of  the
                  airport and on their way to their home areas and to verify
                  whether they have arrived there  soon  afterward.  If  the
                  authorities have an adverse interest in an individual,  he
                  will be picked up at home,  not  at  the  airport,  unless
                  there is a "stop" notice on the airport  computer  system.
                  There is no evidence that  strip  searches  occur  at  the
                  airport; the GOSL's approach  is  intelligence-led  rather
                  than being driven by roundups and checkpoints  as  it  was
                  during the civil war."

72. In the light of the foregoing, it seems to me to be at least reasonably
    likely that on return the appellant would be questioned and  that  such
    questioning would reveal her own background and  those  of  her  family
    members. Even without such questioning there is a reasonable likelihood
    that the process of redocumentation would establish her  background  in
    any  event.    She  would,  if  not  already  known  at  the  time   of
    questioning, have to reveal her relationship with SM.  It is reasonable
    to conclude that her  brother's  'martyrdom'  and  the  2013  newspaper
    article about him would also be known to the authorities, or  would  be
    revealed by the appellant, having formed part of the background to  her
    claim in the UK, and about which she could be expected to be asked.

73. Whilst it is accepted that the appellant is not in fact a risk  to  the
    Sri Lankan state, the combination of factors in her background  and  in
    her relationship with SM is a sufficient basis from which  to  conclude
    that she is reasonably likely to be perceived as  such  a  risk.   That
    conclusion is informed by the UNHCR's  guidelines,  albeit  that  those
    guidelines are not determinative.

74. The risk to the appellant is not established because  of  hers  or  her
    family's historic association with the LTTE. It is based on what  could
    be described as a  reasonably  likely  perception  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities of 'persistent links' with the cause of  Tamil  separatism,
    through her family and in her association with SM, who as an individual
    and through his family has also been associated with that cause.

75. In all these circumstances, I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established to the required standard that she does face a  well-founded
    fear of  persecution  for  a  Convention  reason,  namely  her  imputed
    political opinion.   Accordingly,  her  appeal  is  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds.  It follows that her appeal  is  also  allowed  on  Article  3
    grounds.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, the  appeal  is
    allowed on asylum grounds, and human rights grounds with  reference  to
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      26/06/17
