
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08810/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 05 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     BM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu of Counsel instructed by Duncan  Lewis,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is an Iranian national born in 1985.  On 28 January  2008
    she arrived with leave to enter as a student  expiring  on  21  October
    2012.  During June 2011 she had made an application for  further  leave
    to remain as the family member of a refugee which was refused in August
    2011.  On  11  April  2013  she  made  an  application  for  subsidiary
    protection in her own right which on  26  August  2014  the  Respondent
    refused.  The Appellant's father has been recognised as  a  refugee  on
    account of his political opinion and her claim was  on  the  basis  she
    also had been involved politically and in particular had  maintained  a
    blog critical of the Iranian authorities.

The Home Office Decision

 2. By a letter of 26 August 2014 the Respondent rejected  the  Appellant's
    claim for subsidiary protection.  She considered the Appellant was  not
    credible in the light of the lack of evidence  to  support  her  claim,
    inconsistencies in her account and her delay in claiming  asylum.   The
    Respondent  referred  to  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and to the country guidance  on
    sur place claims in BA (demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran
    CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).  She concluded that  on  return  to  Iran  the
    Appellant would not be at risk.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 3. By a decision promulgated on 26 August 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Amin made adverse credibility findings against  the  Appellant
    and dismissed her appeal on all grounds.

 4. On 16 September 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Reid granted  the
    Appellant permission to appeal because it was arguable  the  Judge  had
    failed to consider the Appellant's blogging claim with reference to the
    decision in AB and Others (internet activity - state of evidence)  Iran
    [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC).  Further,  it  was  arguable  her  finding  the
    Appellant would not be of interest to the Iranian authorities on return
    was based on speculation and she had failed to have full regard to  the
    country expert report of 4 January 2015 prepared by Dr Van Engeland at
    pages 42-62 of the Appellant's first bundle.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 5. The Appellant attended but other than to confirm her  address  took  no
    active part in the proceedings, the purpose and the procedure of  which
    I explained to her.  It was quite clear at the opening exchange between
    the Appellant and myself that she had at least a minimum fluency in the
    English language.



Submissions for the Appellant

 6. Ms Akinbolu  relied  on  the  grounds  for  appeal.   These  are  full.
    Essentially,  they  challenged  the  Judge's  failure  to  address  the
    learning in AB and Others and its findings that there  is  evidence  of
    people blogging outside Iran reporting that members of  their  families
    had, consequentially, been detained and of some monitoring of  blogging
    activities outside Iran by the Iranian authorities.

 7. The second  ground  took  issue  with  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
    relevance of the Appellant's membership and involvement  in  the  Green
    Wave movement.  The expert report had addressed this but the Judge  had
    not.  Further, there were no grounds  for  the  Judge's  finding  that,
    since the Green Wave movement no longer existed as an organisation, the
    Appellant's fears on return were merely speculative.

 8. The third ground challenged the Judge's treatment  of  the  Appellant's
    claim that the United Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention to respect her  private  and  family  life  in  the
    United Kingdom were engaged by her appeal.  This  last  ground  asserts
    the Judge's adverse credibility  findings  were  not  well-founded  and
    failed  to  give  due  weight  to  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  the
    submission  of  a  disk  and  supporting  evidence  from  Dr   Khonsary
    evidencing her political involvement.

 9. It was properly arguable that the Appellant fell within the  guidelines
    and risk categories identified in AB  and  had  the  Judge  taken  this
    determination into account it might have well have made  a  significant
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.

10. The Judge had not addressed the statements from the Appellant's  family
    and others who knew her from  her  political  or  blogging  activities.
    Additionally, she had not expressly addressed the  background  evidence
    submitted in support of the appeal.

11. The Judge's treatment of the Article 8 claim contained material  errors
    of law.  She had not considered the aspects of  the  Appellant's  claim
    based on her refugee  parents'  dependence  on  her  because  of  their
    failing health.  Ms Akinbolu referred to paragraph 113 of the  decision
    which merely stated the meaning of what constitutes private and  family
    life.  If  it  was  meant  as  a  criticism  of  the  strength  of  the
    Appellant's claim it was unsustainable.

12. The decision as a whole was not safe and could not stand. It should  be
    set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

13. Mr Staunton accepted, quite properly, that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    address the learning in AB and that if there was an error  of  law  the
    appeal would need to be heard afresh in its entirety.

Findings and Consideration

14. I shall follow the order of paragraphs  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and the paragraph numbers are references to it.

15. The reference at paragraph 70 to Somalia embedded  in  a  paragraph  in
    which the Judge states she has considered the background evidence  when
    the Appellant is an Iranian national is at the very least careless.

16. At paragraph 74 the Judge repeats the Appellant's claim to be  at  risk
    because of her blog and political  activities  but  in  fact  makes  no
    express finding whether this fundamental part of the Appellant's  claim
    is accepted or not.

17. The apparent inconsistency  when  the  Appellant  opened  her  blogging
    account, whether it was in 2009 or 2010  identified  at  paragraph  76,
    was, absent any other contextual material, not a matter which could  be
    considered  as  undermining  the  Appellant's  credibility,  especially
    having regard to the Appellant's claims mentioned in  paragraph  10  of
    her decision to which it would have been appropriate for the  Judge  to
    refer. She also  does  not  make  it  clear  whether  she  reached  her
    conclusion after allowing that the  Iranian  calendar  year  starts  in
    March.

18.  At  paragraph  78  the  Judge  finds   the   Appellant's   claim   was
    "opportunistic" but fails to give any reason to  support  this  finding
    which therefore is no more than speculation.

19. At paragraph 80 the Judge refers to the Appellant's delay  in  claiming
    asylum but fails to take into account her full immigration history  set
    out in  the  Respondent's  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letters  but  not  in
    paragraphs 2 and 3 of her own decision.

20. At paragraph 81 the Judge criticises the Appellant  for  supposing  the
    blogs critical of her evidence that the  Iranian  authorities  are  the
    perpetrators of threats against  her  or  that  they  closed  her  blog
    accounts but no reasons are given for her adverse conclusion.

21. At paragraph 82  the  Judge  finds  the  Appellant's  claimed  fear  of
    persecution on return to  be  speculative  because  the  expert  report
    states that the media  outlets  in  which  she  claimed  to  have  been
    involved had ceased to exist.  There is no explanation why the  closure
    of the media outlets in  which  the  Appellant  claimed  to  have  been
    involved means that her claimed historic  involvement  in  them  in  an
    opposition role ceases to be of relevance to her claim.

22. Paragraph 89 makes the second and last reference to the expert  report.
    It appears to refer to paragraph 37 of the report but does  not  fairly
    reflect what the report stated.  The  expert  did  not  find  that  the
    Appellant's fear was objectively well-founded only if there was a court
    order against her.  The expert concluded that the Appellant had "a well-
    founded fear of persecution  on  the  basis  of  her  political  ideas,
    especially if the court order exists".

23. The Judge reached her conclusions at paragraph 94 without any reference
    to the background evidence of which a  substantial  quantity  had  been
    submitted for the Appellant.  Her statement that the Appellant did  not
    use social media in Iran is extraordinarily comprehensive and sweeping.
     The Appellant's claim is that she did not  operate  a  political  blog
    until after she had left Iran. There is no  consideration  whether  the
    Appellant might have used social media for non-political purposes. This
    may not be a material error but indicates a dis-connection between  the
    evidence and the conclusion.

24. The Judge's conclusions  in  paragraphs  92  and  96  are  inadequately
    reasoned, if only by the failure to take account of  the  determination
    in AB and Others.

25.  At  paragraph  99  the  Judge  fails  to  distinguish  the   different
    involvement which the immigration authorities are  likely  to  have  in
    respect of those departing and those entering a country.

26. At paragraph 100, the Judge's wording raises a  serious  doubt  whether
    she has applied the correct standard of proof.

27. The Judge's treatment of the Appellant's claim under Article 8  outside
    the Immigration Rules at paragraph 109 dealing  with  Part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as  amended  fails  to
    reflect the learning in Dube (ss.117A-117D)  Zimbabwe  [2015]  UKUT  90
    (IAC).  At paragraph 119 she  conflates  the  treatment  of  Article  8
    claims under the Immigration Rules and outside the Rules.

28. For all  these  reasons  I  find  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    contains material errors of law such that it should be set aside in its
    entirety.  The appeal will need to be heard afresh.

29. Taking account of  the  nature  of  the  errors,  no  findings  can  be
    preserved from the First-tier Tribunal's decision.   Having  regard  to
    s.12(2)  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  Practice
    Statement  7.2(b)  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-finding
    required, I conclude the appeal should be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to decide.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors of law and  is
    set aside in its entirety.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.  Anonymity direction continued.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 29. xii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

