
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08625/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke-on-Trent                         |Determination Sent         |
|On 18 March 2014                                |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              Shahrokh Mirzaei
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Shahrokh Mirzaei, was born on  26  May  1977  and  is  a
    citizen of Iran. The appellant had previously  claimed  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2003 but had returned voluntarily to Iran  in  August
    2006.  He left Iran again on 8 August 2012 travelling by lorry  through
    Turkey to the United Kingdom where he arrived and claimed asylum on  24
    August 2012.  On 29 August 2013, he was refused asylum and  a  decision
    was also taken to remove him from the  United  Kingdom  as  an  illegal
    entrant.  The appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge P J Clarke) which, in  a  determination  dated  12
    October 2013, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge carried out  an  inadequate
    assessment of the evidence which led him to find, erroneously, that the
    appellant's account of past events  in  Iran  was  not  credible.   The
    instances of the judge's alleged misunderstanding of the evidence,  his
    failures  to  consider  explanations  provided  by  the  appellant  for
    apparent inconsistencies and  rejections  of  the  appellant's  account
    without giving adequate reasons are numerous and are set out in  detail
    in the grounds of appeal.  Having  considered  the  determination  very
    carefully, I have concluded that some of the  alleged  inadequacies  in
    the determination are made out.  I  shall  give  particulars  of  those
    instances below. However, it should first be recorded that Judge Clarke
    has clearly striven to carry out a detailed analysis of the appellant's
    (somewhat complex) account of past events.

 3. The appellant claims to have joined a spiritual group  in  Iran  called
    Interuniversal Mysticism  (hereafter  IUM).   In  the  section  of  the
    determination headed "credibility findings" the judge, at 82(v),  noted
    that the appellant had been asked at interview  about  the  differences
    between IUM and Islam as practised in Iran.  He had only been  able  to
    provide  details  of  one  difference  (the  absence  of  a  need   for
    intermediaries  such  imams  in  the  practise  of  IUM).   The   judge
    considered that this "cast doubt on his  understanding  of  IUM."   The
    judge considered that the appellant was "clearly an educated  man;  and
    had he been a true follower, I consider he  would  have  been  able  to
    explained  further  differences."   Mr  McVeety,  for  the  respondent,
    acknowledged that the judge in reaching this finding has failed to have
    regard  to  the  various  detailed  answers  regarding  IUM  which  the
    appellant had given in his asylum  interviews.   For  example,  in  his
    interview answer at [40] the appellant has given a detailed answer to a
    question about the difference between Islam and IUM but the judge makes
    no reference to this in his determination.  Whilst the  judge  was  not
    obliged to accept that the interview record  effectively  rebutted  the
    respondent's submission that the appellant  had  limited  knowledge  of
    IUM, I find that he should have engaged more fully with the appellant's
    evidence, in particular the interview record.  Given  that  there  were
    parts of the appellant's evidence which supported his  claim  to  be  a
    member of IUM, I find that the judge should have explained  in  greater
    detail why he found that the appellant was not a true follower of  IUM.



 4. At [82(vii)] the judge found that the appellant's explanations,

         and accounts of his Facebook difficult to follow and contradictory.
          I am unclear how he was able to access Facebook without the regime
         [in Iran] being aware.  He states that he used a  VPN  which  could
         evade regime censorship...  However he does not explain  how  those
         who he wished to access the Facebook pages could do so.


    A VPN is a Virtual Private Network which enables a computer to send and
    receive data across shared or public networks  as  if  it  is  directly
    connected  to  the  private  network  whilst   benefitting   from   the
    functionality, security and management policies of a  private  network.
    As the grounds point out, a VPN does not require the  users  to  access
    the network through the same item of computer hardware.  I accept  that
    the judge appears to  have drawn a  negative  inference  from  what  he
    perceived to be the appellant's failure  or  refusal  to  explain  "how
    those who he wished to access the Facebook pages could do so" whilst  a
    proper understanding of the nature of a  VPN  may  have  resolved  that
    apparent anomaly in the appellant's evidence.  I accept that the  judge
    has wrongly found that the appellant's account of  the  use  of  a  VPN
    diminished his credibility.

 5. At [82(x)] the  judge  found  that  he  was  "not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant placed posters of Karaj [a city in Iran]."  The posters  bore
    the photograph of Mohammad Ali Taheri, the founder of IUM.   The  judge
    noted that "the only  evidence  [the  appellant]  has  produced  is  of
    another placing of posters on a bridge  which,  as  he  accepted,  were
    nothing to do with him."  Here, the judge refers back to  [45]  of  his
    determination and whilst that  paragraph  deals  with  the  appellant's
    evidence about putting up posters  I  can  find  no  reference  in  the
    paragraph to the "placing of posters on  a  bridge."   The  grounds  of
    appeal assert that the appellant's account of  putting  up  posters  is
    both internally consistent and consistent with the background material.
     I can identify no proper reason in the determination  to  explain  why
    the judge was not satisfied that the appellant placed  the  posters  in
    Karaj as he had claimed.  The finding at [82(x)] is little more that  a
    bare assertion that the judge did not believe this part of the account.



 6. At [82(xiii)] the  judge  states  that,  "I  also  it  implausible  and
    incredible that [the appellant] would have returned to Sepah to ask for
    his documents back."  The appellant had travelled to the Sepah base and
    asked for the return of his passport and military card.   He  had  been
    told by the authorities that these documents would be returned  to  him
    and he would be informed when he might  attend  again  to  collect  the
    documents.  Again, it is not at all clear why the  judge  has  rejected
    this evidence out of hand.

 7. As I have indicated above, there is much detailed and accurate analysis
    of the evidence in the determination.  However, in the instances  which
    I have set out above, I find  that  the  judge  has  either  failed  to
    understand the evidence given by the appellant (and, as a  consequence,
    unfairly found the appellant's credibility to have been diminished)  or
    he has asserted that he does  not  believe  parts  of  the  appellant's
    evidence without giving any or any adequate reasons for such  findings.
    I find that there are  sufficient  examples  of  the  judge's  analysis
    faltering so as to render the  determination  as  a  whole  unsafe.   I
    stress that this conclusion does not mean  that  the  appellant  should
    have been believed in all those instances  where  I  find  the  judge's
    analysis to be inadequate.  It does mean that all the factual  findings
    of the judge should be set aside and the  appeal  considered  de  novo.
    Given that extensive oral evidence may be adduced, that is a task which
    I consider may be better addressed at a fresh hearing in the First-tier
    Tribunal which will need to remake the decision.





DECISION

 8. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  is  dated  12th
    October 2013 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact are preserved.
     The matter shall be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal (not  Judge
    P J Clarke) and that Tribunal shall remake the decision.







Signed                              Date 2 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

