
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08428/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th September 2014                          |On 16th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                          Mr Shah md hussain ahmed
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Martin Counsel instructed by Lawland Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Shah MD Hussain Ahmed, date of  birth  25th  December
    1953, is a citizen of Bangladesh.  Having considered the facts there is
    no need for an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Del Fabbro promulgated on 9th May 2014, whereby the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated the 3 September 2013 to remove the appellant from  the
    United Kingdom under section 10 of the 1999 Act.

 3. By decision made on 29 May 2014  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. The case appears before me to  determine  in  the
    first instance whether or not there was a material error of law in  the
    original determination.

 4. The grounds of appeal seek to argue: --

         a) The judge erred by failing to make findings on central parts  of
            the case, specifically whether the appellant had been in the  UK
            from 1993 onwards.

         b) The judge erred in his approach to the issue of false documents.
            Having acknowledged that the respondent had to  prove  that  the
            stamps on the passport were not genuine, as there was no  report
            analysing the stamps and no positive evidence otherwise to prove
            falsity, the burden of proof had not been discharged.

         c) The judge failed to make findings  as  to  whether  or  not  the
            appellant had been in the United Kingdom since 1993.

         d) The appellant had produced evidence to confirm he  had  been  in
            the United Kingdom for 30 years.

         e) The judge has failed to specify which provision under S-LTR .2.2
            to 2.4 had not been met.

         f)  The  judge  has  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for   the
            conclusions reached under paragraph 41, wherein  he  found  that
            the appellant still had ties to Bangladesh.

 5. The appellant's full immigration history is analysed in detail  in  the
    letter of refusal of 2 September 2013. The appellant  claimed  to  have
    entered the United Kingdom in 1973. At that stage  he  claims  to  have
    entered as a visitor with a visa valid for  six  months.  He  suggested
    that at that time he could re-enter without a further visa and  without
    any further checks. The appellant claims  that  that  system  continued
    until 1985.

 6. The appellant claims to have continued entering and  leaving  until  27
    June 1989, when his passport  was  stamped  with  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain. The appellant claims to have continued to travel to the  United
    Kingdom from Bangladesh on a number of occasions.

 7. The appellant claims that in  September  1999  after  obtaining  a  new
    passport he attended at the Immigration  Offices  in  Croydon  and  the
    indefinite leave status was endorsed into the new passport.  There  was
    no evidence to confirm such appointment other than a photocopy  of  the
    appellant's passport.

 8.  To  substantiate  parts  of  his  case  the  appellant  has   produced
    photocopies of what he claims to be his original passports.  He  claims
    otherwise that his original passports, all  four  of  them,  have  been
    stolen.  The photocopies of the passport are in the main  the  evidence
    relied upon to show that the appellant has been given indefinite  leave
    and has been in the UK continuously since 1993.

 9.  On  the  appellant's  account  he  has  admitted  travelling   between
    Bangladesh and the United Kingdom on a number of occasions up to  2003.
    He claims that in 2003 there was a breakdown of his  relationship  with
    his family and he has not been back to Bangladesh.

10. It is the respondent's case that the appellant has never  been  granted
    indefinite leave and that given the evidence otherwise  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that he was not satisfied that the  appellant  had
    been in the UK continuously since 1993.

11. As part of the grounds of appeal it is asserted that in paragraph 37 of
    the determination the judge has rejected the stamps in the  appellant's
    passport. It is asserted that no evidence was submitted on the part  of
    the respondent to show that the stamps in the  appellant's  "passports"
    were not genuine.

12. That seems to ignore what was being  produced  before  the  judge  were
    photocopies and not the originals. It also seems  to  ignore  that  the
    appellant's account clearly shows that at least one of  the  stamps  on
    the photocopies produced was not genuine.

13. As identified by the judge in paragraph 37  of  the  determination  the
    appellant's account was not consistent with  a  stamp  in  one  of  the
    photocopies. The stamp on the photocopies was to the  effect  that  the
    appellant had been given indefinite leave in Manchester  in  1976.  The
    appellant had stated that he was  first  granted  indefinite  leave  in
    1989. He had not been granted indefinite  leave  in  1976.  That  stamp
    cannot be genuine and the photocopy is either a photocopy  of  a  false
    document or the photocopy itself has been altered in some way.

14. Whilst the judge had noted in paragraph 35 that the burden was  on  the
    respondent to prove the falsity of a document, on the  appellant's  own
    evidence that stamp and document were not genuine. No  explanation  had
    been given as to how the photocopy could have a stamp on  it.  As  only
    photocopies had been produced, the original could  not  be  checked  on
    this or any other passport. It did not need the respondent  to  produce
    evidence to show that document was not genuine. On the appellant's  own
    account it was not genuine. The judge was entitled to  make  a  finding
    based on the evidence presented.

15. In the light of that the  requirements  for  refusing  this  matter  on
    Suitability grounds under S-LTR.2.2 were made out as found by the judge
    in paragraph 38 of the determination. Whilst the judge has referred  to
    paragraphs S-LTR.2.2-2.4, it is clear  that the provisions of paragraph
    2.2 are engaged on the facts. By reason thereof the judge was  entitled
    to dismiss the appeal under the immigration rules specifically appendix
    FM.

16. It has otherwise been asserted that it was required  of  the  judge  to
    make findings of fact as to other parts of the appellant's account.  In
    assessing the credibility of the appellant the judge took into  account
    that there was clearly a false document that  had  been  produced.  The
    judge  was  therefore  not  satisfied  that  he  could  rely  upon  the
    appellant's account otherwise.

17. There were clearly periods of time when the appellant was  not  in  the
    United Kingdom. The judge found that he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had been continuously in the United Kingdom  as  required  by
    the rules. Again that was a finding of fact that the judge was entitled
    to make on the basis of the evidence. That finding  was  sufficient  to
    deal with the appellant's claim.

18. The judge has gone on to consider Article 8  private  and  family  life
    outside  the  rules.  The  judge  has  carefully   assessed   all   the
    circumstances and has given valid reasons for coming to the  conclusion
    that he did.

19. In the  circumstances  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination. I uphold the decision to  dismiss  this  matter  on  all
    grounds.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

