


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/08235/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester CJC
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 20th February 2019
On 13th March 2019



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                     R V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms S Khan (Counsel, instructed by IAS)
For the Respondent:        Mr C Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This appeal has a lengthy history which has involved a number of
   appeals. For these purposes the relevant decision is that of First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Cruthers promulgated on the 27th of February 2018
   following a hearing on the 9th of January 2018 in Manchester. In a
   lengthy decision running to 126 paragraphs over 36 pages the Judge set
   out the basis of the Appellant's claim, the evidence received and
   discussed the issues before dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

2. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal to the Upper
   Tribunal made to the First-tier Tribunal was refused but granted on a
   renewed application to the Upper Tribunal. That explains the delay in the
   case coming to a hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

3. The grounds argue that the First-tier Tribunal acted procedurally
   unfairly in paragraph 57 as the suggestion that the cigarette burns could
   have been self-inflicted had not been put to the Appellant. Secondly it
   is argued that the Judge erred in in failing to take account of the
   Appellant's vulnerability in assessing the Appellant's account, referring
   to the guidance in AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123. Thirdly it is
   argued that the Judge erred in the assessment of the risk the Appellant
   would face in the event of return to Sri Lanka.

4. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray granted permission on the 13th of
   August 2018. The principal basis for the grant of permission was that it
   was arguable that the Judge had not directed himself in accordance with
   AM (Afghanistan) and the appropriate guidance. It was observed that the
   other grounds had less merit.

THE HEARING

5. The oral submissions were made in line with the parties' respective
   positions. These are set out in full in the Record of Proceedings and
   summarised here. With regard to the first ground self-infliction had not
   featured in the Refusal Letter and the Appellant had not been cross-
   examined on that basis. I asked how it was central, it was submitted that
   this went to the claim he had been tortured and detained. With regard to
   the Appellant's vulnerability this was dealt with in paragraph 10 of the
   grounds. Referring to the findings made and a number of authorities and
   the Appellant's mental health difficulties the Judge should have
   considered the Appellant's vulnerability, the case law was not in the
   mind of the Judge. So far as his risk of return was concerned the
   evidence of the Appellant's involvement was sufficient to meet the
   guidance in GJ.

6. For the Home Office it was submitted that the observations in paragraph
   57 were an observation and not a finding that he had self-inflicted the
   injuries on his lower legs. Reference was made to paragraph 66, the Home
   Office maintained that the evidence had been assessed in the round. The
   report could not say who had caused the injuries and this was not
   material. On vulnerability reference was made to paragraph 44, at
   paragraph 45 the guidance was borne in mind and the Judge was aware of
   the approach, paragraphs 59 and 60 the Appellant's PTSD and medication
   was noted, in paragraph 63 there was no evidence from the psychiatrist
   regarding ideation. There was late disclosure of the claims of ill-
   treatment and in paragraph 78 the Judge set out what was accepted and did
   give the Appellant the benefit of the doubt.

7. Devaseelan was the starting point and credibility had been properly
   assessed. The Appellant's account had changed and at its highest there
   had been a fundamental shift which was not explained by his mental health
   difficulties, the non-disclosure had not been explained and it was not
   the Appellant's case that he had not raised it because of his mental
   health. The explanations given had been considered. In short the Judge
   assessed the evidence and was mindful of the Appellant's mental health
   and considered the explanations given.

8. So far as the Appellant's sur place activities were concerned the
   grounds were a simple disagreement with the decision, the Judge had
   considered the extent of the Appellant's involvement. It was submitted
   that the Appellant had attended 15 demonstrations between 2009 and 2014
   and had been little more than a participant, the Judge was entitled to
   find that the Appellant did not have a high profile.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

9. Burnett LJ in EA v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 10 at paragraph 10 made the
   following observations: "Decisions of tribunals should not become
   formulaic and rarely benefit from copious citation of authority.
   Arguments that reduce to the proposition that the F-tT has failed to
   mention dicta from a series of cases in the Court of Appeal or elsewhere
   will rarely prosper.  Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v
   Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be read on the
   assumption that, unless he has demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew
   how he should perform his functions and which matters he should take into
   account". He added that an "appellate court should resist the temptation
   to subvert the principle that they should not substitute their own
   discretion for that of the judge by a narrow textual analysis which
   enables them to claim that he misdirected himself".  Moreover, some
   principles are so firmly embedded in judicial thinking that they do not
   need to be recited.  For example, it would be surprising to see in every
   civil judgment a paragraph dealing with the burden and standard of proof;
   or in every running down action a treatise, however short, on the law of
   negligence. That said, the reader of any judicial decision must be
   reassured from its content that the court or tribunal has applied the
   correct legal test to any question it is deciding."

10. In Re M-W (Care proceedings: Expert evidence) [2010] EWCA Civ 12 at
   paragraph 39 Wall LJ stated: "I regard the following as trite
   propositions of law:- (1) Experts do not decide cases. Judges do. The
   expert's function is to advise the judge; (2) The judge is fully entitled
   to accept or reject expert opinion; (3) If the judge decides to reject an
   expert's advice, he or she; (a) must have a sound basis upon which to do
   so; and (b) must explain why the advice is being rejected. (4) Similar
   considerations arise when a judge prefers one expert's evidence to that
   of another. Judges must explain why they prefer the evidence of A to that
   of B."

11. The sentence in paragraph 57 that the Appellant could have inflicted
   cigarette burns on himself was clearly an observation and not a finding.
   The medical evidence was discussed at length between paragraphs 54 and
   66. As an observation it forms a very small part of the discussion and is
   not remotely central to the discussion or the findings made. A fair
   reading of the relevant paragraphs shows that the observation had no
   impact on the overall assessment made by the Judge. To characterise it as
   a finding is not simply misleading but wrong and to suggest it is central
   to the reasoning applied is to attach weight to it that has no sense or
   justification. Given the size of the file as it now is it may be that the
   observation had not been spotted by the Judge but as it was not held
   against the Appellant in the findings made the point has no relevance.
   This is not an error.

12. Turning the Appellant's sur place activities secondly this was dealt
   with by the Judge at paragraph 75 to 81 with the Appellant's actual
   involvement and the consequences set out at paragraphs 79 to 81. From
   paragraph 115 to 125 the Appellant's risk was discussed fully with the
   guidance in GJ forming the starting point for the Judge's consideration
   of the Appellant's case. There followed a discussion of each of the
   relevant risk factors ending with his participation in demonstrations.
   The underlying findings have not been challenged and there is nothing in
   the evidence or the grounds to show that the Appellant could be regarded
   as either prominent or high profile. The grounds are a disagreement with
   the findings made but do not show that the Judge erred in his approach to
   the evidence, the factual findings made or the conclusions drawn from
   them.

13. As Judge Murray observed the most significant ground is that relating
   to the Judge's treatment of the Appellant's mental health. In paragraph
   14 of the grounds it was stated "Even at the very start of the
   determination the Judge had formed a view that the Appellant's chronic
   PTSD was not necessarily going to explain the credibility issues that
   arose in this case." That appears to be a reference to paragraph 44 but
   as a summary of the approach to be taken it would not be wrong.

14. The fact an individual has PTSD and/or other mental health issues would
   still require an examination of the claim made and part of that requires
   a rounded assessment of all issues including differences in any accounts
   that have been given and the explanations for the discrepancies, if any,
   identified. An Appellant's mental health issues may explain discrepancies
   or they might not, that was an issue the Judge had to deal with.

15. In paragraph 6 of the decision the Judge correctly noted that the
   rejection of some aspects of an Appellant's evidence did not
   automatically lead to the centrepiece of the Appellant's case being
   rejected, following Chiver. The Judge's general approach to the
   Appellant's mental health issues was set out at paragraph 44 where the
   Judge stated that he had "proceeded with regard to the tribunal's
   relevant guidance relating to vulnerable witnesses." The lawyers were
   advised about the need for sensitive and appropriate questions and the
   Judge stated that he had borne the Appellant's vulnerability when
   assessing the evidence. That is in accordance with the extract relied on
   from JL (medical reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC) and
   the assessment of the relevance of an Appellant's vulnerability to
   inconsistencies relied on by the Secretary of State.

16. The issue is a question of substance not form. AM (Afghanistan) [2017]
   EWCA Civ 1123 is set out in the grounds at paragraph 12. Paragraph 30
   includes "The directions and guidance contained in them are to be
   followed and for the convenience of practitioners, they are annexed to
   this judgment. Failure to follow them will most likely be a material
   error of law." It is not an error of law to not set out the guidance, it
   is a failure to follow and apply the guidance. So far as the second
   ground is concerned there is no reference in the grounds, nor in the
   submissions made, to any specific paragraph in the decision where it is
   said that the Judge erred in the approach to these issues or the findings
   made as a result.

17. The Judge considered the medical evidence at paragraphs 54 to 66 of the
   decision, the reference to the possibility of self-infliction of
   cigarette burns has been considered above and forms a small and
   irrelevant observation. The psychiatric evidence was discussed at length
   in paragraphs 59 to 66. When considering the differences between the
   Appellant's accounts the Judge clearly had regard to the medical evidence
   relied on and the Appellant's vulnerability. There was nothing in the
   medical evidence that explained the differences between the Appellant's
   replies when first interviewed in 2007 and his evidence to Judge Simpson
   in 2008 compared to that before Judge Cruthers.

18. The fact that the Appellant has mental health issues was clearly
   relevant to the conduct of the proceedings and the Judge's consideration
   of the evidence and the decision clearly shows that it was taken into
   account in both settings. The fact that an Appellant has PTSD does not by
   itself lead to the conclusion that the account is to be accepted, the
   Judge has to analyse the evidence and assess the explanation for the
   differences, if any, between accounts that an Appellant has given. That
   is what the Judge did, the medical evidence did not explain why his
   account had changed so significantly from the evidence before Judge
   Simpson and there was no other evidence that assisted the Appellant in
   that regard. The grounds rely on form over substance and do not
   demonstrate that there was an error in the Judge's approach to the
   Appellant's vulnerability, the findings made or the final decision.


CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)


Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 12th March 2019










































