
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08069/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2015                       |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     KC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Worthington, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, KC, was born in 1987 and is a female citizen of  Gambia.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom in May 2009 as  a  dependant  spouse.
    She was granted further leave to remain in that status  on  26  October
    2009 and, on 29 November 2011,  a  further  application  for  leave  to
    remain was refused.  On  8  August  2013,  the  appellant  applied  for
    asylum.  Her application was refused and  the  decision  was  taken  on
    25 September 2014 to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.  She
    appealed against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Robson) which, in a decision dated  20  February  2015,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The main ground of  appeal  concerns  the  refusal  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to adjourn the hearing of the appellant's  appeal.   The
    hearing took place in Bradford on 2 February  2015.   The  judge  noted
    that the appellant had been  represented  by  solicitors  (Switalskis).
    Those solicitors indicated to the Tribunal that  they  were  no  longer
    acting at the Case Management Review (CMR) of  27  October  2014.   The
    appellant was subsequently represented by  the  Manuel  Bravo  Project.
    Those representatives applied for an adjournment which was granted.  In
    particular,  the  representative  sought  to  obtain  expert   evidence
    relating to female genital  mutilation  (FGM).   It  appears  that  the
    appellant was then granted legal funding and, in order  to  obtain  the
    expert report, a further adjournment was granted to  2  February  2015.
    However, Manuel Bravo Project appears to have  ceased  acting  for  the
    appellant who had instructed Ison Harrison Solicitors who wrote to  the
    Tribunal on 30 January 2015, a letter which was received by  the  judge
    at the hearing on 2 February 2015.   That  letter  indicated  that  the
    solicitors had received,

         "... a referral and copy of [KC's] papers this week  ...  but  have
         not had the opportunity to meet with her and take  instructions  on
         this case.  She will, we understand, seek a  short  adjournment  in
         order to meet with us and we therefore write simply to confirm that
         we would be in a position to meet with her in the same week as  the
         hearing and would be optimistic of being able to represent her  and
         prepare  for  a  hearing,  should  her   adjournment   request   be
         successful."

 3. The judge refused to adjourn  the  hearing.   At  [26],  he  refers  to
    "inquiries" which he caused to be made  with  Ison  Harrison  and  from
    which he learned that the appellant (not the solicitors) had asked  for
    the adjournment; the representative Ison Harrison who had been  present
    in the building had simply acted as a "messenger"; Ison Harrison had no
    funding in their instruction; and any file relating  to  the  appellant
    had not been received by Ison Harrison and they had no expert report.

 4. The grounds of appeal  assert  that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the
    overriding objective which appears in the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014  (paragraph
    2). Contrary to what the judge stated in the  decision,  Ison  Harrison
    had received the file and were in a position to meet with the appellant
    in the same week as the hearing.  There had been problems  obtaining  a
    new representative over the Christmas/New Year period.

 5. The judge makes no reference to the overriding objective which  in  the
    new Procedure Rules from 2014 provides the only guidance to  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges as to when they should or should not adjourn a hearing.
     In the present case, I am concerned that the judge was well aware that
    there had been a number of adjournments (this case had started  off  in
    the Fast Track, the appellant detained at Yarl's Wood) and that he also
    had  the  letter  from  solicitors   which   clearly   indicated   that
    instructions  would  be  taken  forthwith;  there  was  a  considerable
    likelihood that an expert report would also be obtained given that  the
    solicitors had obtained legal aid funding  ("we  understand  [there  to
    have been] a grant of legal aid funding by the Legal Aid Agency  ..."),
    a point made by Ison Harrison in their letter that  they  had  obtained
    funding and had obtained the appellant's file of papers,  both  matters
    which the judge appears to have misunderstood [26].  It is also unclear
    why the judge thought it was significant that the appellant  had  asked
    for an adjournment in person, rather than through Ison Harrison.   Ison
    Harrison were in no position to seek an adjournment since they had  not
    formally been entered on the record as acting for the appellant;  their
    letter made it clear the appellant herself would attend and  apply  for
    an adjournment.  The clear impression left by [26] was that,  for  some
    reason, the judge held this fact against the appellant  in  determining
    whether or not to adjourn the hearing.  Likewise,  I  cannot  see  that
    there was anything sinister in the fact that the representative of Ison
    Harrison, who was in Phoenix House, Bradford on the day of the hearing,
    was only acting as a messenger, that is to deliver the  letter  to  the
    judge.  Once again, the representative would have had no status  before
    the judge at the hearing because his firm had not formally  become  the
    representatives of the appellant.  I am concerned that  the  judge  has
    had regard to aspects of  the  application  to  adjourn  which  he  has
    misunderstood or misinterpreted and that these are matters  which  have
    had a material influence on his  decision  to  refuse  to  adjourn  the
    hearing.  I am well aware of the need of First-tier Tribunal Judges  to
    adopt a robust approach to  applications  for  adjournment,  but  I  am
    satisfied, in this  particular  instance,  that  the  judge  failed  to
    understand properly the nature of the application being made to him and
    the position of Ison Harrison.   I  therefore  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.  The matter must  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because the appellant has not had a fair hearing.  None of the findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    (not Judge Robson) will remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which is dated 20 February 2015
    is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The appeal is
    remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  Robson)  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 2 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

