
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08447/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2016                              |4th May 2016                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                LAYLA ALIKHEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Anderson, Manuel Bravo Project


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Layla Alikhel, was born on 1  January  1991  and  is  a
    female  citizen  of  Afghanistan.   I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  the
    appellant as the respondent and to the respondent as the appellant  (as
    they appeared respectively  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal).   By  a
    decision dated 30 April 2015, the respondent issued to the appellant  a
    notice of decision to remove her by way of  directions  having  refused
    her asylum claim.  The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Saffer) which, in a decision promulgated  on  5  November  2015,
    allowed the appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights  (Article  3/8  ECHR)
    grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State argues that the judge by making no reference  to
    Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004.  The appellant had failed to claim asylum  en  route  to  the
    United Kingdom in particular, in Italy.  At [25], the judge  had  found
    that the "damage to her credibility by her failure to claim  asylum  en
    route is minimal as I accept that the draw  of  family  is  a  powerful
    incentive against claiming it en route".  The finding ignored the  fact
    that the appellant met with her family in Italy.   Further,  the  judge
    had found a "material discrepancy" [22] concerning the date upon  which
    the appellant's husband had allegedly been killed.  As the judge noted,
    "[the appellant] initially said it was three years ago, then vigorously
    denied that in  her  substantive  interview  insisting  it  was  (then)
    thirteen months ago and then at the hearing twelve months later equally
    vigorously reverted back to it being (now) four years ago ...".   Later
    in the decision [27] the judge  found  that  it  was  likely  that  the
    appellant had "just got confused regarding when [her  husband's  death]
    happened".  Further, the judge accepted that the appellant is  pregnant
    [26] by a Mr Shaida with whom she now lives.   The  judge  found  that,
    "they did have an Islamic marriage as I do not accept  [the  appellant]
    will have entered a bigamous relationship  or  had  sexual  intercourse
    with another man unless her husband  was  dead  given  her  communities
    cultural norm (sic)".  The grounds argue that the judge has  failed  to
    explain why having a child by a man who is  married  to  another  woman
    (the judge refers to this  fact  at  [22])  would  also  appear  to  be
    contrary to the appellant's community's "cultural norms".  The  judge's
    findings are described as "irrational".

 3. I find that the judge has erred in law such that his decision falls  to
    be set aside.  I have reached that decision for the following  reasons.
    I accept that the judge's failure to make any reference to Section 8 is
    not, in itself, necessarily  a  material  error  in  law  but,  on  the
    particular facts of this case, it is significant that the appellant had
    travelled through Iran, Turkey, Italy and France  before  entering  the
    United Kingdom illegally in December 2014 and, as she points out in her
    Asylum Interview Record, she met  with  family  living  in  Italy.   At
    question 38, the appellant is asked, "Where are  your  brother-in-law's
    children now?"  The appellant replied,

         'On the way we had separated from his children.  Now he is with his
         children in Bulgaria.  I believe they are in  Italy  now  and  they
         have received documents from Italy because in  Bulgaria  they  were
         not given any place to live and were not  granted  (sic).   He  was
         deported from here to Bulgaria and he had known where to stay  then
         he went to Italy (sic).'

    Later in answer to question 44 ("So where are the  people  who  brought
    you up?") the appellant replied, "I do not know  where  they  are  now.
    The father who had raised me, my father he had come to Italy  after  my
    marriage and had  Italian  documents.   My  father  had  raised  me  in
    Jalalabad".  It is clear from the appellant's own evidence  that  Italy
    was not simply another country to which she had no connection  whatever
    and through which she had  simply  passed  en  route  to  her  intended
    destination, the United Kingdom.  Indeed, the  judge's  very  reasoning
    for attaching minimal weight to her failure to claim  asylum  in  Italy
    (the "draw" of family) appears to have operated more strongly in  Italy
    than in any other country through which she passed.  I accept that  the
    judge has dealt with the Section 8 issue and I  acknowledge  also  that
    the Upper Tribunal should hesitate before finding a  judge's  reasoning
    inadequate or irrational, but I find  that  the  judge  has  failed  to
    engage with an important issue  in  this  appeal,  an  issue  to  which
    specific reference had been made in the refusal letter [28].

 4. I am also concerned that the judge accepted that the appellant was from
    Afghanistan because "she has consistently said she is  from  there  and
    she speaks  a  language  used  extensively  there".   The  language  in
    question (Pushtu) is also spoken extensively in Pakistan.   It  is  not
    clear why the appellant  should  necessarily  be  believed  as  to  the
    question  of  her  nationality  simply  because  she  has  consistently
    asserted that she is from Afghanistan.  Once again,  I  find  that  the
    judge has failed to engage with important issues which had been  raised
    in the refusal letter.

 5. I also  agree  with  the  respondent  that  the  judge  has  failed  to
    satisfactorily  resolve  in  the  appellant's  favour   the   "material
    discrepancy" regarding the date of  the  death  of  her  husband.   The
    appellant did not simply make a single error regarding the date of  her
    husband's death; rather, as the judge pointed out at [22], she  gave  a
    series of completely discrepant answers over a period of time.  I  also
    agree with the respondent that the judge's reasoning for  finding  that
    the appellant's husband was dead (that she had chosen to enter a sexual
    relationship with another man) does not really stand up, given that the
    appellant has apparently contravened "culture norms" by having a sexual
    relationship with a man whose wife is still alive.

 6. The judge's reasoning is certainly concise but  it  leaves  begging  as
    many questions regarding the appellant's account as it seeks to answer.
     Viewed as a whole, I am not satisfied that the decision can stand.   I
    therefore set it aside.  None of the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand.
    There will need to be a further fact-finding exercise which the  First-
    tier Tribunal are better equipped to carry out.  I therefore return the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  that  Tribunal  to  re-make  the
    decision following a hearing de novo.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  5
    November 2015 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.
    The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Saffer)
    for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 29 April 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
