
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08406/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |                      Decision & Reasons|
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 19 May 2015                      |                      On 5 June 2015    |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR DK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Mr A MacKenzie (Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   For the sake of  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  as  the
    "Secretary of State" who is the appellant in this matter and to  DK  as
    the "Claimant".
2.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Stanford) who  in  a  Decision  and  Reasons
    dated 4 March 2015 allowed the Claimant's appeal against the  Secretary
    of State's decision to refuse to grant him asylum and to return him  to
    Iran.

3.   The Claimant is a citizen of Iran and he applied for asylum  under  the
    Refugee Convention.  In the reasons for refusal  at  paragraph  55  the
    Secretary of State did not accept the claim that he was a member of the
    Basij, but stated:

         "Even if it were accepted that you  were  a  member  of  the  Basij
         (which it is not), you would be excluded from the protection of the
         Refugee Convention under Article 1F(b); 'Under  Article  1F(b)  the
         provisions of the Convention shall not apply with respect  to  whom
         there are serious reasons for considering that he has  committed  a
         serious non-political crime outside the country of refuge prior  to
         his admission to that country as a refugee'.


         It is considered that the activities of the Basij could  constitute
         serious non political crimes (see COI Report 2013  Iran  paragraphs
         9.16-9.22).  You therefore would not qualify for  protection  under
         the Refugee Convention, even if your asylum claim was taken at  its
         highest."


4.   In its determination the First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)  [65]  dealt  with
    Article 1F as follows:

         "The respondent's representative did not pursue at the hearing  the
         possible exclusion of the appellant from protection  under  Article
         1F(b) of the Refugee  Convention  which  had  been  raised  in  the
         Reasons for  Refusal  Letter.   There  is  no  evidence  that  this
         exclusion should be applied to the appellant."


Grounds of Application


5.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal on the  grounds
    that :

6.   The FTT erred in law by not considering Article 1F(b) as raised in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter at paragraph 55,  in the event that  it  was
    found that the appellant was a member of the Basij and involved in non-
    political crime. The FTT accepted that the appellant was  a  member  of
    the Basij  [39]  for  eighteen  years  [24].   The  activities  of  the
    Claimant, whilst a member were described in the determination at [  38]
    and in the Reasons for Refusal Letter at paragraph 3.


7.   The representative for  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  pursue  in
    submissions  exclusion  under  Article  1F,  but  the  FTT  failed   to
    appropriately consider material parts  of  the  respondent's  case  and
    resolve the conflict as to whether  or  not  the  appellant  should  be
    excluded from reliance on the Refugee Convention.



Permission to Appeal

8.   Upper Tribunal  Judge  Martin  granted  permission  on  30  March  2015
    stating:

         "It is clear from the Record of Proceedings that  the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer relied on the letter of  refusal.   Whether  the
         appellant was a member of the Basij was a credibility point,  which
         once the judge found that he had been, ought arguably to  have  led
         to a consideration of Article 1F(b)".


Rule 24 Response

9.   The FTT did deal with Article 1F(b) in the decision and reasons  [  65]
    albeit  briefly  noting  that  the  representative  had  not  made  any
    submissions beyond relying on the reasons for refusal and finding  that
    there was no evidence that the Claimant should be excluded.  These were
    adequate in the circumstances.  Furthermore the Claimant's  submissions
    on Article 1F(b) were set out in detail in a skeleton argument which in
    summary argued that the Secretary  of  State  had  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof on her to show that  there  were  serious  reasons  for
    considering that the appellant committed  serious  non-political  crime
    prior to his entry in the UK.  Thus by stating there  was  no  evidence
    that the Claimant should be excluded, it  was  submitted  that  it  was
    evident that the FTT accepted the submissions on this matter.   In  any
    event the Reasons for Refusal Letter addressed the issue  of  exclusion
    in two short paragraphs solely  by  reference  contained  in  the  COIS
    Report.

10.  It was further submitted that in the event that it was  found  the  FTT
    failed to give adequate reasons in support of its conclusion, the error
    of law was not material  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  skeleton
    argument.

11.  In any event the FTT's decision to allow the  appeal  under  Article  3
    ECHR should stand. It was not challenged by the Secretary of State.

Error of Law Hearing

12.  Mr Bramble relied on the grounds of  application.   The  FTT  ought  to
    have  considered  Article  1F(b),  irrespective  of  the  two    "bald"
    paragraphs in the Reasons for Refuel Letter.  Having found the Claimant
    to be a member of the Basij it was not sufficient to leave  the  matter
    there.  The FTT needed to complete its assessment and give  reasons  in
    support of the conclusion made.

13.  Mr MacKenzie submitted that the appeal was wholly unmeritorious as  the
    FTT clearly considered the issue of exclusion at [65].  The  Tribunal's
    statement that there was no evidence was  correct.   The  Secretary  of
    State's  reference  to  Article  1F  at  paragraph  55  was  brief  and
    speculative.  There was no evidence to explain what activities amounted
    to serious non-political crimes or to show how the  claimant  could  be
    implicated.  Reliance was placed on the guideline decision of  JS  (Sri
    Lanka)  v  SSDH  [2010]  UKSC  15  in  which  mere  membership  of   an
    organisation is insufficient.  Where the Secretary of State adduced  no
    evidence and no oral submissions were relied on the FTT  was  perfectly
    entitled to come to a brief conclusion on the matter.

14.  At the end of the hearing I decided that there was  no  material  error
    of law in the Tribunal decision which shall stand.  The appeal made  by
    the Secretary of State was dismissed.  My brief reasons are as follows.

Discussion and Conclusions

15.  The FTT  concluded  that  the  Claimant  was  a  refugee  on  political
    grounds. This is not challenged.  The issue raised was the  failure  of
    the FTT to consider Article 1F(b)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  having
    found that the Claimant was a member of the Basij.  Article 1F provides
     that "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any  person
    with respect to whom there are serious reasons  for  considering  that:
    (a) ...., (b) he has committed a serious non  political  crime  outside
    the country of refuge prior to his  admission  to  that  country  as  a
    refugee;  (c)...".

16.  The leading case is JS (Sri Lanka) v SSDH [2010] UKSC 15  in  which  at
    [30 to 40] Lord Brown sets out the correct approach and  interpretation
    of Article 1F.

17.  Having regard to the Secretary of State's case under Article 1F as  put
    before the FTT, I am satisfied that there was no detailed  or  specific
    evidence, and/or consideration of the Claimant's role or activities  in
    the Basij. The Secretary of State made reference  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter to specific paragraphs  in  the  COIR  relevant  to  the
    Basij.  There was no further  consideration  or  analysis  of  evidence
    linking the Claimant to any  activities  that  could  come  within  the
    definition of a serious non political crime.  In short the Secretary of
    State's reference to Article 1F was limited and  generalised  and  thus
    itself deficient.  Accordingly, I agree entirely with  the  submissions
    made on behalf of  the  Claimant  together  with  the  content  of  the
    skeleton argument that was before the FTT.

18.  The FTT properly considered Article 1F with reference  to  evidence  in
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  No further oral submissions were  made
    at the hearing.  There was no further action that the FTT was  required
    to do as there was no evidence to show that  Article  1F  applied.   In
    such circumstances the FTT gave adequate reasons and I conclude that it
    cannot be argued that the FTT erred in law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the decision which shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 3.6.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is applicable.






Signed                                  Date 3.6.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
