
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08494/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 July 2016                               |On 05 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G A
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Fripp, Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal that is  Mr  Atsakzai  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant was born on [ ]  1996  and  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally on 19 September 2011 and claimed asylum.  His application for
    asylum and humanitarian protection under the  European  Convention  was
    refused by the Secretary of State and his appeal came before  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor on 5  January  2012,  who  found
    that the appellant, although a minor, was able  to  give  detailed  and
    cogent answers in his asylum interview and was able to  understand  the
    nature of the proceedings and give appropriate responses.  Nevertheless
    Judge Taylor proceeded to find that the inconsistencies in his  account
    set out in the Secretary of State's refusal letter, were such  that  at
    the age of 15 the  appellant's  claim  was  not  credible.   The  judge
    referred to the guidance of UNHCR on dealing with claims made by minors
    but, nonetheless relied on and adopted the inconsistencies set  out  by
    the Secretary of State referring to those as being "fully listed in the
    reasons  for  refusal  letter."   She  highlighted  the  main  area  of
    inconsistency  which  was  that  the  appellant  gave  three  different
    accounts of when his problems began  with  the  Taliban.   She  further
    found that the  appellant  gave  "the  implausible  evidence  that  the
    Taliban were attempting to find him to recruit him for a period  of  up
    to three years but were unable to do so."  Judge Taylor  recorded  that
    "the appellant gave  inconsistent  answers  on  the  frequency  of  the
    Taliban visits after his father's death,"  and found that  it  was  not
    credible that the Taliban never came at night or at a time that it  was
    likely that the appellant would be home (paragraph 14).  She also found
    it unbelievable that the appellant would disobey  the  instructions  of
    his uncle or that he would be left alone having been kidnapped  by  the
    Taliban such that he could escape.

 3. His appeal was  therefore  dismissed  but  the  appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave in the UK until 14 March 2014 on the basis  he  was
    an unaccompanied asylum seeking child.

 4. He applied for further leave to remain in the UK on 13 March 2014  that
    being refused on 23 September 2014 and a decision was  made  to  remove
    him under Section 47 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
    2006.  The appellant appealed on refugee and human rights grounds.

 5. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn  on
    19 June 2015 and his claim was allowed on 29 July 2015.  That  decision
    was subject to a challenge by the Secretary of State and the matter was
    returned  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Callender who also allowed the appeal. His decision  was
    the subject of further challenge.   An application  for  permission  to
    appeal was first  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Deans  but  then
    permission was granted by UT Judge Macleman.    I address  the  grounds
    of the Secretary of State in turn.

 6. Ground (i) it was asserted that the judge failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons on a material point.  In essence that  the  judge  circumvented
    the previous findings of Judge Taylor by relying on the evidence of the
    new witness, Mr Ajab Khan and on the basis that the  Tribunal  did  not
    reconcile the previous finding of fact.

 7. I find there is little substance in this ground.  The judge made  clear
    at paragraphs 54 to 57 that he had taken note of the previous  decision
    with reference to Devaseelan and reflected that the  original  decision
    was his starting point but accepted that the evidence of  Mr  Khan  was
    clear, cogent and credible and  had  assisted  him  in  arriving  at  a
    differing conclusion in relation to credibility of the  appellant.   He
    noted the closeness of the Afghan diaspora in the UK generally.  It  is
    clear that this witness  substantially  altered  the  approach  to  the
    appellant's case.  As the Secretary of State notes it was correct  that
    Mr Khan was not a witness at the previous hearing.  The judge explained
    the reasons for him accepting his evidence albeit  that  the  appellant
    had met him in London.  The challenge to the claim in  respect  of  the
    death of the father, on the basis that it was not clear who was  killed
    in May or June in relation to the appellant's family, is a disagreement
    with the findings of the judge who clearly found that the appellant was
    young when he arrived in the UK and his account had remained consistent
    [61]. The grounds themselves  rely  on  an  ambiguity  in  relation  to
    whether the evidence regarding family included the father. That  cannot
    be read into the recorded evidence to undermine the claim.

 8. Although it is advanced by the Secretary of State that  the  record  by
    the  judge  of  the  appellant's  account  remaining   consistent   was
    completely at odds with the previous determination,  the  core  of  the
    appellant's claim was that he was  targeted  and  of  interest  to  the
    Taliban.    That did remain consistent.

 9. As an  aside,  the  Secretary  of  State  advances  that  Judge  Taylor
    considered the appellant's age  when  assessing  credibility,  but  the
    evidence found on the one hand to be cogent and yet places emphasis  on
    the discrepant nature of the evidence.  That is  not,  however,  relied
    upon by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Judge Callender did  deal  with
    the core of the claim in the light of the new witness's evidence.

10. The second ground of challenge was in relation to the bombing  by  NATO
    forces of Afghanistan.  At [58] and [59 the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant's family was killed in a NATO bombing raid on the basis  that
    that was the evidence from the witness and that witness would  not  run
    the risk, if the Secretary of State undertook research, to be proved  a
    liar at court.   It  was  asserted  that  the  judge's  conclusions  in
    relation  to  the  witness  saying  something  that  was  fundamentally
    incorrect was inadequately reasoned, if not illogical.

11. I find that although it is not for the Secretary of State to show  that
    the incident did not occur and for the appellant to show  that  it  did
    the evidence nonetheless from the witness whom the judge  found  to  be
    credible was that there was  a  bombing  raid.   Bearing  in  mind  the
    contextual background  of  Afghanistan,  it  is  not  an  illogical  or
    surprising that the judge accepted the account of Mr Khan or  that  the
    village was bombed. The judge had clearly read the background  evidence
    which identified the extent of the war and the nature  of  violence  in
    Afghanistan, not least Dr Schuster's report - she referred to the  2014
    Mid-year report on Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict, and  'the
    deaths and injuries caused by mortars, rocket  propelled  grenades  and
    small arms fire  in  ground  engagements  jumped  dramatically  as  the
    frequency and intensity of these incidents increased in 2014'.

12. Although the judge's reasoning to support the credibility findings  was
    brief the judge gave reasoned findings and to a significant extent  the
    grounds amount to little more than a  disagreement  with  the  findings
    made.  The judge  was  entitled  on  the  evidence  to  find  that  the
    appellant's family was killed in the manner alleged.

13. The real challenge was made in relation  to  the  finding  with  regard
    relocation and undue harshness.  As the grounds advance,  the  findings
    in this respect are found at [60] to [64] and are in part  premised  on
    the basis that the appellant  has  no  family  and  the  appellant  has
    escaped the Taliban.  The judge accepted that the appellant had  indeed
    escaped from the Taliban.  The Secretary of State advances  that  there
    was no suggestion that the appellant  would  be  incapable  of  looking
    after himself and he may be able to rely on a returns package  explored
    at paragraph 224 of AK Article 15(c) Afghanistan CG and the  assistance
    of Mr Khan who it is said had visited Afghanistan recently.  These were
    not, it was asserted, considerations which the judge addressed.

14. It was submitted by Mr Tufan that the judge had not  cited  AK  Article
    15(c) Afghanistan [2012] UKUT and this was an obvious defect.   I  note
    this was not something which was specifically identified in the grounds
    for refusal and although the judge has not cited AK it is  quite  clear
    that, when assessing the individual circumstances of the  appellant  he
    concluded that he was still young, and the  judge  placed  reliance  on
    the report of Dr Schuster. Paragraph 63 of her report which in fact  is
    dated  2015,  clearly  identifies  the   deteriorating   situation   in
    Afghanistan.

15. Although not cited, I am not persuaded the judge failed to consider the
    findings in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan [2012] UKUT  163  (IAC).  In
    particular the head note  of AK states as follows

         (iv) Whilst when assessing a claim in the context of Article  15(c)
         in which the respondent asserts that Kabul city would be  a  viable
         internal relocation alternative,  it  is  necessary  to  take  into
         account (both in assessing "safety" and reasonableness")  not  only
         the level of violence  in  that  city  but  also  the  difficulties
         experienced by that  city's  poor  and  also  the  many  Internally
         Displaced Persons (IDPs) living there,  these  considerations  will
         not in general make return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.

16. AK at paragraph 243 confirms that the individual  circumstances  of  an
    appellant must be considered and Judge Callender clearly found that the
    appellant was young, had lived in the UK since he was a minor  and  had
    no family in  Afghanistan  and  considered  the  circumstances  of  the
    individual appellant and on this basis allowed the appeal.   As  stated
    in AK

         243.  (As  regards  Kabul  city,  we  have  already  discussed  the
         situation in that city and we cannot see that for the  purposes  of
         deciding  either  refugee  eligibility  or  subsidiary   protection
         eligibility (and we are only  formally  tasked  with  deciding  the
         latter) that conditions in  that  city  make  relocation  there  in
         general unreasonable, whether considered  under  Article  15(c)  or
         under 15(b) or 15(a). We emphasise the words "in  general"  because
         it is plain from Article  8  (2)  and  our  domestic  case  law  on
         internal relocation (see AH (Sudan) in particular)  that  in  every
         case there needs to be an inquiry into the  applicant's  individual
         circumstances; and what those circumstances  are  will  very  often
         depend  on  the  nature  of  specific  findings  made   about   the
         credibility of an appellant in respect of such matters  as  whether
         they have family ties in Kabul. But here our  premise  concerns  an
         appellant with no specific risk characteristics and  someone  found
         to have an uncle in Kabul: see above paras 3,5,154, 186 and  below,
         paras 250-254).  To summarise our conclusion, whilst when assessing
         a claim in which the respondent asserts that Kabul city would be  a
         viable internal relocation alternative, it  is  necessary  to  take
         into account (both in assessing "safety" and  reasonableness")  not
         only the level of violence in that city but also  the  difficulties
         experienced by that city's poor  and  also  the  many  IDPs  living
         there, these considerations will not  in  general  make  return  to
         Kabul unsafe or unreasonable, although  it  will  still  always  be
         necessary to examine an applicant's individual circumstances.

17. Although not directly on point  as the appellant is now over the age of
    18, AA (unattended children Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016, makes the
    point that unattached children returned  to  Afghanistan  depending  on
    their particular circumstances and the location to which  retuned,  may
    be at risk of serious harm from  for  example  indiscriminate  violence
    forced recruitment and sexual violence.  I note that the judge does not
    cite AA either despite finding there was no bright line with respect to
    age.  Dr Schuster's  report  also  identifies  the  remaining  risk  to
    returned asylum seekers, particularly the young,  from the Taliban  and
    the risks that they are identified as having lived  in  the  west.   Dr
    Schuster identifies the very severe difficulties including unemployment
    but more particularly the judge notes, at paragraph 60,  that  an  18th
    birthday is no bright line and dangers such as  forced  recruitment  by
    the Taliban or sexual exploitation of vulnerable  young  males  do  not
    disappear because the returnee is over 18.  It is  incumbent  upon  the
    judge to take into account all the circumstances of the case and  which
    the judge saw fit to do in the case of this particular appellant.   The
    judge also notes that the appellant was "young when he arrived  in  the
    UK originally."  As  Mr  Fripp  pointed  out  in  his  submissions  the
    appellant in AK was  disbelieved  and  from  the  assessment  of  Judge
    Callender that was not the case here.

18. The judge clearly found that the appellant was at risk in his home town
    and that he would be at risk substantially because of his age on return
    to Afghanistan.  Dr Schuster records the rise in the number of  attacks
    with civilian casualties in Afghanistan particularly in Kabul  and  the
    inability of the  forces  to  protect  themselves  let  alone  ordinary
    citizens.  She also,  at  paragraph  75  of  her  report,  states  that
    thousands of people are internally displaced  within  Afghanistan  each
    month  and  that  Kabul's  population  had  exploded  from  500,000  to
    5,000,000 in the space of ten years.  She referred to the  increase  in
    those displaced into IDB camps and those  unable  to  return  to  their
    original homes and a significant number of those  have  settled  around
    Kabul.  She states  "the  basic  infrastructure  including  sanitation,
    education and health have not kept pace.  There are  daily  power  cuts
    the water is contaminated" and she adds "unless  they  have  access  to
    support networks (71) they will find it difficult, perhaps  impossible,
    to find livelihood opportunities."  She also added that  employment  in
    Kabul was scarce.  Of particular importance was the scale  of  internal
    displacement in the area of prospective relocation.

19. She added finally at paragraph 76

         "Of further concern is that those returned after spending years  in
         Europe, in particular formative teenage years would stand out .. if
         they do not have family or friends in Kabul they will not have  the
         necessary guidance and advice on where to go  and  how  to  behave.
         This is as true in Kabul as in the provinces."

20. The  judge  effectively  concluded  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was without  family  members  in  Afghanistan  and  would  in
    essence be unable to navigate successfully any  process  of  return  to
    Kabul.

21. There is no doubt that Judge Callender took into account and relied  on
    the report of Dr Schuster and in the particular circumstances  of  this
    Appellant, who was ultimately found to be credible,  and  the  lack  of
    his uncle whom the judge found  likely   no  longer  alive  (there  was
    evidence in the bundle in the appellant's name that the Red  Cross  had
    been approached by the appellant to  elicit  tracing  information)  the
    judge has given adequate reasoning for his  findings  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed.

22. There is no material error in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and it shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

