
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08427/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th May 2016 & 30th August 2016  |On 6th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     hQ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
(18.5.2016)
     Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer (30.8.2016)


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Atkinson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 21st September 2015.



Background

 2. The Appellant says that he is a citizen of Iran, born on 21st  November
    1996.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 18th  February  2013  as  an
    unaccompanied minor but was refused on 3rd October 2014.

 3. The Appellant claimed that he would  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Iran
    because  of  a  former  relationship  with  a  girl.   His  claim   was
    disbelieved by the  judge and  there  has  been  no  challenge  to  his
    findings of fact.

 4. The Appellant also claimed to be  at  risk  on  return  to  Iran  as  a
    consequence  of  his  illegal  departure  and  the  fact  that  he  was
    undocumented.   A  considerable  amount  of  background  material   was
    produced to the judge arguing that the  country  guidance  case  of  SB
    (Risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT  00053  should  no
    longer be followed.

 5. So far as that submission was concerned the judge wrote as follows:

         "It is not necessary for me to make further findings in respect  of
         the Appellant's nationality. As noted above, I accept the  evidence
         of Dr Kakhki so far as it relates to the provisions of the  Iranian
         Code on Citizenship.  I note that the return of undocumented minors
         may be problematic but consider  that  aspect  of  the  Appellant's
         circumstances to be beyond the scope of fact finding necessary  for
         me to come to a determination as to whether or not he would face  a
         real risk of serious harm or on return to Iran."

 6. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the ground
    that the judge had not adequately engaged with the material before him.



 7. At the hearing Mr Diwnycz accepted that the judge had erred in law  and
    was content that the decision be remade when  the  forthcoming  country
    guidance case on this issue has been  promulgated.

 8. The Appellant is a member of the Kurdish community in Iran and entitled
    to Iraqi citizenship.  The removal directions are set to Iran and Iraq.
     It was submitted on the Appellant's behalf that removal to Iraq  would
    give rise to a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR  because  the  Appellant
    has never lived there and would not be able to call on the  support  of
    his family members who are based in the contested area of Kirkuk.   The
    judge did not consider the issue of risk on return to  Iraq  and  again
    permission was sought and granted on the basis that he  had  failed  to
    make a clear finding on  the  issue  of  nationality  and  whether  the
    Appellant would be at risk in Iraq.

 9. Again there was no resistance from Mr Diwncyz  who  accepted  that  the
    judge had erred in failing to decide one of the issues under appeal  as
    he was required to do.

10. The decision is set aside.





Resumed Hearing

11. At the resumed hearing the appellant produced a supplementary statement
    and further objective evidence in relation  to  both  the  position  of
    Kurds in Iran and the general security situation in Iraq.

12. In his statement the appellant maintained that he has  never  lived  in
    Iraq and does not know anyone there who would be able to  support  him.
    His Iraqi stepbrothers are in the UK.   He  speaks  no  Arabic  and  is
    uneducated.

13. Mr McVeety accepted  that  there  was  nothing  controversial  in  that
    witness statement   and  the  appellant's  Kurdish  ethnicity  was  not
    doubted.  He  also  accepted  that,  in  accordance  with  the  country
    guidance case of AA (Article 15(c) - Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 00544,  since
    the appellant had no sponsors in Iraq and he was  unable  to  be  in  a
    position to find work there,  he  would  struggle  to  argue  that  the
    appellant should not be entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

14. At paragraph 11 of the head note to AA  the Tribunal said:

         "Where P's return to Iraq is found by the Tribunal to be  feasible,
         it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has a  CSID,  or
         will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in  Iraq.
         A CSID is generally required  in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
         financial assistance from the authorities;  employment;  education;
         housing; and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no family  or
         other members likely to be able to provide means of support,  P  is
         in general likely to face a real risk of destitution, amounting  to
         serious harm, if, by the time  any  funds  provided  to  P  by  the
         Secretary of State or her agents to assist  P's  return  have  been
         exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have no CSID."

15. In the light of Mr McVeety's proper concession  I  find  that,  if  the
    appellant were to be returned to Iraq, he would be at real risk of harm
    under Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR and has characteristics  such  as  to
    put him at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

16. Since the first hearing of this case the country guidance case  of  SSH
    and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  CG  [2016]  UKUT00308  has
    been promulgated.  That case establishes that there is no real risk per
    se to appellants such as HQ who have left Iran  illegally  and/or  have
    claimed asylum in the UK.

17. Accordingly it was agreed between the parties that the  sole  issue  in
    this determination is whether there is a risk  of  refoulement  to  the
    appellant to Iraq upon removal to Iran, it having been accepted by  him
    that there is no real risk to him in Iran and by the respondent that he
    would be at risk of Article 3 harm in Iraq.

Submissions

18. Ms Khan accepted that the practical obstacles to the appellant's return
    to Iran or Iraq were not a matter for this Tribunal to  consider.  They
    could not, as such, found the basis of a  successful  claim.   She  did
    however submit that the appellant, upon removal to Iran, would be  sent
    to Iraq because of his father's nationality. The appellant  has  always
    maintained that his father, who was killed in 2003 when he was 6 or  7,
    was an Iraqi national.

19. By way  of  background  she  relied  on  the  UK  Home  Office  Country
    Information and Guidance Report on Iran dated July 2016 in relation  to
    Kurds and Kurdish political groups which states that Kurds in Iran will
    face institutional  discrimination  affecting  their  access  to  basic
    services such as housing, employment and education, although the  level
    of  discrimination  does  not  reach,  in  general,  the  threshold  of
    persecution.

20. According to the expert report provided  by  Dr  Kakhki  dated  27thMay
    2015, the father's citizenship is a decisive  factor  in  the  rule  of
    descent by blood.  He sets out Article 976 of Iran's Civil  Code  which
    states that anyone born to an Iranian father whether the birth  was  in
    Iran or abroad, is considered an Iranian citizen.  No reference however
    is made to the mother's citizenship even if she is an Iranian  citizen.
    Whilst persons born in Iran of foreign parents, one of  whom  was  also
    born in Iran, are considered to be Iranian subjects, this requires both
    parents to be foreign nationals and therefore not an avenue open to HQ.



21. Iran's Parliament has now  passed  a  law  allowing  children  with  an
    Iranian mother and a foreign  father  to  acquire  Iranian  nationality
    after they reach 18.

22. Subsection (5) of Article 976 reads as follows:

         "Persons living and born in Iran of a father of foreign nationality
         who have continued to  reside  at  least  one  more  year  in  Iran
         immediately after reaching the full age of 18; in other cases their
         naturalisation  as  Iranian  citizens  will  be  subject   to   the
         stipulations for Iranian naturalisation laid down by the law."

23. Ms Khan cited a report from Payvand News dated 7th May 2012 as follows:

         "New legislation passed by the Iranian Parliament grants  permanent
         residency to children to [sic] born to Iranian mothers and  foreign
         fathers.  The Khaneh Mellat website reports  that  the  legislation
         give  such  children  a  citizen's  right  to   education,   health
         insurance, social security and government case benefits,  but  they
         will not be given automatic Iranian citizenship.

         According to previous laws  children  born  to  Iranian  women  and
         foreign men could apply for Iranian citizenship  after  they  reach
         the age of 18, but prior to that they were denied residency and all
         citizen rights.  The new legislation was widely  expected  to  also
         grant citizenship to such children but  it  does  not.   Until  now
         children born to Iranian mothers and foreign national  fathers  had
         to acquire a visa to travel  to  Iran  and  face  residency  permit
         problems if they  wanted  to  live  there  permanently  with  their
         mothers.  Children born to Iranian  fathers  and  foreign  national
         women do not face such restrictions."

24. Ms Khan submitted that there were  clear  obstacles  to  the  appellant
    acquiring Iranian citizenship via this  route,  particularly  since  he
    left Iran at the age of 16.

25. She relied on the COI Report of September  2013  which  quoted  a  USSD
    Report of 2012 as follows:

         "Women cannot transmit citizenship to their children or to  a  non-
         citizen spouse.  According to media reports there  were  officially
         30,000 citizens married to Afghan  men,  although  the  number  was
         likely much higher.  As  a  result  there  were  more  than  32,000
         children  without  refugee  identification   cards,   making   them
         effectively stateless and barred from receiving government support,
         education, healthcare or travel documents.

26. Ms Khan submitted that not only were there obstacles in the appellant's
    way in seeking Iranian nationality, he was also at risk of refoulement.
     Dr Kakhki cites a report of an expulsion of a young Christian on  29th
    May 2011 whose situation was not dissimilar to that of  the  appellant.
    He had been born and had lived in the  city  of  Qom  from  an  Iranian
    mother and exiled father.  He was however denied  a  birth  certificate
    and according to the Farsi Christian News Network had been informed  of
    a decision to deport him to Iraq.

27. On that basis she asked that the appeal be allowed.

28. Mr McVeety submitted that there was  no  real  risk.   The  expert  had
    identified only one single person who had been deported  to  Iraq.   He
    pointed out that the source of  the  information  was  not  verifiable.
    Furthermore,  the  expert  himself  had  suggested  that  there  was  a
    possibility that HQ's father might have been able to  acquire  "Iranian
    nationality" particularly as he said that "when I was living in Iran no
    one suggested that I am an Iraqi.  I lived in Iran for all of my life."



29. Mr McVeety reminded me that this appellant had been found to be lacking
    in credibility and accordingly his word, in  relation  to  his  or  his
    father's nationality, could not be relied upon.

30. He also observed that the expert himself did not say that the appellant
    was at risk of refoulement to  Iraq.   There  were  many  Iranian/Iraqi
    Kurds and if refoulement was a genuine  risk,  there  would  have  been
    reports of deportations.

31. By way of reply Ms Khan said that the reason that there were  not  more
    examples was that many people travel without documentation but  in  any
    event where nationality was in dispute, few asylum seekers were able to
    be returned.  She said that the  Secretary  of  State  herself  in  the
    refusal letter stated that it was believed that the  appellant  was  an
    Iraqi citizen.

Findings and Conclusions

32. First, the appellant came to the UK on a false prospectus.  His  story,
    that he was at risk on return because of a sexual relationship  with  a
    girl which came to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities,  was
    rejected by the original Immigration Judge and there is no challenge to
    his conclusions.  It is in this context that his claim that his  father
    could not transmit Iranian citizenship to him has to be assessed.

33.  Second,  although  there  is  no  reason  at  all  to  disbelieve  the
    appellant's evidence that his father was an Iraqi national by  birth  -
    he has Iraqi stepbrothers in the UK - according to the  expert  it  may
    well be that his father could have  acquired  Iranian  nationality  and
    therefore been in a position to pass it on to his son.

34. Third, it does seem that it is the respondent's view that the appellant
    is an Iraqi national which may well be correct. It does not  mean  that
    he would be at risk of refoulement.  There are many people in the  same
    position as HQ.  It is most unlikely that if  refoulement  was  a  real
    risk there would not be many more reports of it.  The example cited  by
    the expert is of a single occasion in 2011.

35. Finally, whilst there is evidence in the COI Report  of  discrimination
    and potential obstacles to the appellant acquiring citizenship that  is
    some way from establishing risk of persecution on return.

36. It is important to bear in mind that the burden of proof in this appeal
    lies with the appellant.  He has to establish a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood of risk of refoulement to a country where  he  would  be  at
    real risk of serious harm. His own expert does not suggest that he  is.
    The evidence presented, effectively that of a deportation in 2011  from
    an unverifiable source, falls short of establishing a real risk.



Decision

37. The original judge's decision has been set aside.   It  is  re-made  as
    follows.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed[pic]                             Date 2 September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

