
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08913/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent:        |
|On 13th February 2014                           |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     Y H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed on behalf of
                    Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity direction  that  no  report  or
      other publication of these proceedings or any part or  parts  of  them
      shall name or directly or indirectly identify the claimant.  Reference
      to the claimant may be by  use  of  his  initials  but  not  by  name.
      Failure by any  person,  body  or  institution  whether  corporate  or
      incorporate (for the avoidance of doubt to  include  either  party  to
      this appeal) to comply with this direction may lead to a  contempt  of
      Court.   This direction  shall  continue  in  force  until  the  Upper
      Tribunal (IAC) or an appropriate Court lifts or varies it.

   2. The Appellant is a female unaccompanied asylum seeking child  with  an
      accepted date of birth  as  19th  February  1996.   She  appeals  with
      permission against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
      Taylor) who in  a  determination  promulgated  on  22nd  October  2013
      dismissed her claim on asylum and human rights grounds.

 1. The central issue in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  related
    to the Appellant's claimed nationality in which she stated  she  was  a
    citizen of Eritrea.  The history given by her was that her parents were
    both Eritrean and that whilst pregnant,  the  Appellant's  mother  fled
    Eritrea with her sister to Ethiopia where the Appellant was born.   Her
    mother died during childbirth and thus the Appellant was cared  for  by
    her aunt.  At the age of approximately 3 or 4 it was said that her aunt
    was deported by the Ethiopian authorities to Eritrea, at a time  during
    the Eritrea/Ethiopian war.  The  Appellant  was  left  behind  with  an
    Ethiopian woman whom the Appellant referred to as her "godmother",  who
    cared for her.  In  Ethiopia  she  was  brought  up  as  a  Pentecostal
    Christian, attended church and also attended school from the age of  7.
    At the age of 12 her godmother became ill and she left Ethiopia by  way
    of Sudan by the use of an agent to live with her aunt who by that  time
    had relocated from Eritrea to  Khartoum  in  Sudan.   She  remained  in
    Khartoum for three years with her aunt till she left on 4th July  2012,
    whereby the agent took her to an airport where she  took  a  flight  to
    France and was taken to a lorry park.  She was hidden  the  back  of  a
    lorry and taken to the United Kingdom  and  was  one  of  eight  people
    arrested by the police in the back of a lorry at Whitfield, Kent on 7th
    July 2012.

 2. In view of her age she was referred  to  Kent  Social  Services  as  an
    unaccompanied minor and thereafter attended the Asylum  Screening  Unit
    in July 2012 and  her  claim  was  registered  on  2nd  November  2012.
    Subsequently her asylum application was refused on  7th  December  2012
    but she was granted discretionary leave to  remain  until  19th  August
    2013.  On 15th August 2013 she applied for further leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent in a detailed reasons for refusal letter  dealt  with  a
    number of issues but principally with the issue of nationality  on  the
    basis that the Respondent believed her to  be  a  citizen  of  Ethiopia
    rather than Eritrea which was her claimed nationality.  For the reasons
    set in the refusal letter, and by reference to the objective  material,
    her application for asylum was refused.

 4. The Appellant appealed that decision and it came before the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Taylor) on  22nd  October  2013.   In  a  determination
    promulgated thereafter, the  judge  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant was not a citizen of Eritrea but had citizenship of  Ethiopia
    and rejected her evidence as not being credible as to the issue of  her
    nationality.  The judge therefore considered risk on return to Ethiopia
    finding that there was no basis to conclude that she would  be  subject
    to any  harsh  treatment  if  returned  there.   Thus  her  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that  decision  and  on  10th
    December 2013 Judge Cruthers granted permission.  It is plain from  the
    grant  of  permission  that  Judge  Cruthers  granted  the  application
    primarily because as  he  stated  "It  seems  to  me  arguable  as  per
    paragraph 9 of the grounds the judge did not make an assessment of  the
    Appellant's best interests before concluding that her removal  will  be
    proportionate in Article 8 terms (his paragraph 22)."  It is  right  to
    record that following the grant of permission and the Rule 24  response
    on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  a  letter  was  sent  by  those
    instructed on behalf of the Appellant seeking to demonstrate  that  the
    grant of permission did not restrict the grounds and that in the  light
    of the decision of the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v
    Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2,  that  the  grant  of  permission  was  an
    unrestricted one whereby all grounds should be arguable.

 6. Before the Upper Tribunal  Mr  Bandegani,  Counsel  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant developed the grounds for permission and did so helpfully  in
    a skeleton argument that he had produced for the hearing.  Dealing with
    Ground 3 at the outset of his submissions, he directed the Tribunal  to
    the decision of Blake J in ST (Child asylum seekers) Sri  Lanka  [2003]
    UKUT 292 and in particular paragraphs 16 and 21 - 24 of that  decision.
    He submitted that the Tribunal had not directed itself properly  or  at
    all either to Section 55 of the  2009  Act  specifically  or  the  best
    interests principle generally.   He submitted that the decision  of  ST
    was of relevance because firstly the Appellant was  accepted  to  be  a
    child, secondly this was  a  Section  82  appeal  against  the  removal
    decision and an assessment of whether she would face harm was required.
     He further submitted that because of  the  potential  consequences  of
    removal, an assessment was  required  of  risk,  which  could  only  be
    undertaken with regard to the fact that the Appellant was  a  child  at
    all times prior to her claim for protection.  Thus  he  submitted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had failed to do that and had  also  failed  in
    its approach to the evidence by  taking  into  account  child  relevant
    considerations.  He built upon those grounds in his  oral  submissions.
    At the outset of the hearing Mr Bramble  conceded  that  there  was  an
    error of law disclosed in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    by reference to the decision of ST (as cited).  Mr Bramble had been the
    Presenting Officer in the appeal of ST.  He agreed  with  and  endorsed
    the submissions made by Mr Bandegani that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    failed to apply the principles in  that  decision  and  in  particular,
    failed to take into account the statutory duty  under  Section  55  and
    take into account the best interests of the Appellant, who was a  minor
    at the time of the hearing.  He further submitted that  the  judge  had
    failed to deal with the impact upon return to  Ethiopia,  in  terms  of
    family network (if any relative was available) or as a minor  or  young
    female being returned to Ethiopia.  None of that had been assessed.

 7. As to the other ground raised by Mr Bandegani and developed in his oral
    argument, Mr Bramble also conceded that that disclosed an error of  law
    also he conceded that the findings at paragraph 14 onwards, when making
    an assessment of credibility, at no  point  did  the  judge  take  into
    account or consider the age of the Appellant who at  the  time  he  had
    given the information originally upon arrival was a  minor  and  indeed
    was a minor at the date  of  the  hearing  and  thus  the  findings  of
    credibility are affected by that approach also.

 8. In the light of the concession made  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, there is no basis on which I could  possible  do  otherwise  and
    accept that concession and find that the judge made an error of law  as
    set out in the proceeding paragraphs.  It is therefore  only  necessary
    to state in brief terms why the Tribunal finds that to be the case.  In
    arriving at its determination, as Mr Bandegani submits, the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not give any consideration to the statutory obligation  on
    the Secretary of State and the Section 55 of the 2009 Act to ensure her
    functions in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  asylum  application  were
    discharged "having regard to the need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare" of a Appellant whilst in the UK.  It was conceded on behalf of
    the Secretary of State in  ZH  (Tanzania)  that  the  Section  55  duty
    extended to the consideration of an asylum application by a child  such
    as the Appellant (as per Lady Hale at paragraph 24 of  ZH  (Tanzania)).
    That would require any  consideration  in  the  terms  as  set  out  in
    decision of ST (as cited) and would require the assessment  by  way  of
    the country materials as to the situation upon a  return.   The  second
    issue relates to the credibility findings that were made generally  and
    the lack of self direction as to how those matters were affected by the
    age of the Appellant.  As noted by both representatives,  at  paragraph
    15 of the decision, the Appellant's claim  has  always  been  that  her
    grandmother was dead.  The judge  found  that  she  had  "submitted  no
    evidence of the medical condition of her godmother", further that there
    were no documents from her aunt or any photographs (paragraph 16).  and
    thirdly the judge referred to the Appellant being unable to explain why
    her aunt was deported but that she  was  allowed  to  stay.   When  the
    decision maker is faced with  the unsupported  testimony  of  a  child,
    particular regard should be given to the country  information.  Article
    4(3) c) of the QD  provides that an assessment  of an  application  for
    international protection is to be carried out on  an  individual  basis
    and  includes  taking  into  account  the   individual   position   and
    circumstances of the applicant, including factors such  as  background,
    gender, age. The country materials that were before the judge  at  page
    24 give support for the Appellant's factual claim  that  the  Ethiopian
    police exercised "complete random discretion" as to decide which family
    member stayed and which family members  were  deported.   There  is  no
    reference in the determination to any of the country material.

 9. Having accepted the concession made on behalf of  the  Respondent  that
    the determination  discloses  an  error  of  law  the  decision  should
    therefore be set aside.  As  to  the  remaking  of  the  decision  both
    advocates have invited the Tribunal to  determine  the  appeal  with  a
    fresh oral hearing by way of remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Both
    parties before the Tribunal indicated that in their view, by reason  of
    the nature of the error, none of the findings could  be  preserved  and
    that a fresh oral hearing would be required.

10. I am satisfied that the appropriate course to follow is  the  one  that
    both parties invited the court to adopt, namely to remit the appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Whilst it is not the ordinary practice of the
    Tribunal to remit cases to the First-tier Tribunal, there  are  reasons
    why in this  case  such  a  course  should  be  adopted,  having  given
    particular regard to the overriding objective of the efficient disposal
    of appeals and  also  that  there  are  issue  of  facts  that  require
    determination which will be required to be assessed.

11. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, none of
    the findings shall stand and the case is to be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a hearing on a date to  be  fixed  in
    accordance  with  Section  12(2)(b)  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2 of the  practice  statement  of  10th
    February 2010 (as amended).





Signed                              Date: 14/2/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

