

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/08680/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 1st October 2014                 |On 23rd January 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                CHARITH PRABASH CHATURANGA DE SILVA WALIMUNI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy, Counsel, Renaissance Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka  date  of  birth  11th  June
       1983. He appeals with  permission  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge Cohen) dated 22nd July 2014  to  dismiss  his  appeal
       against a decision to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant  to
       s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  That  decision  followed
       from  the  Respondent's  rejection  of  the  Appellant's   claim   to
       international protection.




       Background and Matters in Issue


    2. The basis of claim was that the Appellant had a history of  political
       involvement with the United National Party  (UNP)  and  had  suffered
       persecution as a result, including assault, threats to his  life  and
       that of his family, detention and torture.  The Appellant avers  that
       he did not receive any protection from the Sri Lankan state and  that
       his  attempt  to  register  his  complaints  with  the  Human  Rights
       Commission  were  withdrawn  under  duress.  He  claimed  to  have  a
       currently well-founded fear of persecution in Sri Lanka  for  reasons
       of his political opinion.  He submitted  a  number  of  documents  in
       support of his claim, including a doctors report said  to  relate  to
       injuries caused when assaulted, correspondence with the Human  Rights
       Commission and affidavits from witnesses.


    3. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant's claim was true and
       refused to grant asylum.


    4. On appeal the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  had
       fabricated his entire  asylum  claim.  The  reasons  given  for  this
       finding were that he had  not   given  detailed  evidence  about  the
       party, which was inconsistent with his claimed level  of  involvement
       (paragraph 22), he had given inconsistent evidence about whether  the
       man who was orchestrating the persecution against him was  the  vice-
       chair or chair of the opposing faction (24), his doctor has  recorded
       that he was attacked by unknown assailants whereas the Appellant told
       the interviewing officer that in fact it was eight men  who  included
       this leader of the opposition faction (25), the  medical  report  was
       vague about when the alleged assault had taken  place  (26)  and  the
       Appellant delayed in two years in claiming asylum (27).  The Tribunal
       accepted the Respondent's evidence  that  the  emblem  shown  on  the
       letter purporting to be from the Human Rights Commission was  not  as
       it should be, and found the Appellant's legal exit from Sri Lanka  to
       be  indicative  of  the  fact  that  he  has  no  problems  with  the
       authorities there.


    5. The grounds of appeal are lengthy.  It is alleged that the First-tier
       Tribunal erred in the following respects:


        i) The reasoning in the determination is unclear (words  appear  to
           be missing from the narrative);
       ii)  In  finding  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  his   political
           involvement "vague" the Tribunal appears to have overlooked  the
           very detailed evidence given in statements and interview;
      iii) Matters were taken against the Appellant which had not been  put
           to him, including the allegation that the medical report  by  Dr
           Jagoda was fabricated;
       iv) There is an error of  fact  in  that  the  Tribunal  appears  to
           believe that the Appellant is afraid of someone  called  Pralona
           where in fact  the  man  named  was  Prasanna,  leading  to  the
           erroneous finding of inconsistency in the evidence;
        v) There  is  a  failure  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
           explanation as to why he did not wish to  tell  the  doctor  who
           assaulted him;
       vi) There  is  a  failure  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
           explanation, given in oral evidence, about who was orchestrating
           the attacks against him and when;
      vii) Made irrational findings as to whether the Appellant's Sinhalese
           sister, in the UK as a working holidaymaker, would have been  in
           a position to advise him about claiming asylum;
     viii) Accepting the Respondent's allegation that that letter from  the
           Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka was false when no  evidence
           had been submitted to substantiate that allegation;
       ix) Failure to properly engage with the evidence of an expert;
        x) Making the "troubling" finding that the Appellant "smiled"  when
           cross examination became difficult for him;
       xi)  Making  the  "troubling"  finding  that  the  evidence  of  the
           Appellant's wife was "self-serving";
      xii) Misapplying the country guidance: insofar as the Tribunal relied
           on the case of GJ  it  was  wrong  to  do  so  since  that  case
           concerned Tamils and  the  Appellant  is  not  a  Tamil.  He  is
           Sinhalese and his fear does not relate to Tamil separatism.


    6. Mr Tarlow submitted that  all  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal were open to it on the evidence. He conceded that the First-
       tier Tribunal did make an error of fact in respect of the name of the
       individual said to be persecuting the Appellant,  but  taken  in  the
       round the Respondent does not consider this to be material.


       Discussion


    7. The grounds can be  broken  down  into  five  legal  challenges.  The
       alleged errors, and my findings on them, are as follows.


       Failing to take relevant evidence into account


    8. The Appellant had relied  upon  an  Opinion  by  Dr  Chris  Smith,  a
       research associate  at  Chatham  House.  Dr  Smith  produced  a  very
       detailed report, directly engaging with  the  account  given  by  the
       Appellant, and aiming to  set  it  in  the  context  of  the  country
       background material.  Having done  that  Dr  Smith  -  in  summary  -
       considers the account given to be plausible.    If  it  is  true,  Dr
       Smith considers that the Appellant would be at considerable  risk  if
       returned to Sri Lanka today. That report is dealt with  at  paragraph
       31 of the determination.  This reads:


           "Whilst I acknowledge that the appellant has produced an  expert
           report in support of his claim, the same is largely generic.  In
           respect of the questions which are answered and which were posed
           by  the  appellant's  representatives,  the  expert  takes   the
           appellant's  credibility  as  face  value  and  found  that  the
           appellant's claims are consistent with  the  objective  evidence
           and his knowledge of the  way  the  authorities  worked  in  Sri
           Lanka.  I  have  found  the  appellant  is  totally  lacking  in
           credibility and in the circumstances find that the expert report
           does not advance the appellant's claim in any way".


    9. It is not the function of an expert witness to comment on whether the
       claimant is credible. That is the preserve of the Tribunal. It is the
       function of an expert to place  the  claim  in  its  proper  context,
       drawing on his or her own knowledge; this will very often involve  an
       assessment of whether the claim is plausible. Where a claimant relies
       upon such a report it is incumbent upon the  Tribunal  to  take  that
       evidence into account. It is able to reject it, or  to  place  little
       weight upon it, but must give clear reasons for  so  doing.  In  this
       case Dr Smith expressly directed himself that it was not for  him  to
       assess credibility (paragraph 14), and I found nothing in the  report
       to support the contention that he has taken the Appellant's claim "at
       face value". The whole point of the report  was  that  he,  with  his
       knowledge of Sri Lankan  politics  and  the  modus  operandi  of  the
       security services and other  actors,  believed  this  account  to  be
       perfectly plausible.  That was plainly  a  matter  relevant  to  this
       determination, since the Tribunal goes  on  to  reject  a  number  of
       claims on the grounds that they are "implausible": see  for  instance
       paragraph 28 and 32.  The failure to consider the expert evidence  in
       the round was therefore an error of law.


   10. The grounds further complain that various  points,  advanced  by  the
       Appellant  in  his  evidence,  have  not  been  recognised   by   the
       determination. For instance the Tribunal rejects the medical evidence
       of Dr Jagoda inter alia because the Appellant did not  tell  him  who
       his assailants were. The Appellant had explained in his evidence that
       he did not want to cause himself further trouble by  identifying  his
       attackers (and in any case Dr Jagoda would not have wanted  to  write
       it down).   I would agree that the Appellant's  explanation  for  the
       discrepancy in the evidence is not considered.


       Anxious Scrutiny


   11. This determination has clearly not  been  proof  read.  There  are  a
       number of places where the narrative makes absolutely no sense.  That
       is unfortunate. It clouds the  reader's  understanding  of  that  the
       Tribunal is trying to say  and  it  leaves  the  Appellant  with  the
       impression that his case was not  properly  considered.  One  example
       serves to illustrate this point:


           "The appellant was asked why he was  not  targeted  between  the
           2/2009 and he responded that he was the election and there  were
           increased tensions. The question was repeated and he smiled  and
           responded reason they assaulted him in April and  if  they  meet
           killed him. They would be responsible for this. They planned  it
           out, using their brains leaving from time before attacking him".


       Unclear reasoning and a failure to give a  claim  "the  most  anxious
       scrutiny"[1] are both errors of law.


       Error of fact amounting to an error of law


   12.  Throughout  the  entire  determination   the   Appellant's   alleged
       persecutor is referred to  as  Pralona,  when  in  fact  it  was  his
       evidence that this man was called Prasanna. Mr Paramjorthy  complains
       that  this  was  an  error  of  fact  that  materially  affected  the
       Tribunal's understanding of the evidence.  Whilst it is apparent from
       paragraph 24 that the Tribunal was not impressed generally  with  the
       evidence about this man, it is less clear that getting his name right
       would have made any difference to the decision.    I am  nevertheless
       satisfied that this is again a matter arguably engaging Lord Bridge's
       comments in Musisi.


       Perversity


   13. Mr Paramjorthy's criticism of the approach taken to the  evidence  of
       the Appellant's wife is that it was simply irrational to  reject  her
       evidence as "self-serving".   What the determination actually says is
       that she had "rehearsed" her evidence.    If  by  that  the  Tribunal
       means that her evidence was largely the same as her husband's  it  is
       impermissible for the Tribunal to reject it on  that  ground  without
       considering the other possibility: that their evidence is  consistent
       because it is true.


   14. The Tribunal was not impressed that the Appellant  waited  until  his
       working holidaymaker visa  was  about  to  expire  and  then  claimed
       asylum. The Tribunal notes  that  the  Appellant's  sister  had  been
       living in the UK for some time and it is  suggested  that  she  could
       have informed him about asylum.  The grounds submit that it is unfair
       and irrational to suppose that a Sinhalese working holidaymaker would
       have been in a position to advise her brother  about  the  merits  or
       otherwise of seeking asylum. There is nothing in this  point.  Asylum
       is a daily point of discussion in the media. Anyone who has lived  in
       this country, Sri Lankan or otherwise, for a period of time is likely
       to know what it is. The Tribunal was obliged by s8 of AI(TC)A 2004 to
       weigh the late  claim  against  the  Appellant.   There  was  nothing
       irrational in the approach taken.


       Procedural Impropriety


   15. The grounds particularise a number  of  matters,  taken  against  the
       Appellant in the determination, which were not put to him at hearing.
       I am not satisfied that any of these points constitute  an  error  of
       law such that the decision  should  be  set  aside.  The  Appellant's
       overall credibility had been squarely challenged by  the  Respondent.
       He had been put on notice of that fact in the refusal letter  and  it
       was up to him to make out his case.  It is  not  the  case  that  the
       report of  the  doctor  is  rejected  as  being  a  fabrication.  The
       Tribunal, applying Tanveer Ahmed, declined to  place  weight  on  it.
       That is a different matter, and it was open to the Tribunal  to  take
       that approach.


       My Findings


   16. I have found that  the  determination  displays  a  lack  of  anxious
       scrutiny, and that there was a flawed approach taken to the evidence.
       As such the determination cannot stand and I set the  decision  aside
       in its entirety. The matter will need to be re-made. It involves  the
       evidence of at least two witnesses and is likely  to  take  up  to  3
       hours. Against this background the parties invited me  to  remit  the
       matter to the First-tier Tribunal. I do so in view of the  extent  of
       judicial fact-finding required.


       Decisions


   17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is set aside.


   18. The matter is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          12th November 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] R v SSHD ex parte  Bugdaycay  and  Ors  [1987]  1  AC  514:   "The  most
fundamental of all human rights is the individual's right to life and,  when
an administrative decision under challenge is said to be one which  may  put
the applicant's life at risk, the basis of the decision calls for  the  most
anxious scrutiny. Where the result of a flawed decision may imperil life  or
liberty a special responsibility lies on the court  in  the  examination  of
the decision-making process."


