
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08356/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 19 August 2015                    |On 23 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     KP
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Isaac Maka, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is  a  female
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 3 September  2014  refusing  to  grant  her
    asylum and to remove her to Albania.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 15 June 1982. She  states
    that her mother is dead and her father was involved in a  land  dispute
    with a neighbour who installed water pipes on  or  under  her  father's
    land. In order to avoid a blood feud the neighbour suggested  that  the
    appellant marry his son. The appellant married LV on 1  December  2009.
    After a week LV took the appellant  to  Italy  using  a  false  Italian
    passport and forced her to work as a prostitute. She  tried  to  escape
    but LV stabbed her. She was taken by LV to different houses to have sex
    with strangers. LV was arrested on 15 June 2010 and the appellant  fled
    to Albania on 20 June 2010. She told her father what had  happened  and
    he went to LV's family home and discharged a gun but no one was shot or
    injured.

 4. The appellant's  father  was  arrested  on  10  October  2011  and  was
    eventually sentenced to 18 months  imprisonment  on  23  December  2011
    later reduced to 8 months imprisonment  on  appeal.  LV  returned  from
    Italy and took the appellant to a house in Shkoder in Albania where  he
    forced her to work as a prostitute again. In September 2012 he took her
    to Italy and she worked there as a prostitute until June 2013 when  she
    discovered that she was six months pregnant. LV took her to Albania for
    an abortion but she escaped from the hospital  and  went  back  to  her
    father's house. Her cousin arranged for her to travel to the  UK  in  a
    lorry on 18 June 2013. She claimed asylum on 13 July 2013 and  her  son
    was born on 20 October 2013.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Birmingham on 11 December 2014. The  judge  found  that  her
    evidence  was  not  credible.  No  evidence  had   been   produced   to
    substantiate her claims that LV's family had contacts in  the  Albanian
    police and that LV was able to take her to Italy under a false passport
    due to his connections with border officials. The appellant  failed  to
    speak to police at any time but particularly when LV  was  arrested  by
    Italian police in her presence.  It  was  highly  improbable  that  the
    appellant had been helped to  escape  by  someone  to  whom  she  spoke
    Spanish that she had learned from  the  television.  She  said  in  her
    asylum interview and witness statement that her father shot her brother
    in law but then in oral evidence said that no one was injured.  It  was
    most unlikely that a hospital would entertain an  abortion  at  such  a
    late stage because LV was able to bribe someone to do it. The appellant
    claimed in oral evidence that there was a blood feud but no members  of
    her family have been harmed.

 6. The judge noted that the appellant relied upon AM  and  BM  (Trafficked
    women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT  80  (IAC).  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's account  of  being  trafficked,  fleeing  to  the  UK  when
    pregnant and then  suffering  from  psychological  problems  gives  the
    strong impression of an attempt to arrange her  circumstances  to  suit
    the principles of that decision. Her evidence was not at  all  credible
    and there was no reasonable degree of  likelihood  that  the  appellant
    would face any danger if she returned to Albania or that she  would  be
    persecuted or ostracised. It was highly unlikely that the appellant had
    been trafficked or that she had suffered any  significant  physical  or
    psychological injury.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal from the Upper Tribunal on 11
    February 2015 on the basis that  the  judge  had  imposed  an  unlawful
    requirement for corroboration in relation  to  the  appellant's  claims
    that LV had connections to  police  and  border  officials,  failed  to
    consider the psychological effect of trafficking which according to the
    respondent's own guidance causes many victims not to make  use  of  the
    first available opportunity to  escape  their  captors  and  adopted  a
    flawed approach to the country guidance (paragraph  6  above).  Country
    guidance cases are selected precisely because the appellants  in  those
    cases are likely to be representative of a wider class of  persons  and
    it should come as no surprise that an Albanian  victim  of  trafficking
    has suffered  similar  experiences  to  the  appellants  in  a  country
    guidance case about trafficking in Albania.  That  should  bolster  her
    credibility rather than damage it.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Doyle  on  21
    May 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge  had  applied
    an incorrect standard of proof and that the country  guidance  was  not
    followed. All grounds were arguable.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 9  June  2015,  the  respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the judge did not require
    corroboration but fairly pointed out that the appellant had produced no
    adequate evidence to support her allegations. It was open to the  judge
    to observe that the appellant had tailored her account to AM and BM but
    that was not the main reason for the rejection of her claim. The  judge
    made a series of carefully reasoned adverse credibility findings  which
    were entirely open on the evidence.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

11. Mr Maka submitted that the judge made no reference to the law  relating
    to asylum and human rights and at paragraph 32 of the decision referred
    to the "lower standard" of proof without explanation  or  reference  to
    burden. The judge failed to deal with  the  appellant's  account  in  a
    chronological order (paragraphs 34-35) and  made  no  findings  on  the
    appellant's background story. The judge  refers  to  "no  evidence"  at
    paragraphs 35-36 but the appellant has given oral evidence and  written
    statements. The appellant  was  never  asked  to  produce  evidence  of
    meetings  between  her  husband  and  the  police  and  it   would   be
    unreasonable to ask her to do so. The appellant did previously  attempt
    to  escape  and  was  stabbed.  She  did  not  speak  Italian  and  the
    respondent's own policy accepts that  there  may  be  mistrust  of  the
    authorities and a reluctance to report trafficking.

12. Mr Maka further submitted that there is  no  reference  in  the  asylum
    interview (question 229) to the appellant's father having escaped  from
    custody and the appellant has never  suggested  that  her  father  shot
    anyone; questions 226 to 227 of the asylum interview make it clear that
    the father shot in the air. Mr Jarvis  correctly  objected  that  those
    matters do not feature in the grounds of appeal as material  errors  of
    law. Mr Maka then submitted that there was no  basis  for  the  finding
    that the appellant had tailored her account to the facts of AM  and  BM
    (paragraph 43  of  the  decision)  and  consideration  of  the  country
    guidance case was inadequate.

13. Mr Jarvis submitted that the appeal is a storm in a teacup. There is no
    need to set out all of the case law and  the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof appears at paragraph 32 of the decision. There is no  requirement
    for the judge to make chronological findings on  every  aspect  of  the
    appellant's account. The judge got to the core of the appellant's claim
    at paragraphs 32-45. The Modern Slavery guidance is to front line  Home
    Office staff and does not purport to be guidance to a judge. There  was
    no need for the judge to refer to it and it was not placed  before  the
    judge. It cannot be right  that  the  guidance  says  that  victims  of
    trafficking never seek assistance. There is no  different  test  for  a
    victim of trafficking and on 17 July 2014 a competent authority decided
    that the appellant was not a trafficked woman (paragraphs 23-24 of  the
    decision). Reasonable degree of likelihood is referred to in paragraphs
    45-46.

14. Mr Jarvis further submitted that at paragraph 35 the  judge  is  really
    commenting upon the appellant's evidence about  collusion  between  her
    husband and  the  police;  that  consisted  of  a  bald  assertion  not
    supported by any detail. There was no obligation on the  judge  to  ask
    questions about the account given. The judge is saying that  there  was
    no explanation or substance as to how the appellant knew  that  LV  had
    connections with the police and border officials. At paragraph 45,  the
    judge clearly identified that the appellant's  account  was  manifestly
    unreliable and riddled with inconsistencies. The  medical  evidence  is
    addressed at paragraph 44. At paragraph 43 the  judge  follows  up  the
    previous credibility findings by asking why  the  appellant  would  lie
    about her circumstances. The judge just pointed out the obvious.

15. Mr Maka replied that at questions 298-299 of the asylum  interview  the
    appellant did explain why she believed that collusion had taken  place.
    The judge stated that "no evidence was produced" and that was  imposing
    a requirement for corroboration. The grounds of appeal had to refer  to
    the wrong standard of proof because of  the  unlawful  requirement  for
    corroboration. The respondent cannot rely upon the refusal letter  from
    a competent authority because that was not produced to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Failure to put a point can be  grossly  unfair  and  lead  to
    injustice. The appellant was pregnant at the time of the  oral  hearing
    and that may explain the absence of medication  for  her  psychological
    issues (paragraph 44 of the decision).The country guidance issues  were
    not addressed at all. This is not an easy case; the decision is clearly
    open to different interpretations and that says a lot.

16. I find that there is force in Mr Maka's submission  regarding  standard
    of proof. The judge referred to the "lower standard"  at  paragraph  32
    without defining that standard, having just defined the civil  standard
    of proof in relation to Article  8  cases.  The  judge  then  variously
    referred to "would have thought" (paragraph  37),  "highly  improbable"
    (paragraph 38), "most unlikely"  (paragraph  40),  "strong  impression"
    (paragraph 43) and finally, "no reasonable likelihood" (paragraph  46).
    I find that the judge  has  failed  to  demonstrate  that  the  correct
    standard of proof in asylum cases  has  been  consistently  applied  to
    factual issues arising in this appeal. That is a material error of law.

17. Mr Jarvis sought to defend the apparent imposition of  a  corroboration
    requirement  at  paragraph  35  of  the  decision  in  his  submissions
    summarised at paragraph 14  above.  There  is  some  support  for  that
    interpretation in the judges' finding at the end of  paragraph  35;  "I
    consider that it would be reasonable for the  appellant  to  show  some
    justification for her allegation of collusion between her  husband  and
    the police but  she  records  no  evidence  of  any  meetings  or  even
    instances  where  the  circumstances  led  her  to  believe  that  such
    collusion  had  taken  place".  However,  the  reference  to  recording
    evidence again suggests a requirement for  corroboration.  Further,  at
    paragraph 36, the judge stated (referring to connections between LV and
    border officials), "Once more, no evidence was produced to substantiate
    this". I find that  the  reference  to  production  of  evidence  means
    something more than the appellant giving a more detailed account of the
    basis of her belief that LV had connections with  border  officials.  I
    find that it is clear  that  the  judge  was  looking  for  independent
    evidence produced by the appellant to support her assertions about LV's
    connections to police and border  officials.  There  is  no  evidential
    requirement for such corroboration in  asylum  cases  and  the  judge's
    approach amounts to a further material error of law.

18. The judge has referred to AM and BM at paragraphs  43  and  47  of  the
    decision but there are no findings as to what elements (if any) of  the
    appellant's account of her life in Albania were accepted by the  judge.
    The findings at paragraph  43  are  wholly  unsupported  by  the  other
    findings made by the judge and there is nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant read the country guidance before coming to the  UK  and  then
    fell pregnant and developed psychological problems in order  to  tailor
    her circumstances to meet the  requirements  set  out  in  the  country
    guidance. I accept Mr Maka's submissions on this point  and  find  that
    the approach adopted by the judge in paragraph 43 was irrational. There
    is no  other  attempt  in  the  decision  to  consider  and  apply  the
    principles from AM and BM. I find that  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    country guidance is a further material error of law.

19. I have not found it necessary to  make  findings  in  relation  to  the
    remaining ground of appeal. However, it  is  clear  from  the  evidence
    cited by Mr Maka that a number of adverse credibility findings were not
    soundly based upon the evidence. Not all of those issues were raised in
    the grounds of appeal. However, I do not preserve any of  the  findings
    made by the judge.

20. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

21. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

22. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date 19 September 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
