
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08237/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2016                              |On 4th May 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                                    (X M)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Harding of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Farmer to dismiss her appeal against the respondent's decision
    to refuse her appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds  and  also  to
    dismiss her appeal  against  the  respondent's  refusal  to  grant  her
    international humanitarian protection.

2.   The appellant was granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (FTT) by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Eshun  because  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge considered that the  Immigration  Judge  may  have
    reached inconsistent findings and failed to give proper weight  to  the
    appellant's claim that she had been persecuted/ill-treated.

3.   The appeal came before me on 21 March 2016 when the grounds were  fully
    argued by Mr Collins.  I concluded at the end of the hearing that there
    appeared to be a material error of  law  in  relation  to  the  matters
    identified by Judge Eshun.  I directed a further hearing at  which  the
    matter would receive  further  consideration  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    However, I observed in the final sentence of that decision  that  there
    was, apparently, a clear finding in paragraph  39  of  the  Immigration
    Judge's decision that there was a safe place in Albania  to  which  the
    appellant  could  relocate.   I  noted  that  that  "internal   flight"
    alternative finding had not been impugned in  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    And I saw no reason why the decision should not, therefore, be  allowed
    to stand.

4.   Nevertheless, I  directed  a  further  hearing  at  which  new  witness
    statements and updated medical evidence was to be obtained.

The Hearing

5.   Mr Harding did not seek to persuade the Tribunal that the  decision  to
    preserve the internal flight finding was wrong and stated that  he  had
    "no further representations" to make on behalf of his client.

6.    Clearly,  the  respondent  did  not  take  issue  with  Mr   Harding's
    representation that his  client's  appeal,  as  a  consequence  of  the
    internal flight finding, was correctly dismissed by the FTT.

7.   In the light of these concessions the decision of the FTT stands.

DECISION

Having reconsidered the matter following a further  hearing  at  which  both
parties were represented I have concluded that there was no  material  error
of law in the decision of the FTT  in  the  light  of  its  internal  flight
finding.

Accordingly, this appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  decision  to  refuse  the
appellant asylum/human rights protection/humanitarian protection in  the  UK
stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

