
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08331/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 10 March 2014                                |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           VIRGINIA ONYINYE OGADI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Pal, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss P I Kiai, instructed by Southwark Law Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Virginia Onyinye Ogadi was born on 4 June 1995 and is a
    citizen of Nigeria.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondent as  "the
    appellant" and to the Secretary of State at the "respondent"  (as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant  had  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the respondent  dated  16
    August 2013 refusing her claim for  asylum  and  making  directions  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom under Section 10 of the  Immigration
    and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Jones  QC)
    dismissed the appeal on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds  but  allowed
    it under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The judge allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR  [79]  et  seq.
    Following MF [2013] EWCA Civ  1192  and  also  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin), the judge considered whether the appellant could succeed under
    the Immigration Rules to obtain leave to remain on account  of  private
    life in the United Kingdom (see,in particular, paragraph  276ADE).   He
    concluded [79] that she  could  not.   However,  he  went  on  [80]  to
    consider that this is

         One of those rare cases where, due  to  a  combination  of  unusual
         circumstances, I consider it disproportionate, applying the five  -
         steps set out by Lord Bingham at paragraph 17  of  his  opinion  in
         Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, to remove the appellant to Nigeria.

    He then set out in six sub-paragraphs his  reasons  for  reaching  that
    conclusion.  There  were  psychological  reports  before  the  Tribunal
    indicating the appellant was a vulnerable young  adult  suffering  from
    moderate depression with a history of domestic  violence  and  possible
    sexual abuse.  She had  only  recently  turned  18  years  old,  having
    entered the United Kingdom shortly after her 14th birthday.  She  would
    be returning to Nigeria  as  a  "single  intact  female".   The  expert
    evidence (to which the judge gave weight) indicated that  returning  to
    Nigeria might expose the appellant to some  hardship  living  with  the
    Igbo community.  He found that she would "receive little  support  from
    any family members in Nigeria."  [80(4)].  He found that the  appellant
    had, "against the odds," built up a substantial  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom and he found also that the fact that Nigeria  "may  have
    facilities to treat those with mental health is...somewhat  beside  the
    point given that the onset of serious mental  health  problems  can  be
    avoided by not returning [the appellant] to Nigeria."  It was  on  that
    basis and  "giving  appropriate  weight  to  the  public  interest  and
    immigration control" that the judge went on to allow the  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The grounds of appeal are narrow in scope.  The grounds assert that the
    "Tribunal allowed this appeal on Article 8 grounds on  the  basis  that
    the appellant has no ties to her home  country."   The  grounds  assert
    that the judge misinterpreted the "tests to assess 'no ties' and it has
    therefore misdirected itself in law".  The grounds state that  the  "no
    ties"  wording  is  intended  to  "set  the  benchmark  for  when   the
    individual's rights outweigh the public interests at a very high  level
    as is legitimate and justified."  It refers to the UK residence test of
    "no less than twenty years".  It is submitted that

         The Tribunal had failed to  provide  any  reasons  as  to  why  the
         appellant has no ties in Nigeria...she would have  been  raised  in
         the knowledge and culture and customs there and English  is  spoken
         in Nigeria.  It is submitted the appellant is an adult who is fully
         capable of living an independent life and could do so in Nigeria.

 4. In my opinion, there are problems with parts of  the  analysis  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The suggestion (see above)  that  the  appellant's
    access to medical facilities in Nigeria need not concern  the  Tribunal
    because her health problems might be avoided altogether by not  sending
    her there in the first place arguably amounts to  a  circular  argument
    rather than a proper  apportionment  of  weight  in  a  proportionality
    assessment.  Further, the fact that the appellant  may  have  "a  great
    many friends and supporters in the UK" is unlikely to be  determinative
    of or influential in determining  her  appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR.
    However, having read the determination  as  a  whole  carefully,  I  am
    satisfied that neither of those matters is so serious in the context of
    the reasoning as a whole as to warrant setting aside the determination.
     In any event, they have not been cited as errors by the  Secretary  of
    State in the grounds of appeal, which concentrate  exclusively  on  the
    question of "no ties" and do so from the perspective of the "Article  8
    provisions of the Immigration Rules."  This is strange given  that  the
    judge had found [79] that the appellant could not qualify  under  those
    provisions.  No attempt is made in the grounds to relate the "no  ties"
    principle to the wider Article 8 ECHR  jurisprudence  relevant  to  the
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.  On the  evidence  before
    him, the judge's finding  that  the  appellant  would  "receive  little
    support from any family members in Nigeria" is, in my opinion, adequate
    for the purposes of the Article 8 assessment; a  greater  concentration
    on the  question of what ties the appellant might have to  Nigeria  may
    have been necessary under  the  Immigration  Rules  appeal.  There  was
    nothing in the judge's careful analysis of the factual matrix  and  his
    application of the relevant jurisprudence (for example,  Razgar)  which
    leads me to conclude that his analysis is flawed by error  of  law  for
    the reasons asserted in the grounds of appeal.  The judge has  properly
    adopted a two stage process and, having rejected the Immigration  Rules
    appeal, has moved on to consider Article 8.  He  reached  a  conclusion
    which was available to him on the evidence. The relevance of the single
    argument contained in the grounds ("no ties") to that analysis has  not
    been established.  It is not for this Tribunal (and it was not for  the
    judge who granted permission in the First-tier Tribunal)  to  make  the
    Secretary of State's case for her or to add grounds of appeal which  do
    not appear in the written application.  In the circumstances, I see  no
    reason to disturb the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

DECISION

 5. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 10 April 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

