
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08018/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 12 November 2015                  |On 28 January 2016                   |
|Determination given immediately      |                                     |
|following hearing                    |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LORD TURNBULL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                        RAED MOHAMMED ZUHAIR QTAISHAT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Bretherton, Counsel, instructed by the
                    Government Legal Department


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is this case  was  originally  a  Jordanian  national  of
    Palestinian descent who came to the UK in November 2009 as a visitor at
    the age of 23.  His visa expired but he remained in  this  country  and
    subsequently was arrested for theft on 10 August 2012.  He then claimed
    asylum which claim was refused by the respondent on 24 August 2012.  He
    was placed in the Fast Track and whilst in the Fast  Track  his  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal to grant  him  asylum  was  heard  and
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet, on  7  September  2012.
    Subsequently the appellant sought permission to appeal  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which application was refused  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker sitting as a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  12  September
    2012.

 2. The appellant renewed his application to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    but permission to appeal was again refused this time by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gill on 21 September 2012.  Thereafter the appellant  brought  an
    application seeking  judicial  review  of  the  refusal  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal to grant permission to appeal and although permission to bring
    this application was initially refused on  paper  the  application  was
    renewed before Ingrid Simler QC as she then was on 21 January 2013  and
    permission to bring the application was granted.

 3. Subsequently in a substantive hearing before Phillip Mott QC sitting as
    a Deputy  Judge  of  the  High  Court  the  Deputy  Judge  granted  the
    application for judicial review and quashed Judge Gill's decision of 21
    September 2012 refusing permission to appeal.   The  very  lengthy  and
    considered judgment of the Deputy Judge is contained within  the  file.
    Subsequently and unsurprisingly the Upper Tribunal  granted  permission
    to appeal to the appellant against Judge  Turquet's  decision  and  the
    appeal accordingly comes before us to consider at  this  stage  whether
    Judge Turquet's decision should be set aside as containing  a  material
    error of law.

 4. This case was originally before the Upper Tribunal as long ago as  last
    February when for procedural reasons the case could not proceed.  It is
    right to say that at that  stage  the  papers  had  not  been  properly
    organised and on that occasion I  gave  directions  as  to  the  future
    conduct  of  the  proceedings  which  included  a  direction  that  the
    respondent should state whether or not she intended to argue that there
    had been no error of law in Judge Turquet's determination.  I indicated
    that in the event that the respondent did intend so to  argue,  further
    directions would then be given.

 5. Subsequently and in accordance with the directions which I had given  a
    Rule 24 response was received on behalf of the respondent  setting  out
    the reasons why the respondent still sought to  argue,  notwithstanding
    the decision of the Deputy Judge, that there was in  fact  no  material
    error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal.
    Thereafter in April of this year I gave instructions  that  the  appeal
    was to be listed at the first available opportunity  when  Counsel  for
    both parties could be present, namely Ms Bretherton on  behalf  of  the
    respondent and Mr Vaughan on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   Regrettably
    although the hearing was listed for today's date it  appears  that  the
    Tribunal did not first establish whether or not the parties' respective
    Counsel would in fact be available and the parties  were  not  notified
    until last week of the date of the hearing.  For this  reason  although
    Ms Bretherton was able to attend she in the time available was not able
    to prepare the case as fully as she would have liked had she been given
    more time, and Mr Vaughan was  not available at all.   Consequently  Mr
    Symes of the same chambers has appeared  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    before us.  Both members of this tribunal  are  extremely  grateful  to
    both Counsel for the succinct and persuasive way in which both parties'
    cases have been presented before us.

 6. Essentially, on behalf of the appellant Mr Symes argued as  Mr  Vaughan
    had before the Deputy Judge in the judicial review proceedings that the
    essential error of the First-tier Tribunal was the failure to allow  an
    adjournment in order for the documents which were in Arabic  and  which
    supported the appellant's  claim  that  he  had  in  fact  revoked  his
    Jordanian nationality could be properly translated and also  to  enable
    proper instructions to be taken from the appellant in respect  of  this
    document.

 7. It is undoubtedly the case and this Tribunal recognises that it  is  an
    unattractive aspect of the appellant's submissions, that he put a false
    case before the Tribunal  with  regard  to  the  circumstances  if  his
    nationality had in fact been  revoked.   It  is  the  case  and  it  is
    accepted now on behalf of the respondent that as a matter of  fact  the
    appellant had revoked his Jordanian nationality but  as  recognised  by
    the Deputy Judge in the judicial review proceedings he had done  so  by
    submitting  false  documents  to  the  Jordanian  authorities.   As  Ms
    Bretherton correctly points out, had this fact been put  fairly  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, that Tribunal may very well  have  found  that
    this made it even more likely that an adverse credibility finding  that
    would have been made with regard to the appellant's claim as a whole.

 8. However, an adjournment was  refused  and  in  our  judgment  the  main
    consequence of that is that the appellant's solicitors were not put  in
    a position where they could  given proper advice to the appellant based
    on a considered reading of all the papers in the case.  It may well  be
    that even had they had all the material that they should have  had  and
    had advanced the appellant's  case  as  well  as  it  could  have  been
    advanced, adverse credibility findings would still have been made.  But
    in  our  judgment  the  appellant  should  at  least  have   had   that
    opportunity.

 9. An unattractive feature of the appellant's submissions is  that  he  is
    relying upon criticism of findings which had  been  properly  based  on
    evidence which was in fact untrue but  which  had  been  given  by  the
    appellant. However, one of the reasons arguably why the  appellant  may
    have given that evidence is because as a result of the judge's  refusal
    to grant an adjournment he had not been properly advised as to how best
    his case should be advanced.  This is, we recognise, a finely  balanced
    case and it may well be that on a rehearing ultimately the same  result
    is reached but like the Deputy Judge before us we are very  mindful  of
    the fact that this is an  asylum  claim  which  does  demand  the  most
    anxious scrutiny and we feel that effectively the  hearing  was  rushed
    through without giving the appellant a  proper  opportunity  of  having
    that case advanced.  So notwithstanding  the  very  persuasive  reasons
    advanced before us on behalf of the respondent on balance we find  that
    we are obliged to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as
    containing a material error of law, the  consequence  being  that  this
    appeal will have to be reheard.

10. In our judgment it is appropriate for  that  rehearing  to  take  place
    before the First-tier Tribunal and so we will remit the  case  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  any  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal except Judge Turquet.

Decision

We set aside the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Turquet  as
containing a material error of law  and  direct  that  the  appeal  will  be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross to  be  reheard  by  any
judge other than Judge Turquet.


Signed:
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 20 January 2016
