


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/08757/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at North Shields                                  Decision and
Reasons Promulgated
On 13 May 2015                                               On 2 June 2015
Prepared on 14 May 2015

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    B. K.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Ms Rasoul, Counsel, instructed by Halliday
                    Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of  Iraq,  born  on  26  January  1977,
           entered the United Kingdom clandestinely and claimed asylum on 2
           March 2001. The Respondent refused that claim on 26 May 2001 and
           in consequence she made a decision of the same  date  to  remove
           him to Iraq as an illegal entrant.
        2. An appeal against that removal decision was heard and  dismissed
           by an Adjudicator, Mr Ward, in a Determination promulgated on  7
           February 2002. The Adjudicator accepted that the Appellant was a
           Kurd who came from Halabja, as claimed, and that he was married,
           although he rejected as untrue the Appellant's account of why he
           had felt obliged to leave Iraq, and his claim to be at  risk  of
           harm from members of the IMIK party, a  Kurdish  Islamic  group.
           The Appellant's appeal rights were exhausted in early 2002.
        3. On 19 August 2008, 10  September  2009  and  30  June  2010  the
           Appellant made further representations to the Respondent  as  to
           why he should not be removed to Iraq. Written  requests  by  the
           Respondent for further information in 2008 and 2009  to  support
           these representations were ignored. The representations made  in
           June 2010 finally prompted a further decision by the  Respondent
           to remove him to Iraq on 22 September 2010.
        4. The Appellant pursued an  appeal  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
           against this decision on Article 8 grounds alone. His  case  was
           that he was in a long term relationship akin to marriage with Ms
           K R,  an  Iraqi  citizen  who  had  also  been  granted  British
           citizenship. That appeal was heard and dismissed by  Immigration
           Judge Zucker in a Determination promulgated on 17 November 2010.
        5. Permission to appeal was sought in relation to the dismissal  of
           the Article 8 appeal. That application  was  granted  by  Senior
           Immigration Judge Spencer on 9 December 2010 on the  basis  that
           it was arguable that in deciding that the Appellant and Ms  K  R
           could pursue their family life together in Iraq  the  Judge  had
           failed to ask himself whether or not it was reasonable to expect
           them to do so. The appeal was however  dismissed  by  the  Upper
           Tribunal on the basis there was no material error of law by  way
           of a decision promulgated on 23 May 2012. Ms K R had never  been
           recognised by the Respondent as a refugee  from  Iraq,  and  she
           held dual Iraqi and British  citizenship,  having  acquired  the
           latter as a result of naturalisation. The  First  Tier  Tribunal
           was perfectly entitled on the evidence before it  to  reach  the
           conclusions that it had in dismissing the Article 8 appeal.
        6. For whatever reason, despite the exhaustion of  the  Appellant's
           appeal rights, no step was taken by the Respondent to remove him
           to Iraq. Instead on  10  October  2014  the  Respondent  made  a
           further removal decision in relation  to  the  Appellant.  As  a
           result he appealed  once  again.  Notwithstanding  the  previous
           findings of the Tribunal the Appellant pursued  this  appeal  on
           asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights  grounds  once
           more. His appeal was heard and dismissed by  a  panel  of  First
           Tier  Tribunal  Judges  Fisher  and  Bannerman  in  a   decision
           promulgated on 23 February  2015.  The  Tribunal  rejected  once
           again the Appellant's account of why  he  had  left  Iraq  as  a
           fabrication.
        7. The Appellant applied to the First Tier Tribunal for  permission
           to appeal  relying  upon  only  one  complaint,  concerning  the
           approach  taken  to  the  humanitarian  protection  claim.  That
           application was granted  by  Judge  Brunnen  on  19  March  2015
           because he considered it arguable that the Tribunal  had  failed
           to consider adequately the  humanitarian  protection  ground  of
           appeal, having failed to consider whether the available evidence
           was sufficient to justify differing from  the  country  guidance
           given by the Upper Tribunal in HM (Iraq) [2012] UKUT 409.
        8. The Respondent filed a Rule 24  Notice  on  27  March  2015  and
           argued that the Judge had directed  himself  appropriately,  and
           that the decision in DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure  from
           CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 148 set out the proper  approach  to
           country guidance decisions,  which  approach  it  was  said  the
           Tribunal had followed.
        9. Thus the matter comes before me.


      The Upper Tribunal decision of 23 May 2012
       10. I was a member of the panel of the Upper Tribunal that dismissed
           by way of decision of 23 May 2012 the Appellant's appeal against
           the decision of the First Tier Tribunal of 17 November 2010. The
           Appellant confirmed through Ms Rasoul  that  nothing  turn  upon
           that, and that it was not suggested that I should recuse  myself
           from hearing this appeal. For my own part, I agree. I can see no
           proper basis upon which an application to recuse myself could be
           made, and I decline to do so of my own motion.


      Grounds
       11. The grounds, which were not  drafted  by  Ms  Rasoul,  raise  no
           complaint about the Tribunal's treatment of either  the  asylum,
           Article 3, or Article 8 appeals. Those  decisions  must  on  any
           view stand.
       12. The draftsman  of  the  grounds  focuses  exclusively  upon  the
           approach  taken  to  the  humanitarian  protection  appeal.  The
           complaint is a simple one. It is asserted that the Tribunal  was
           not entitled to take the approach to the humanitarian protection
           appeal that it did, because it had failed  to  engage  with  the
           evidence  before  it  adequately,  or  at  all,  and  thus   the
           Tribunal's approach was flawed.
       13. Since the decision  records  the  fact  that  the  Tribunal  had
           considered all of  the  evidence  placed  before  it  Ms  Rasoul
           accepted that she did not suggest it  had  been  overlooked  and
           that the decision  was  flawed  through  procedural  error.  She
           accepted that the complaint she sought to pursue  was  that  the
           Tribunal had failed to give adequate reasons for the decision it
           had reached.
       14. It is fair to say that the Tribunal dealt with the  humanitarian
           protection briefly, but that alone does not disclose  any  error
           of law, and to be fair to her, Ms Rasoul did not suggest that it
           did. The  relevant  part  of  the  Tribunal's  decision  was  as
           follows;
                 Beyond referring us generally to the background evidence in
                 the Appellant's bundle at pages 144 onwards, Ms McCrae made
                 no specific submissions on humanitarian protection.  Whilst
                 we accept that there has been  a  spate  of  attacks  which
                 terrorised civilians in Iraq we  are  still  bound  by  the
                 decision in HM and others (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2012]
                 UKUT   409.   The   degree   of   indiscriminate   violence
                 characterising the armed conflict taking place in Iraq  was
                 not at such a high level that substantial grounds had  been
                 shown for  believing  that  any  civilian  returned  there,
                 would, solely on account of his presence, face a real  risk
                 of being subject to that  threat.  If  there  were  certain
                 areas where the violence in Iraq reached levels  sufficient
                 to engage Article 15 (c) the Tribunal considered it  likely
                 that internal relocation would achieve safety and would not
                 be unduly harsh in all the circumstances.  In  all  of  the
                 circumstances,  and  taking  into   account   our   factual
                 conclusions,   the   Appellant   does   not   qualify   for
                 humanitarian protection.
       15. Ms Rasoul  accepted  that  there  was  no  suggestion  that  the
           Tribunal had recorded inaccurately  the  manner  in  which  this
           ground of appeal had been pursued by Counsel on  behalf  of  the
           Appellant at the hearing. She  accepted  that  the  humanitarian
           protection appeal had been raised in only general terms  in  the
           skeleton argument prepared by the Appellant's  counsel  for  the
           hearing, and that this had not been the  focus  of  the  way  in
           which the appeal had been argued.
       16. Whilst Ms Rasoul asserted that the evidence before the  Tribunal
           recorded civilian deaths as occurring within Iraq every day, she
           also accepted that the Appellant had always claimed to originate
           from the KAZ, and not from one of the areas in which  there  had
           been violence resulting from the actions of ISIS forces, or as a
           result  of  acts  of  terrorism  by  others.  Her  argument  was
           nonetheless that a full consideration  of  the  evidence  placed
           before the Tribunal might have led to a different outcome.
       17. The Upper Tribunal considered at  length  in  October  2012  the
           evidence concerning the situation that then existed within Iraq,
           and the approach that should be taken to claims for humanitarian
           protection in HM. The conclusion was that the evidence  did  not
           then  establish  that  the  degree  of  indiscriminate  violence
           characterising the current armed conflict taking  place  in  the
           five central governates in Iraq, namely Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk,
           Ninewah, Salah al-Din was at such a high level that  substantial
           grounds had been shown for believing that any civilian  returned
           there would solely on account of his presence there face a  real
           risk of being subject to that threat. The approach taken by  the
           Upper Tribunal to both the evidence concerning what  was  taking
           place in those governates, and, to the  test  for  a  successful
           claim to humanitarian protection, was upheld  by  the  Court  of
           Appeal in HF & Others (Iraq) [2013] EWCA Civ 1276.
       18. Neither the grounds, the evidence produced  to  the  First  Tier
           Tribunal, nor the submissions made on the Appellant's behalf  by
           Counsel, sought to focus specifically upon the  position  within
           the Appellant's home area within the KAZ,  or,  his  ability  to
           travel there in safety by internal flight  from  Baghdad  if  he
           were returned by  the  Respondent  to  that  city,  rather  than
           directly by air from the UK to the KAZ.
       19. The draftsman of the grounds has  proceeded  upon  the  somewhat
           simplistic approach that since there has been a lot of  violence
           in  Iraq  since  2012,  the  conclusions  reached  in  HM   must
           necessarily be no longer valid.  That approach is flawed; DSG.
       20. I am satisfied, and Ms Rasoul did not seek to suggest otherwise,
           that the Tribunal  did  apply  the  correct  legal  test  for  a
           humanitarian protection claim, as approved in HF. [23]
       21.  Neither  Counsel  who  represented  the  Appellant  before  the
           Tribunal, nor the (different) Counsel who drafted  the  grounds,
           nor Ms Rasoul (who was neither of those) have sought to identify
           evidence that had been placed  before  the  Tribunal  and  would
           necessarily lead to the conclusion that the position within  the
           governate of Baghdad, or the KAZ, had changed to such  a  degree
           since October 2012 that the test in HF was met. Indeed there has
           been a lamentable failure  to  focus  upon  the  detail  of  the
           decision in HM and the evidence which was relied  upon  to  show
           that the  position  in  those  areas  had  deteriorated  to  any
           significant degree, as opposed to simply continuing. Thus,  even
           if it was possible to argue that by the date of the hearing  the
           test in HF was met in relation  to  the  governates  of  Diyala,
           Kirkuk, Ninewah, Salah al-Din, there appears  to  have  been  no
           proper basis for the assertion that it was met  in  relation  to
           Baghdad or the KAZ.
       22. I am satisfied that the Tribunal gave entirely adequate  reasons
           for its findings on the humanitarian protection appeal, and that
           the Appellant's criticisms of them are in reality no more than a
           disagreement with them.



   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      26 February 2015 therefore contained no error of law in the  dismissal
      of the Appellant's humanitarian protection appeal which requires  that
      decision to be set aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 14 May 2015


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.

   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 14 May 2015


