
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08008/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 22 September 2015                   |               On 25 September 2015  |
|Oral decision given                    |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                  ms r c c
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Pickup, Counsel instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is technically a cross-appeal  by  both  the  respondent  and  the
    appellant in this matter.  I start with the respondent's  appeal  first
    because that will impact on whether or not the appellant pursues  their
    grounds of appeal.

2.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State in respect of  decision  by
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Harrington)  who  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal for asylum on the grounds of her sexuality, finding  that  as  a
    lesbian she would face a real risk on return to Jamaica of persecution.
     That determination was promulgated on 3  June  2014.   The  respondent
    appeals on the grounds that the First-tier  Tribunal  reached  findings
    and conclusions that were based on  speculation  rather  than  evidence
    that  was  before  the  Tribunal  and  failed  to  make   findings   on
    contradictions or conflicts in the evidence that were left  unresolved.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chohan.
    He granted permission to both the appellant and  the  respondent.   The
    terms of the grant of permission to the  respondent  was  that  it  was
    arguable that the Tribunal made conclusions or reached  conclusions  on
    speculative evidence.  The Appellant appealed on the grounds  that  the
    Tribunal had not dealt with Articles 3 and 8 which were pursued in  the
    event of the respondent's appeal being allowed as  regards  the  asylum
    matter.

3.   I have heard submissions this morning by both representatives and  have
    had an opportunity to look through  the  appellant's  detailed  written
    Rule 24 response.  I have also been  assisted  by  Ms  Pickup  who  has
    identified the specific  aspects  of  evidence  that  were  before  the
    Tribunal when the case was heard in support of her submissions that the
    findings made  were  sustainable  and  based  on  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal.  Ms Isherwood placed considerable emphasis on the fact of the
    appellant's changed claim from fear of repercussions form a gang to her
    sexual  identification  by  way  of  background  in  support   of   her
    submissions.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal placed weight  on  the  psychiatric  report  of
    Professor Katona who diagnosed that the appellant  was  suffering  from
    major depressive disorder.  The  Tribunal  found  the  appellant's  own
    account to be broadly consistent and  found  her  reasons  for  leaving
    Jamaica to be broadly consistent. The Tribunal also accepted  that  the
    appellant had other reasons for leaving Jamaica which have been set out
    at [35].  The Tribunal accepted the reasons for the late disclosure  of
    the appellant's sexual identity as a lesbian.  The Tribunal found  that
    the appellant was lacking in credibility  in  certain  aspects  of  her
    claim [37-38] but found that she was credible in the  majority  of  the
    aspects of her claim.  The Tribunal found that the appellant was in  an
    on-off relationship for six years with a man whom she described as  her
    "boyfriend" and did not accept her explanation for describing him as  a
    friend who she slept with.  However, the Tribunal went on  to  conclude
    that the fact of having heterosexual relationships in the past made  no
    difference to the findings as to the appellant's sexuality and risk  on
    return as at  the  date  of  hearing.   It  found  that  the  appellant
    identified as a lesbian and that she would have to hide  her  sexuality
    if returned to Jamaica [40-43].

5.   The respondent focused in particular on [39] arguing that the  findings
    were speculative. I acknowledge that on the face of it  the  Tribunal's
    approach appears to import a degree of speculation.   However,  I  have
    now been referred to and as set out in the Rule 24 response  (see  para
    14), particular aspects of the evidence that were before the  Tribunal.
    I am satisfied that the findings made in paragraph 39 are supported  by
    evidence before the Tribunal, albeit  worded  in  somewhat  speculative
    terms.  In any event  I  am  satisfied  that  such  findings  (even  if
    speculative) are not material to the outcome of the decision and do not
    detract from the main findings of  fact  and  reasons  given  that  the
    appellant as a lesbian faces a real risk of persecution  on  return  to
    Jamaica.

6.   I now turn to the second issue raised  by  the  respondent  that  there
    were evidential conflicts  left  unresolved.  The  Tribunal  considered
    other reasons why the appellant would leave Jamaica and has taken these
    into  account  at  paragraph  35.   This  was  given  in  terms  of  an
    explanation for  leaving  Jamaica  in  fear  of  gangs.   The  Tribunal
    accepted and dealt with the core of the appellant's claim that she  was
    at risk because of her sexual orientation.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Tribunal considered carefully all the relevant  evidence  and  resolved
    any material conflicts  including  the  appellant's  past  heterosexual
    behaviour, the delay in disclosure of her sexual  identity  and  claim,
    the on-off relationship with N over six years.  I am satisfied that the
    Tribunal engaged with all the evidence in  the  round  and  issues  and
    reached sustainable findings and conclusions that were open to it.  The
    Tribunal fully addressed the background to the  appellant's  claim  and
    the fact of her changed claim and reasons for the delay  in  disclosure
    of her sexual identity and why that now formed the basis of  her  claim
    as at the date of hearing.

7.   I conclude therefore that the grounds  do  not  disclose  any  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  In view of my
    decision there was no need for the appellant to proceed with her appeal
    on the Article 3 and 8 point.  In the event that the Secretary of State
    apply for  permission  to  appeal  this  decision,  the  Appellant  has
    permission to cross appeal.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the decision which shall stand.

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   The
matter discloses sensitive personal detail about the appellant  which  could
place her at risk.




Signed                                  Date 25.9.2015
G. Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
A hearing was necessary to fully address all relevant issues raised.







Signed                                  Date: 25.9.2015

G. Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

