

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08096/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 13 April 2015                              |on 17 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              H'CENE BELGROUNE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S F Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination by a panel of the  First-
    tier Tribunal comprising  Designated  Judge  Murray  and  Judge  Hosie,
    promulgated on 15 December 2014, which  dismissed  his  appeal  against
    refusal of recognition as a refugee from Algeria.

 2. The grounds in summary are as follows:

          1) A "section 8" issue about the timing of the claim was  wrongly
             taken as a starting point.

          2) At paragraph 49 the FtT said "There  is  a  problem  with  the
             summons ... in that it is not an original document ... because
             of the other credibility issues we believe  that  the  summons
             may well not be genuine." This  reaches  a  conclusion  before
             surveying all the evidence - Mibanga [2005] INLR 377 - and the
             fact  that  the  document  is  a  copy  does  not  compel  the
             conclusion that it is unreliable - (O) (Turkey)  [2003]  UKIAT
             00006.

          3) The  appellant  was  not  given  the  opportunity  to  explain
             perceived implausibilities - his twin  coming  to  Glasgow  to
             look for him; his brother waiting 2 months to tell him that he
             is also homosexual; and how his brother obtained a copy of the
             summons (paragraphs 45 and 49).

          4) The adverse finding about the appellant's  brother  waiting  2
             months to tell him that  he  was  also  homosexual  failed  to
             consider the reticence brought about by the  cultural  context
             and taboo against homosexuality in Algeria.

          5) The panel founded on an inconsistency over whether photographs
             were taken from a corridor or from  inside  a  bedroom,  there
             being in truth no such inconsistency in the evidence.

          6) There was error in founding on  failure  to  claim  asylum  in
             France, in light of authority that statements  should  not  be
             found to lack credibility because an appellant does  not  rely
             on his declared sexual orientation on the  first  occasion  of
             setting out grounds for fear of persecution.

 3. These grounds are clearly of varying strength.  It is doubtful  whether
    some of them reveal any error.   Judges have to deal  with  matters  in
    some order.  Ground 6 turns an apparently valid point about failure  to
    claim asylum at the first reasonable opportunity into a separate  issue
    about reticence in declaring sexual orientation.

 4. However, the respondent conceded that the grounds together do  disclose
    material error in the determination, in particular in the way in  which
    conclusions were reached surrounding the summons.  It was not  accepted
    that the appellant's account is credible, even to the  lower  standard,
    but it was acknowledged that the panel's assessment could not stand and
    a fresh hearing was required.

 5. In those circumstances, the determination of the First-tier Tribunal is
    set aside in its entirety.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  2007  Act
    and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and  extent  of  judicial  fact
    finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  members
    of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the  case  are  not  to
    include Judges Murray and Hosie.

           [pic]


           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
           15 April 2015


