
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08338/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 July 2013                                  |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                           karunakaran kanthasamy
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Karunakaran Kanthasamy, was born on 28 June 1985 and  is
    a male citizen of Sri Lanka.  The  appellant  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 24 October 2011 and his first  application  for  asylum  had
    been refused by the respondent  on  23  November  2011.   A  subsequent
    appeal to Judge Hemingway was dismissed on 16 February 2012.  Following
    proceedings in the Administrative Court, the Secretary of State  agreed
    in July 2012 to consider further representations made by the appellant.
     On 23 August 2012, the  respondent  refused  to  grant  the  appellant
    asylum and also made a decision to remove the appellant from the United
    Kingdom by way of directions under Section 10 of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Shimmin) which, in a determination which  is  dated  31
    October 2012, dismissed the appeal on  all  grounds.   The  appellant's
    application to the First-tier Tribunal for  permission  to  appeal  was
    refused by Judge Wilson on 19 November 2012  but,  on  renewal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, permission was granted by Judge Storey on  12  December
    2012.

 2. At the appeal hearing at Bradford on 8 July 2012, Mrs  R  Pettersen,  a
    senior Home Office Presenting Officer,  appeared  for  the  respondent.
    The appellant did not attend. The appellant's previous  representatives
    had contacted the Tribunal to indicate that they were no longer  acting
    for the appellant.  There was nothing on the file to indicate that  the
    notice of hearing sent to the appellant by first-class post on 26  June
    2013 had not been received by him.  Mrs  Pettersen  showed  me  a  Home
    Office print-out which indicated that in June 2013 officers of the UKBA
    had visited the appellant's last known address. The appellant  was  not
    there and he had not left  a  forwarding  address.   Consequently,  the
    appellant had been recorded as an absconder.  In those circumstances, I
    found that the notice of hearing had been served upon the appellant and
    I considered that, because he would  be  unlikely  to  attend,  nothing
    would be gained by adjourning the proceedings. I decided that it was in
    the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing (see the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, paragraph 38).

 3. Granting permission Judge Storey had written:

         "I see arguable error in the FtT Judge's approach to the  issue  of
         the appellant's identity.  Even though the FtT Judge properly  took
         into account the earlier findings of Hemingway on this issue, it is
         arguable that the judge did  not  have  sufficient  regard  to  the
         detention attestation provided by  the  ICRC  and  gave  inadequate
         reasons for rejecting the expert report.

         Whilst the FtT Judge took careful account of  the  submissions  and
         further evidence to hand, since the Tribunal CG case of TK  shed  a
         significantly different light, it  is  arguable  that  the  judge's
         assessment of this  evidence  did  not  justify  a  fresh  approach
         focussed unduly on the fact that new evidence  was  only  from  one
         source.  At the  hearing  the  Tribunal  will  also  need  to  give
         consideration to the view of the implications of this Freedom  From
         Terror evidence set out by Wilkie J in R (Application of Qubert)  v
         SSHD [2012] EWHC 3052."

 4. Quoting extensively from the previous determination of Judge Hemingway,
    Judge Shimmin had considered the new evidence which had been adduced by
    the appellant and rejected by the respondent. Judge Hemingway had found
    that "I have  disbelieved  a  great  deal  of  the  account  which  the
    appellant offers. All I have accepted which might be thought to  be  in
    his favour is that he is a Sri Lankan national of Tamil ethnicity."

 5. Judge Hemingway had found, in particular, that the appellant's name was
    not Karunakaran Kanthasamy [40].  Before Judge Shimmin,  the  appellant
    had produced a  national  ID  card  showing  his  name  as  Karanukaran
    Kanthasamy.  At [67] Judge Shimmin  found  that  the  likeness  of  the
    photograph on the 2005 identity document now produced by the  appellant
    was not "striking".  Judge  Shimmin  accepted,  however,  [74]  that  a
    person named Karunakaran Kanthasamy had been confirmed by the  ICRC  to
    have been detained in Jaffna  prison  from  2007-2009.   However,  like
    Judge Hemingway, Judge Shimmin had not been able  to  accept  that  the
    appellant before him was Karunakaran Kanthasamy.   I  find  that  Judge
    Shimmin has given adequate reasons for rejecting the  new  evidence  as
    proving that the appellant was the individual  he  claims  to  be.   In
    part, those reasons concern the expert report  of  Sundari  Jayasuriyia
    which had been adduced by the appellant.  At [68] Judge  Shimmin  noted
    the availability of fraudulent documents in Sri Lanka  and  noted  also
    that there was

         "no direct evidence from the persons who were  said  to  have  been
         approached, such as a registrar, also the appellant had  failed  to
         supply a current photograph of  himself  for  comparison  with  the
         file copy.  As a result I have given  the  expert  evidence  little
         weight."

 6. I consider Judge Shimmin's assessment of  the  expert  report  and  the
    reasons which he has given for attaching little weigh to  its  contents
    to be adequate. As the judge observed, it  was  for  the  appellant  to
    adduce evidence which would enable  him  to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof. It was open to the judge for the reasons given to find  that  he
    had not done so.  In  a  detailed  determination,  I  find  that  Judge
    Shimmin's approached to the new evidence  with  an  open  mind;  having
    carried out a proper examination of the new evidence, his findings have
    coincided with those made earlier by Judge Hemingway.

 7. Judge Shimmin went on  to consider risk on return. He was aware of  the
    document from Freedom From Terror to which he had been referred  by  Mr
    Durance, Counsel for the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.
    He gave reasons in his determination for concluding that he should  not
    depart from the existing country guidance (to which he refers at length
    at [81 - 82]).  Again I consider that Judge Shimmin has  not  erred  in
    law in his assessment of risk on return. He reached findings which were
    open to him on the evidence and in line with existing country guidance.
    Neither the Freedom From  Terror  document  nor  any  other  background
    material provided by the appellant necessarily indicated, on the  facts
    as found by the judge, a different outcome of the appeal.

 8. It was for the appellant  to  prove  his  case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He  needed  to  establish,  to  the  standard  of  proof  of
    reasonable likelihood, that he would be at  risk  upon  return  to  Sri
    Lanka. The findings of both Judges Shimmin and Hemingway are clear  and
    cogent and supported by adequate reasoning.   Ultimately,  both  judges
    had concluded that the appellant had proved nothing more than  that  he
    is an ethnic Tamil of Sri Lankan nationality.   Both  judges  concluded
    correctly that there was nothing in the country guidance or any of  the
    background material which would indicate that such a status alone would
    expose the appellant to a real risk of harm.

DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 30 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
