
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08417/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice and Field    |Determination Promulgated    |
|House                                         |                             |
|On 15 September 2014 and 13 January 2015      |On 3 February 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                                     ik
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, instructed by ICS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
    of his protection claim.

 3. This appeal comes before us to be re-made following a decision dated  1
    July 2014 of Upper Tribunal Judges Rintoul and  Chana  which  found  an
    error on a point of law in the determination promulgated on 26 November
    2013  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  W  Khan  which  refused   the
    appellant's asylum appeal.

 4. The error of law decision is at Appendix 1. In summary, it  found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal  had  taken  an  erroneous  approach  to  court
    documents said to have  been  provided  by  a  Sri  Lankan  lawyer  and
    verified by a second Sri Lankan lawyer.

 5. It was common ground before us that our task was to consider the  court
    documents and evidence of the Sri Lankan lawyers, the  weight  afforded
    to those parts of the evidence being highly  determinative  as  regards
    the appellant's claim to face a risk of serious harm on return  to  Sri
    Lanka.

 6. This appeal has a somewhat lengthy history and it is expedient  to  set
    out first what has happened thus far.

First Asylum Claim

 7. The appellant came to the UK on 15 January 2008 and claimed  asylum  on
    arrival. He maintained that he was born in Trincomalee, Sri Lanka where
    he lived with his parents and where his father owned a mill.   In  2000
    the Sri Lankan Army accused his father of assisting the LTTE,  arrested
    and detained him and he was released only in 2002.

 8. In 2005 the appellant's cousin who  was  living  with  the  family  was
    forced to join the LTTE. This cousin continued to visit the appellant's
    family, the LTTE bringing weapons to the home  for  them  to  be  kept,
    threats being made if the family did not comply.

 9. On 5 November 2007 the cousin visited again and the next night the pro-
    government Pillayan group came to the house and forced  their  way  in.
    The appellant and his father were beaten. The appellant was taken to  a
    camp and was  tortured.   He  was  also  sexually  assaulted.   He  was
    released on 26 November 2007 and asked to sign each week.

10.  After  his  release,  the  appellant  complained  to  a  human  rights
    organisation about his mistreatment  and  also  to  police.  After  his
    complaint to the police, he was questioned by members of  the  Pillayan
    group about having reported his mistreatment. They beat  him  and  took
    him to a camp where he was again  ill-treated.  He  was  released  upon
    payment of a bribe and travelled to Colombo and an agent was engaged to
    facilitate his departure from Sri Lanka.  He travelled  to  the  United
    Kingdom arriving on 15 January 2008 and, as above,  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival.

11. The appellant's first asylum claim was refused on  24  September  2009.
    The appeal was initially refused by Immigration Judge Beg (as she  then
    was) in a determination dated 8 January 2010.  The appellant's  account
    was found not credible.

12. Reconsideration was ordered on 8 February 2010  by  Senior  Immigration
    Judge Eshun (as she then was) but the appeal was again dismissed  in  a
    decision dated 7 June 2010 of Senior Immigration Judge King (as he then
    was). Appeal rights were  exhausted  on  27  April  2011  following  an
    unsuccessful appeal to the Court of Appeal.

Second Asylum Claim

13. On 5 September 2012 the appellant made  further  representations  which
    were accepted by the respondent as a fresh asylum claim.

14. In support of his second asylum claim, the appellant provided,  amongst
    other documents contained at annex D of the respondent's bundle (RB),:

        i) further representations dated 5 September 2012 (D1-D6)
       ii)  letter  dated  13   July   2012   from   the   appellant's   UK
           representatives to Mr Asoka Weerasooriya, a  Sri  Lankan  lawyer
           (D12-D13)
      iii) letter dated 29 August 2012  from  Mr  Weerasooriya  to  the  UK
           representatives (D15-D16)
       iv) a letter of instruction dated 5 July 2012 from  the  appellant's
           mother to Mr Weerasooriya (D17)
        v) documents from the Sri Lankan Bar Association, reports of  court
           cases and a human rights  report  confirming  Mr  Weerasooriya's
           standing as a lawyer (D20-D32)
       vi) translations of copies  of  documents  from  the  Mount  Lavinia
           Magistrates' Court in the case of B5343/07 (D33-D61)
      vii) copies of the documents  from  the  Mount  Lavinia  Magistrates'
           Court in the case of B5343/07 (D62-D90)
     viii) translation and copy of a police message dated 3 July  2012   to
           the appellant's mother asking her to attend Bambalapitiya Police
           Station on 5 July 2012 (D91-92)


15. The basis of the second claim was that on 3 July 2012  the  appellant's
    mother contacted him telling him that she had been told to  attend  the
    Bambalapitiya  police  station  on  5  July  2012.   According  to  the
    appellant, on 4 July 2012 his mother contacted a Sri Lankan lawyer,  Mr
    Asoka Weerasooriya. She met him on 5 July 2012 and provided him with  a
    letter of instruction. She then went on the same day  to  Bambalapitiya
    police  station  with  Mr  Weerasooriya's  junior  colleague,  Mr  B  R
    Priyaranjana  Jayasinghe.  She  was  questioned  by  police  about  the
    appellant's involvement with the LTTE and, specifically, a  bomb  found
    on a bus in November 2007.

16. Mr Jayasinghe was told by police that they intended to obtain  a  court
    order enabling them to arrest the appellant. Mr Weerasooriya instructed
    Mr Jayasinghe to apply to the Mount Lavinia Magistrates'  court  for  a
    certified copy of court  file  B5343/07  regarding  the  appellant.  Mr
    Weerasooriya then sent the copy of the court file  to  the  UK  lawyers
    under cover of his letter dated 29 August 2012.

17. The copy of the court file showed that the police had filed a report in
    November 2007 concerning  a  bomb  found  on  a  bus  that  month.  The
    documents from 2007 and 2008 indicated that a suspect, TS, was arrested
    and remanded in connection with the attempted bombing. Documents on the
    court file from July 2012 named the appellant as  someone  involved  in
    placing the bomb on the bus. The court file contained an arrest warrant
    issued for the appellant directed to the Controller of Immigration  and
    Emigration at Colombo airport.

Refusal of Second Asylum Claim

18. Having accepted that the further representations amounted  to  a  fresh
    asylum claim, the respondent refused it on 21 August 2013.

19. The respondent's reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  21  August  2013
    indicated in paragraphs [29]-[30] that the appellant's  new  claim  was
    undermined because the bus bomb in which he claimed  to  be  implicated
    had occurred before he left Sri Lanka and  he  had  not  mentioned  the
    matters set out in his further representations in his earlier claim.

20. At [31], the respondent relied on the appellant having  been  found  to
    lack credibility by two judges in his first asylum claim.

21. The refusal letter went on to state at [32]-[36]:

         "32.     The documents you have submitted have been  considered  in
         the round, in light of the guidance set out in Tanveer Ahmed [2002]
         UKIAT  00439*  and  bearing   in   mind   the   above   credibility
         considerations. It  is  noted  that  the  documents  submitted  for
         consideration  are   copies.   Without   original   documents   due
         consideration cannot be  given  to  their  veracity,  however,  the
         following taken from the Sri Lanka COI report, March 2012 has  been
         noted:


             'Formally it is difficult for the accused to be able to obtain
             a copy of his/her own arrest warrant. When an  arrest  warrant
             is issued, a copy is kept on the legal file and  the  original
             is handed to the police. An accused cannot apply for copies of
             the arrest warrant to the relevant court. However, in practice
             forged documents are easily obtainable throughout  Sri  Lanka.
             Additionally, given ongoing and well documented concerns  over
             corruption in the police it would probably not prove difficult
             to obtain a copy of  an  arrest  warrant,  although  it  would
             probably require prior contacts within the police service.'


         33. As such, it is noted that forged documents are easily available
         in Sri Lanka and that there are concerns  over  police  corruption.
         Therefore, an element of caution would be exercised when  assessing
         such documents.


         34. With particular regard to the documents submitted, which  refer
         to an incident in which a suicide bomb was found on a bus, the date
         of the incident varies  throughout  the  documents  and  is  stated
         variously as 28 November, 20 November or 23 November  2007.  It  is
         not considered credible that official  police  documents  regarding
         the same case would show  such  discrepancies  in  the  most  basic
         details. This significant inconsistency has cast further  doubt  on
         the reliability of these documents.


         35. In the light of your credibility (as discussed  above,  and  as
         considered in the RFRL of 24 September 2009)  and  the  above-noted
         evidence, limited reliance has been placed  on  the  documents  you
         have now submitted.


         36. Consequently, it is not accepted  that  you  are  suspected  of
         involvement in an attempted  bus  bombing,  or  that  you  are  now
         subject to an arrest warrant as a result."


22. An additional  claim  by  the  appellant  to  be  involved  with  Tamil
    activists in the UK was not accepted at [35] as it  was  not  supported
    other than by the evidence of the appellant himself.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

23. For the First-tier Tribunal hearing before Judge  Khan,  the  appellant
    provided a further bundle of evidence submitted under  a  cover  letter
    dated 30 September 2013. We refer to this bundle as the "FTT bundle".

24. The FTT bundle contained:

        i) statement from the appellant (tab 1)
       ii) document verification report dated 25  September  2013  from  Ms
           Sundari Jayasuriya (tab 2)
      iii) country expert report dated 30  September  2013  from  Dr  Chris
           Smith (tab 3)
       iv) letter dated 28 January 2013 from the  British  High  Commission
           (BHC) in Colombo (tab 4).


25. Judge Khan refused the appeal. His findings are usefully summarised  in
    the Upper Tribunal error of law decision (Appendix 1), as follows:

          "11.    Judge Khan directed himself [18] that the central issue in
             this case is whether the documents the appellant has  produced
             in evidence had be (sic) relied  upon  to  show  that  he  was
             suspected of carrying a bomb on a bus some  time  in  November
             2007 and as a result there was an outstanding warrant for  his
             arrest.  He stated:-

                  "In deciding whether these documents are genuine or not, I
                  have paid close attention  to  the  document  verification
                  report of 25 September 2013 from S Jayasuriya."

         12. Judge Khan found that:-

                   i. he could not be satisfied that Ms Jayasuriya's report
                      was credible evidence that the documents are in  fact
                      authentic due to the lack of detail and how it  could
                      be said that they were in fact genuine [21];

                  ii. there were discrepancies as to whether the  explosive
                      material carried on  the  bus  was  in  a  parcel  or
                      whether it was concealed under a jacket or some other
                      item of clothing [23] and, it  is  unclear  from  the
                      reports when the incident was supposed to have  taken
                      place [23], different dates being given;

                 iii. it was unclear why the appellant's mother  would,  as
                      it appeared, have condemned him to the police in  Sri
                      Lanka, explaining his activities for the LTTE both in
                      Sri Lanka and the United Kingdom; or,  how  she  knew
                      that he was doing so.  It  was  incredible  that  she
                      would have stated that the appellant had visited  Sri
                      Lanka  several  times  from  the  UK  [24]  and  thus
                      attached little evidence to this part of her claim;

                  iv. the documents submitted could not be relied  upon  to
                      show either that the appellant actually placed a bomb
                      on a bus or that he is innocent of this because it is
                      a false allegation [27], the verification report  not
                      satisfying him that the documents are genuine;

                   v. that there is no credible explanation as to  why  the
                      police in Sri Lanka would suddenly have  an  interest
                      in  the  appellant  nearly  five  years   after   the
                      incident; that, having had regards  to  the  previous
                      appeal and the appellant's other witness that he  did
                      not find him to be a credible witness [28 to 31];

                  vi. that having rejected the appellant's claim there  was
                      an arrest warrant against him he did not consider  he
                      would be at real risk on return to  Sri  Lanka  [33];
                      that the appellant's removal to Sri Lanka  would  not
                      be in breach of paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
                      Rules or Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention."


Error of Law Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

27. The determination of Judge Khan was appealed and permission  to  appeal
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on 30 January  2014.  The  reason
    given for granting permission to appeal was that the grounds "raise  an
    arguable error of law  in  respect  of  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    documentary evidence submitted by the appellant."

28. The error of law hearing came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  and
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana on  29  May  2014.  As  above,  their
    decision is at Appendix 1.

29. Their decision on error of law was as follows:

         "Did the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involve  the
         making of an error of law?

         19. In his determination at [18], [19], [21] and [31], Judge  Khan
             refers to the question of whether  or  not  the  documents  in
             question which are central  to  the  appeal,  are  genuine  or
             authentic. He states clearly that he  is  not  satisfied  that
             they are.

         20. As Ms Wass submitted, where the respondent makes an allegation
             the document is not genuine or is somehow false, as appears to
             have been done here  from  the  summary  of  the  respondent's
             submissions, that must be proved by the Secretary of State  on
             the balance of probabilities.  It is evident that  Judge  Khan
             wrongly considered that it was for the appellant to prove that
             the documents were genuine.

         21. We do not consider that, as Mr Avery submitted, the judge  was
             in fact assessing whether the documents were reliable. That is
             not the language he used.

         22. It cannot in the circumstances be properly argued that this is
             not a material error as it is inevitable that his approach  to
             the evidence of Ms Jayasuriya was incorrect.  Further,  as  Ms
             Wass submitted the judge  does  not  make  any  findings  with
             regard  to  the  evidence  of  Mr  Weerasooirya  which  is  of
             importance in assessing the documents because he obtained them
             from a court, his bona fides as a lawyer are confirmed by  the
             respondent who also confirms that such court documents as have
             been produced can be obtained from courts (see the letter from
             the FCO to the Home Office).  Given that in  paragraph  14  of
             her report Ms Jayasuriya refers to having checked details with
             Mr Weerasooirya, the error is material.

         23. Whilst we note that  the  judge  found  discrepancies  in  the
             report particularly regarding the date of the incident  it  is
             of course possible that he differences between 20, 23  and  28
             may be accounted for by poor handwriting from which  documents
             were transcribed.  Further, the supposition that mistakes  are
             not made in police documents is at best tendentious.

         24. Accordingly, we are  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  make  a
             material error of law and that it would be necessary to remake
             the determination."


30. The First-tier Tribunal also made the following directions:

         "1.      The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  A  W  Khan
             did involve the making of an error of law, and it is set aside
             to be remade. Judge Khan's  findings  as  to  the  appellant's
             credibility are preserved.


         2.        At  the  reconvened  hearing,  the  Upper  Tribunal  will
             consider what weight, if  any,  to  attach  to  the  documents
             extracted from the courts and the police in Sri Lanka, and  to
             the  letters  and  reports  from  Mr   Weerasooriya   and   Ms
             Jayasuriya."


Re-Making of the Appeal before the Upper Tribunal - Hearing on 15  September
2014

31. The re-making of the appeal was listed before us on 15 September  2014.
    For that hearing, the appellant provided a further bundle  of  evidence
    under cover of a letter of 3 September 2014. We refer to that bundle as
    the "UT bundle".

32. The UT bundle contained only one new document. This was a letter  dated
    16 July 2014 from Dr Chris Smith at tab 1.

33. We heard submissions from both parties. As above, it was common  ground
    that the issue before  us  was  to  assess  the  copies  of  the  court
    documents  and  their  provenance  in  order  to  decide  whether   the
    appellant's second claim was credible and, if so, if he faced a risk of
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.

Re-Making of the Appeal before the Upper Tribunal - Hearing  on  13  January
2015

34. Regrettably, particularly so given the long history of the  case  prior
    to it coming before us, an issue  arose  after  the  hearing  which  we
    considered to be of sufficient significance to require the  parties  to
    provide further evidence and argument at a further oral hearing.

35. Our concerns are set out in full in the direction dated 5 December 2014
    which is at Appendix 2.

36. In summary, there are a number of similarities  between  the  claim  in
    this appeal and that of AA/04690/2013. For completeness sake we  append
    that decision at Appendix 3.

37. That case was heard in the Court of Appeal as PJ  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1011, remitted by the Court  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and re-made as allowed in a decision promulgated on 20 October
    2014. The case of PJ  came  to  our  attention  as  it  was  raised  in
    submissions for the appellant at the hearing on 15 September 2014.

38. Both this appeal and AA/04690/2013 involve:

          i. a false case being brought for  involvement  in  an  attempted
             bombing in 2007
         ii. no action being taken against the appellants until after  they
             had left Sri Lanka and until 2012
        iii. the false case being brought by police from the  Bambalapitiya
             Police Station
         iv. reliance on documents on court files  held  at  Mount  Lavinia
             Magistrates' Court including an arrest warrant directed to the
             Controller of Immigration and Emigration at Colombo airport
          v. the Sri Lankan lawyers involved in  obtaining  and  confirming
             that  the  court  documents  were  reliable  being  Mr   Asoka
             Weerasooriya, Ms Sundari Jayasuriya and Mr B R P Jayasinghe
         vi. the same UK solicitors


39. On 5 December 2014 we issued the direction at Appendix 2 requesting any
    further evidence on which the parties wished to rely in regard to these
    similarities, a skeleton  argument  and  attendance  at  a  hearing  to
    provide oral submissions.

40. No further evidence was provided by either party but  both  provided  a
    skeleton argument and  we  heard  oral  submissions.  We  reserved  our
    decision.

Our Assessment - Legal Principles

41. It was the similar facts and documents in the case of PJ (Sri Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 and the subsequent re-making of  that  appeal
    in the Upper Tribunal which led us to the further hearing on 13 January
    2015.

42. It follows that it is an essential part of our task here is to approach
    the copies of  the  court  documents  before  us  and  evidence  of  Mr
    Weerasooriya and Ms Jayasinghe in line with the ratio of the  Court  of
    Appeal in PJ.

43. At [41] and [42] of PJ, Lord Justice Fulford set out the  view  of  the
    Court on the correct approach to the court documents from Sri Lanka and
    the role of Sri Lankan lawyers in obtaining them, thus:

         "41.     In my judgment, Judge Woodcraft doubted  the  validity  of
             these  documents  (certainly  to  a  material  extent)  on   a
             significantly false basis.  Thereafter, Judge Kekic  -  having
             accepted Mr Jayayasinghe's status as  a  lawyer  -  failed  to
             address the key issue that  then  arose  given  the  suggested
             source of these documents (a court in Sri Lanka) and the route
             by which they were obtained (two independent lawyers who  sent
             them directly to  the  appellant's  solicitor  in  the  United
             Kingdom).  Whilst  it  is  undoubtedly  the  case  that  false
             documents are widely available  in  Sri  Lanka,  once  it  was
             established that the documents in question originated  from  a
             Sri Lankan court, a sufficient justification was required  for
             the conclusion that the appellant does not have a well-founded
             fear of persecution.  Prima facie, this material reveals  that
             the appellant has previously been arrested in connection  with
             a bomb, three members of his family had close LTTE connections
             and he is wanted for questioning 'to  decide  whether  he  had
             been engaged in LTTE  terrorist  activities'  but  perhaps  of
             greatest significance there is a letter from the Magistrate of
             the relevant  court  to  the  Controller  of  Immigration  and
             Emigration stating that the appellant is in the United Kingdom
             and that he is to be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka.   In
             the absence of a sufficient reason for  concluding  otherwise,
             the inescapable conclusion to be drawn from  this  material  -
             retrieved independently, it is to be stressed, by two  lawyers
             from the Magistrates' court on separate occasions  -  is  that
             the appellant will be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka as a
             result of links with the LTTE  and  their  activities.   Judge
             Kekic suggested that  the  inference  to  be  drawn  from  the
             evidence was that Mr Jayasinghe had 'obtained false  evidence'
             and that 'the appellant  had  forgotten  the  account  he  had
             previously  given  when   these   falsified   documents   were
             prepared'.  However,  in  my   view,   without   an   adequate
             explanation, it is difficult to understand how  the  appellant
             could have falsified a  letter  from  the  Magistrate  of  the
             relevant court to the Controller of Immigration and Emigration
             ordering the appellant's arrest which he then  placed  in  the
             court records so that it  could  later  be  retrieved  by  two
             separate lawyers.  At the very  least,  this  feature  of  the
             evidence required detailed analysis and explanation.


         42.      These documents lie at the centre of the  application  for
             protection,  and  I  consider  that  Judge  Kekic  misdirected
             herself when she concluded that they had been falsely prepared
             without providing any reasoning as to how the appellant  could
             have infiltrated  forged  material  into  the  court  records,
             particularly since there is no suggestion that the lawyers had
             been involved in any discreditable conduct".


44. We note the strength of the comments made by the Court of Appeal as  to
    the prima facie weight attracting to the  court  documents.  The  Court
    considered of the "greatest significance" a letter from the  Magistrate
    of the relevant Court to the Controller of Immigration  and  Emigration
    stating that the appellant was in the United Kingdom and that he was to
    be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka.

45. We noted also that it was the Court of Appeal's view that, in  essence,
    the strength of  the  evidence  contained  in  the  Magistrates'  court
    documents provided by those accepted to be Sri Lankan lawyers was  such
    that the appellant's claim was very likely to  be  made  out,  only  "a
    sufficient justification" or a  "a  sufficient  reason  for  concluding
    otherwise" or an "an adequate explanation" and "detailed  analysis  and
    explanation" of this evidence allowing  for another conclusion.

46. We bore these comments in mind and applied the approach set down by the
    Court of Appeal in PJ when reaching our view on the evidence as it  was
    before us.

47. We should also indicate that we assessed the  evidence  before  us  not
    only in line with the specific guidance of the Court of  Appeal  in  PJ
    but also following the ratio of Tanveer Ahmed (Documents unreliable and
    forged) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT 00439.

48. At [38], the Tribunal in Tanveer Ahmed* concluded that:

         "38.     In summary the principles set out  in  this  determination
             are:
             1. In asylum and human rights cases it is for an individual
             claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to rely can
             be relied on.
             2. The decision maker should consider whether a document is
             one on which reliance should properly be placed after looking
             at all the evidence in the round.
             3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make an
             allegation of forgery, or evidence strong enough to support
             it. The allegation should not be made without such evidence.
             Failure to establish the allegation on the balance of
             probabilities to the higher civil standard does not show that
             a document is reliable. The decision maker still needs to
             apply principles 1 and 2."
49. The Court of Appeal discussed Tanveer Ahmed* at [29]-[32] of  PJ.  Lord
    Justice Fulford indicated that:
         "29.     In my judgment, there is no  basis  in  domestic  or  ECHR
             jurisprudence  for  the  general  approach  that   Mr   Martin
             submitted ought to be adopted whenever  local  lawyers  obtain
             relevant documents  from  a  domestic  court,  and  thereafter
             transmit them directly to lawyers in the United  Kingdom.  The
             involvement  of  lawyers  does  not  create   the   rebuttable
             presumption that the documents they produce in this  situation
             are reliable. Instead, the  jurisprudence  referred  to  above
             does  no  more  than  indicate  that  the   circumstances   of
             particular cases may exceptionally necessitate an  element  of
             investigation by the national authorities, in order to provide
             effective protection  against  mistreatment  under  article  3
             ECHR. It is important to stress, however, that this step  will
             frequently not  be  feasible  or  it  may  be  unjustified  or
             disproportionate. In Tanveer Ahmed the court  highlighted  the
             cost and logistical difficulties that  may  be  involved,  for
             instance because of the number of documents submitted by  some
             asylum claimants. The enquiries may put the applicant  or  his
             family at risk, they may be impossible to undertake because of
             the prevailing local situation or they may  place  the  United
             Kingdom authorities in the difficult position of making covert
             local  enquiries  without  the  permission  of  the   relevant
             authorities.  Furthermore,  given   the   uncertainties   that
             frequently  remain  following  attempts   to   establish   the
             reliability of documents, if the outcome  of  any  enquiry  is
             likely to be inconclusive this is a highly relevant factor. As
             the court in Tanveer Ahmed observed, documents should  not  be
             viewed in isolation and the evidence needs to be considered in
             its entirety.
          1. Therefore, simply because a relevant document  is  potentially
             capable of being verified does  not  mean  that  the  national
             authorities have an obligation to take this step. Instead,  it
             may be necessary to make an enquiry in  order  to  verify  the
             authenticity and reliability of a document - depending  always
             on the particular facts of the case - when it is at the centre
             of the request for protection, and when a  simple  process  of
             enquiry  will  conclusively  resolve  its   authenticity   and
             reliability (see Singh v Belgium [101]  -  [105]).  I  do  not
             consider that there is any  material  difference  in  approach
             between the decisions in Tanveer Ahmed and Singh v Belgium, in
             that in the latter case the Strasbourg court simply  addressed
             one of the exceptional situations  when  national  authorities
             should undertake a process of verification.
          1. In my view, the consequence of a decision  that  the  national
             authorities are in breach of their obligations to undertake  a
             proper process of verification is that the Secretary of  State
             is unable thereafter to  mount  an  argument  challenging  the
             authenticity of the relevant documents unless  and  until  the
             breach is rectified by a proper enquiry. It follows that if  a
             decision of the Secretary of State is overturned on appeal  on
             this basis, absent a suitable investigation it will  not  open
             to her to suggest that the document or documents are forged or
             otherwise are not authentic.
          1. Finally, in this context it  is  to  be  emphasised  that  the
             courts are not required to order the  Secretary  of  State  to
             investigate particular  areas  of  evidence  or  otherwise  to
             direct her enquiries. Instead, on an appeal from a decision of
             the Secretary of State it is for the court to  decide  whether
             there  was  an  obligation  on  her  to  undertake  particular
             enquiries,  and  if  the  court  concludes  this   requirement
             existed, it  will  resolve  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
             sustainably discharged her obligation (see  NA  (UT  rule  45:
             Singh V Belgium) [2014] UKUT 00205 IAC). If court finds  there
             was such an obligation and that it was not discharged, it must
             assess the consequences for the case."
50. Following this exposition of the principle in Tanveer  Ahmed*,  it  was
    not our view that the  respondent  here  was  under  an  obligation  to
    investigate the evidence further. That was not the  conclusion  of  the
    Court of Appeal in PJ where the evidence was of a similar nature. There
    was also no obligation on us  to  order  investigation  even  where  we
    invited further evidence and comment in our  direction  of  5  December
    2014. Mr Kandola's submission on both occasions that he appeared before
    us was  that  the  respondent  considered  that  there  were  potential
    difficulties in making enquiries  of the court or police in  Sri  Lanka
    where this could bring the appellant to a level of attention that might
    in itself give rise to difficulty and even a further sur place claim.


51. Put simply, therefore, whilst bearing in  mind  the  ratio  of  PJ,  we
    applied what is a long-standing approach to the documentary evidence in
    such proceedings, that being that the burden is  on  the  appellant  to
    show that the documents "on which he seeks to rely can  be  relied  on"
    and that we should assess the documentary evidence  "after  looking  at
    all the evidence in the round."

52. We have also reminded ourselves that in HK [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 it  was
    held  that  instead  of  asking  whether  an  account  was   inherently
    implausible, one should look at the evidence and  ask  oneself  whether
    for example it is consistent  with  the  background  material  and  any
    expert evidence in support whether such evidence was of good quality.


Our Assessment of the Appellant's Documents


53. We accepted, as in PJ, that the court documents were provided by a  Sri
    Lankan  lawyer  of  good  standing,   here,   Mr   Weerasooriya.    His
    professional standing is  shown in his registration with the Sri Lankan
    Bar and Supreme Court, his involvement in court cases and,  indeed,  is
    attested by the British High Commission in  Sri  Lanka  in  its  letter
    dated 28 January 2013 (FTT bundle, tab 4).

54. The court documents here were also the subject of a verification report
    from a second Sri Lankan lawyer, Ms Jayasuriya. Her  good  standing  is
    attested by Dr Chris Smith, a respected country expert on Sri Lanka. In
    his report dated 30 September 2012 at [19]  to  [21]  he  confirms  his
    "utmost confidence" in the organisation for which Ms Jayasuriya  works,
    approves the methodology used for verification. At [22] he specifically
    confirms that he has known Ms Jayasuriya personally for  15  years  and
    describes her as a "long standing and trusted colleague" who "leads the
    verification team."

55. Further, as in PJ, the British High Commission letter dated 28  January
    2013 also confirmed that an official from the Bar  Association  of  Sri
    Lanka had advised that court files were available to lawyers  and  this
    would include copies of any handwritten notes.

56. We do not dispute the good standing or status of Mr Weerasooriya or  Ms
    Jayasuriya as lawyers or that they would be given access to the type of
    documents on court files on which the appellant here seeks to rely.

57. It remains the case that other aspects of the evidence,  to  our  mind,
    amounted to the "sufficient justification" required  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in PJ such that even where court documents  have  been  provided
    and commented on by Sri Lankan lawyers of good standing  that  evidence
    is not here capable of showing a risk of return.

58. In order to justify that finding, we must set out a "detailed  analysis
    and explanation" as required by the Court  of  Appeal  where  there  is
    evidence of the  apparent  strength  of  that  provided  by  the  court
    documents, Mr Weerasooriya and Ms Jayasuriya.

59. The concerns  we  had  with  the  documentation  before  us  arose  not
    exclusively but mainly from cross-referencing the evidence provided  by
    the UK and Sri Lankan lawyers, court documents and  the  appellant.  We
    found it expedient to begin to set out our concerns using the order  in
    which the appellant submitted the various materials,  albeit  reference
    to later documents being necessary in short order.

    Mr Weerasooriya's evidence

60. Mr Weerasooriya's evidence and the court documents  were  submitted  as
    part of the appellant's second asylum claim made to the respondent  and
    are contained in appendix D of the respondent's bundle (RB).

61. The first document referring to Mr Weerasooriya is the letter dated  13
    July 2012   from the appellant's legal  representatives  to  him  (D12-
    D13).

62. The letter states that the appellant came to the UK on 15 January 2008.
    He had informed the firm that his mother had  told  him  that  she  was
    contacted by police on 3 July 2012 and contacted Mr Weerasooriya  on  5
    July 2012. He had sent his junior, Mr B R Priyaranjana  Jayasinghe,  to
    the police station with the appellant's mother on 5 July 2012.

63. The letter from the UK representatives states at D12  that  the  police
    interview with the appellant's mother on 5 July 2012 was conducted  "in
    the presence of your junior".

64. The UK representative's letter dated 13 July 2012 also states that  the
    appellant's mother was asked about his LTTE connections and an incident
    in which a bomb was found in a jacket on a bus. It goes on  to  request
    an explanation as to "why  the  Sri  Lankan  Police  suddenly  have  an
    interest in our client and his  connection  with  the  LTTE  after  our
    client left Sri Lanka after a long time since January 2008 (sic)."

65. We should point out here that this is, in our view, an obvious question
    arising from the facts of this claim and one which the evidence  relied
    on by the appellant does not anywhere attempt to answer.

66. The final paragraph of the letter from the  UK  representatives  states
    that:

         "We understand from our  client  that  his  mother  will  pay  your
         professional fees in relation to this matter."

67. In response, Mr Weerasooriya sent a letter dated 29 August 2012 to  the
    UK  representatives  (D15-D16).  Mr  Weerasooriya   states   that   the
    appellant's  mother  instructed  him  on  the  recommendation  of   the
    appellant. According to Mr Weerasooriya she contacted  him  on  4  July
    2012, not 5 July 2012. He confirms that Mr Jayasinghe  accompanied  the
    appellant's mother to the police station.  Mr  Jayasinghe  informed  Mr
    Weerasooriya that the appellant's mother had been "interrogated" for "a
    considerable period" about the appellant, particularly  concerning  the
    bus bomb.

68. Mr Weerasooriya states that he instructed Mr  Jayasinghe  to  obtain  a
    certified copy of the court case "B5343/2007" from  the  Mount  Lavinia
    Magistrates' Court. The letter states that  the  copies  obtained  were
    enclosed.

69. Mr Weerasooriya then indicates that on examination of the copy  of  the
    court file he found that the police had  reported  finding  a  "suicide
    jacket" on a bus, the court record going back to 26 November  2007.  At
    that  time  the   accused   had   not   been   identified.   Subsequent
    investigations had led to the police identifying the appellant  as  "an
    active LTTE activist who is clearly connected  to  the  suicide  jacket
    issue."

70. The letter goes on to state that:

         "His mother Mrs [I] has also indicated that she  is  aware  of  his
         involvement in LTTE activities such as bring arm (sic) to  Colombo,
         participating  in  protests  against  the  Sri   Lanka   Government
         organised by the members of the Tamil diaspora in the UK.  She  has
         also confirmed, under interrogation, that  she  had  seen  her  son
         taking part in protests organised by the UK  based  Tamil  diaspora
         against the Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapakse when he  visited
         London recently.


         Further, according to the B Report, she confirms that her son  left
         Sri Lanka on 01st of January 2008 under Sri  Lankan  identity  card
         no: 883490088V, travelling on Passport no N1611984. The Report also
         states that your client has visited Sri Lanka  several  times.  The
         Police are now pursuing a  line  of  filing  charges  against  your
         client under the Offensive Weapons Act under which  the  Court  has
         instructed the Immigration to have  your  client  arrested  in  the
         event of him travelling in or out of Sri Lanka."


71. A number of concerns arise from this correspondence. The first is that,
    as set out in the previous paragraph, the letter dated 29  August  2012
    from Mr Weerasooriya states that the appellant's mother  gave  the  Sri
    Lankan police extensive and incriminating evidence about the appellant.
    The appellant confirms the information  given  by  his  mother  in  his
    witness statement (FTT bundle, tab 1).


72. The information it is claimed that the appellant's mother gave  to  the
    police is also recorded in police reports from  the  court  file  (D57,
    D59). It is recorded in  those  reports  that  the  appellant's  mother
    linked the appellant specifically to the bus bomb.

73. It is the appellant's evidence that his only involvement with the  LTTE
    was via his cousin;  see  [8]-[9]  above.  According  to  his  account,
    therefore, almost all of what his mother is stated  to  have  told  the
    police is profoundly incorrect.

74. There has never been any explanation from the appellant or  his  mother
    or anyone else as to why his mother would have said these things to the
    police. There is no statement from her indicating that she did  so  but
    nowhere is it suggested that she did not. On the contrary, as above, it
    is the evidence of the appellant and Mr Weerasooriya that she gave this
    completely incorrect but very  incriminating  information  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities.

75. We found that to be a  highly  unusual  and  damaging  feature  of  the
    evidence  before  us  and  one  that  concerned  the  letter  from   Mr
    Weerasooriya and the court documents, bringing into question the weight
    we could place on those documents.

76. Further, at [9] of his witness  statement  (FTT  bundle,  tab  1),  the
    appellant states that the authorities told his mother that intelligence
    sources in the UK had confirmed that the appellant was  active  in  the
    LTTE intelligence wing in the UK.

77. Again, according to the appellant's own evidence this is  not  correct,
    albeit he maintains he has supported opposition activities in the UK at
    a lower level. Again, there is no statement from the appellant's mother
    confirming that she was told this.

78. We also noted that at  [6]  of  his  witness  statement  the  appellant
    maintained that his mother was forced to sign two documents  which  she
    had  not  read.  This  is  not  referred  to  in  the  letter  from  Mr
    Weerasooriya even where  his  junior  accompanied  her  to  the  police
    station. There is again nothing from the appellant's mother  confirming
    that this happened.

79. As we have referred to them above it is as well to deal here  with  the
    police reports on the court file  at  D57  and  D59  which  record  the
    information which is supposed to have been  given  by  the  appellant's
    mother to the authorities. We noted that the information in  these  two
    documents is identical but that the first is dated 11 July 2012 and the
    second 12 July 2012. Both end with a request for an order to be sent to
    the Controller of Immigration and Emigration to arrest  the  appellant.
    Nothing before us explained why the police would  lodge  two  identical
    documents on successive days.

80. A number of other matters arise from the correspondence between the  UK
    representatives (D12-D13) and Mr Weerasooriya (D16-D17) which caused us
    to question the weight we could place on  it.  We  noted  that  in  the
    letter from the representatives, it is stated that the police interview
    with the appellant's mother on  5  July  2012  was  conducted  "in  the
    presence of your junior". Mr Weerasooriya's letter  indicates  that  Mr
    Jayasinghe accompanied the appellant's mother to the police station but
    does not state in clear terms whether he was present in  the  interview
    itself or not. The appellant's witness statement (FTT, tab 1) states at
    [4], however, entirely otherwise and that "the junior was not permitted
    to be present during my mother's interrogation."


81. We also noted that the letter from Mr Weerasooriya indicates  that  the
    appellant's mother told police that the appellant left Sri Lanka  on  1
    January 2008 under Sri Lankan identity card no. 883490088V,  travelling
    on passport no. N1611984. The identity card number provided is the same
    as that provided by the appellant in his screening interview at A13  of
    the respondent's bundle.

82. However, at A6 of his screening interview conducted on 15 January 2018,
    the appellant stated that he saw his parents 4 days earlier which would
    be 11 January 2008. This is not consistent with the information at  D57
    and D59 of a departure date of 1 January  2008  which  the  appellant's
    mother is stated to have given the authorities.

83. Also, at A11-A12 the appellant stated that the agent held the  passport
    on which he travelled at all times and that he "never" held it himself.
    We wondered how the appellant's mother could know  the  number  of  the
    passport on which the appellant travelled  to  the  UK  some  4  years'
    before she  provided  the  information  to  the  authorities,  when  he
    maintains he never knew it.

84.  Also,  the  correspondence  between  the  UK  representatives  and  Mr
    Weerasooriya and the appellant's witness statement at [5] (FTT  bundle,
    tab 1) refer to the explosive device on  the  bus  being  hidden  in  a
    "jacket". The court documents at D34, D36, D45, D46 and  D55  refer  to
    the explosives being in a "parcel".

    Further features of the court documents

85. The court documents are not consistent as to when the bomb was found on
    the bus.  At D34-D37 there is a report from a police  officer  about  a
    complaint brought by a member of  the  public  about  explosives  being
    found on a bus. At D34 the report refers to the complaint being made on
    23 November 2007. The same report indicates on D35 that  the  bus  bomb
    incident occurred on 28 November 2007. At D45, the witness statement of
    the complainant refers to the incident occurring on 20  November  2007.
    At D55, a front sheet of a police report refers to the  incident  being
    on 23 November 2007.

86. It might be argued that it is not  surprising  that  documents  arising
    from a false case brought by the Sri Lankan police should contain  such
    inconsistencies and that the different dates do not  detract  from  the
    weight to be afforded to the court documents.

87. However, that line of argument highlights a further significant concern
    arising from the court documents which is that they do not refer to the
    appellant at all until 2012. The file appears to have  been  opened  in
    2007, however, when the police had another, entirely different suspect,
    someone named in the court documents as TS. At D44 there  is  a  report
    dated 21 December 2007 referring only to TS as  the  suspect,  not  the
    appellant, stating that he had been detained,  asking  for  his  remand
    until 4 January 2008. At D38-39 TS is named in entries dated 4  January
    2008, 16 January 2008 and 30 January 2008. TS appears to have  been  on
    remand, a trial listed for 30 January 2008 and an identity  parade  for
    this person cancelled on 4  January  2008  as  further  inquiries  were
    needed.  The  document  at  D50-D53  would  appear  to  relate  to  the
    cancellation of his identity parade and ongoing investigation  in  2007
    and 2008, TS being named again at D52 and D53.


88. As we have pointed out above, the references to the  appellant  in  the
    court documents  do not begin until  2012.  The  discrepancies  in  the
    documents at D34, D35 and D45 concerning the date of the  bus  bomb  do
    not arise from documents produced at the time of police contacting  the
    appellant's mother in July 2012 and relating to the evidence  she  gave
    and  alleged  events  thereafter.  It  was  not  clear  to  us  if  the
    appellant's case is that the entire file was manufactured by police (or
    others) in 2012 with documents being produced going back to 2007 or  an
    earlier file commenced in 2007 was doctored in 2012 in order to include
    false documents relating to him. If it were the former, why  would  the
    file not refer to the appellant from 2007 onwards? If it is the latter,
    the discrepancies do not arise from fabrication but from  errors  in  a
    genuine case from a time before the appellant was wrongly included.

89. Also, even after the references to the appellant appear  in  the  court
    records, the other suspect, TS continues  to  feature.  Even  where  it
    might be credible that the police were investigating  two  suspects  at
    once, the  document  at  D40,  an  entry   dated  11  July  2012  by  a
    Magistrate, appears to confuse the two. It states as follows:

         "On the request of OIC, Bambalapitiya case is called


         Suspect: TS (remand)


         Through this further report the suspect, IK's report is submitted.
         I plead that the order has to be issued on to arrest the suspect on
         his arrival to the country.


         However it appears that the filed report is incomplete. It  is  not
         clear that the committed offense or crime  comes  under  which  law
         provision. Order to police to get further  report  and  inform  the
         court."


90. We were reluctant to place weight on a  document  in  this  form  which
    names one suspect, TS, the only person  previously  identified  in  the
    court file as a suspect, but then in the next line  immediately  refers
    to another person as "the suspect", that being the appellant.


91. A further entry beginning on D40, continued on D41 and  dated  13  July
    2012 is a request from the Bambalapitiya police for an order to  arrest
    the appellant on return. The next entry  on  D41  dated  18  July  2012
    refers only to TS.


92. Further, the court file also contains requests on 11 July  2102  (D40),
    12 July 2012 (D48) and 13 July 2012 (D40-D41) from the  police  for  an
    arrest order concerning the appellant.

93. The court documents also show at D48, however that an arrest order  for
    the appellant was signed by a Magistrate on 12 July 2012 to be sent  to
    the Controller of Immigration and Emigration. If that order was  signed
    on 12 July 2012, why is there an entry on the court file dated 13  July
    2012 at D40-41 requesting such an order?

94. Still further, there are, in fact, two copies of an arrest order to  be
    sent to the Controller of Immigration and Emigration on the court file.
    The first is at D48, as just identified. The second is at D49. It is in
    identical terms to the document at D48 other than containing two dates,
    one at the top being 12 July 2012 and the one at the  bottom  being  13
    July 2012. Nothing before us explains why there  would  be  two  arrest
    orders on the court file in  this  manner,  the  latter  containing  an
    additional date.

95. We should also point out that the refusal  of  an  arrest  warrant  and
    request for the police to get a "further report"  dated  11  July  2012
    (D40) is not followed by any document on the  file  containing  further
    information that might have led the  Magistrate  to  issue  the  arrest
    warrant. As above, the police reports dated 11 July 2012 at D57 and  12
    July 2012  at  D59  are  identical  and  do  not  provide  any  further
    information.

96. Further still, it is part of the appellant's claim  that  he  has  been
    involved in opposing the Sri Lankan authorities at a low level as  part
    of the Tamil diaspora in the UK. According to his witness statement  at
    [10] and [11] he protested at a visit to  the  UK  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    President and associated with Tamil leaders  such  as  "Reverand  (sic)
    Immanuel",  "Mr  Suren  Surenderan"  and  "Mr  Mayan   Kandiyah".   The
    respondent rejected this part of his claim as it was  unsupported;  see
    [22] above. The appellant maintained at [11] of his  witness  statement
    that he could not obtain any evidence of his activities in  the  UK  as
    the Tamil diaspora was not sufficiently well-organised.

97.  Firstly, it was not at all clear to us why the leaders  of  the  Tamil
    diaspora could not provide confirmation of knowing  the  appellant  and
    his taking part in opposition activities. Secondly,  according  to  the
    court document at (D58-59), the appellant's mother  in  Sri  Lanka  had
    been able to identify his activities from  television  broadcasts   and
    that is also stated in the letter from Mr Weerasooriya. If that was so,
    it was additionally unclear to us why it was not possible  to  identify
    and at least  provide  some  kind  of  reference  or  detail  to  those
    broadcasts in order to support this part of his claim.

    Ms Jayasuriya's evidence

98. For the appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  also
    provided a report dated 25 September 2013 of a Sri Lankan lawyer, Ms  S
    Jayasuriya (FTT bundle, tab 2), a lawyer in Sri Lanka. The report lists
    her curriculum vitae and indicates that she works  with  a  UK  country
    expert on  Sri  Lanka,  Dr  Chris  Smith.  She  has  provided  document
    verification reports for a number of UK law firms.

99. At [9] Ms Jayasuriya set out that her instructions from Dr Chris  Smith
    were:

         "... to verify the authenticity of  certified  copies  Case  Number
         Case ref: B 5343/2007 related to Mr [IK] issued by the Mt.  Lavinia
         Magistrates Court in Sri Lanka. Cash receipt issued  by  the  court
         Registrar's office dated 07 August 2012  indicating  the  date  the
         copy was released on payment of government fee of Rs.200.00."


100. At [10] Ms Jayasuriya states:

         "The documents contained in the Magistrate Court's record sent  for
         verification included the following..."


    and she then sets out what appears to be a list of the court  documents
         at D34-D61.

101. The report continues at [11]-[14]:

         "11. The Court records were checked at the  Magistrates  Court,  Mt
         Lavinia and we confirm that the case records including all attached
         B reports, airport notification and journal entries are  authentic.
         There is a file on case No B 5343/2007 on record at the Mt  Lavinia
         Courts.


         12. Police records at the Bambalapitiya also  confirm  that  the  B
         report was filed in the MC, Mt Lavinia. I did not  request  details
         of the investigation as my task is limited to verification  of  the
         authenticity of the documents sent for verification and not make  a
         judgement on the contents.


         13. I also contacted Mr. Asoka Weerasooriya, Attorney at  Law,  who
         had  provided  a  letter   addressed   to   [the   appellant's   UK
         representatives] stating that he  had  instructed  his  junior  and
         filed a motion and obtained the said certified copies of the  court
         records. Mr Weerasooriya confirmed that he had  issued  the  letter
         and also re-confirmed the findings of his investigation. I  do  not
         know Mr. Weerasooriya personally but I have heard of his work as an
         Attorney-at-Law by repute. He is a well-known and respected  lawyer
         in Sri Lanka who  was  attached  to  the  Attorney  Generals  (sic)
         Department before starting private practice in Sri Lanka.


         Opinion


         14. Based on the information received it is  my  opinion  that  the
         documents sent for verification is (sic) authentic."


102. The difficulty we have with this report is that is lacks detail  as  to
    what checks were carried out and how the conclusion that the  documents
    were "authentic" was reached. The statement at  [11]  that  "The  Court
    records were checked" and that "the case  records  ...  are  authentic"
    does not indicate, for example, when this was done, who did it or if  a
    fee was paid for access to the file.

103. We also noted that nothing before us from Ms Jayasuriya  or  any  other
    source indicted that the arrest order signed by the Magistrate  was  on
    any  record  or  file  held  by  the  Controller  of  Immigration   and
    Emigration.


104.  Our  concerns  about  the  verification  report  increased   when   we
    considered it alongside the evidence of Dr  Smith.  He  states  in  his
    report dated 30 September 2013 (FTT, tab 3) at [19]-[20] that:

         "19.     Port Hall Consultancy Ltd operates a document verification
             service  that  is  based  in  Colombo,  Sri  Lanka.  Documents
             relating to this case have been verified by  my  team  to  the
             highest possible standard. The conclusion reached by the  team
             is that the documents are genuine and  the  reasons  for  this
             conclusion are set out in the verification report.


         20.      I have the utmost confidence in the ability of  this  team
             to arrive at the best possible  conclusions  and  I  therefore
             support the assessment that the documents are genuine."


105. Dr Smith's report goes on to state at [21]-[22]:


         "21.     The document verification process involves verification at
             source  and  the  procedure  and  methodology  used   by   the
             verification  team  is  comprehensively   set   out   in   the
             verification report that is submitted with this expert witness
             report. As such, there is no  merit  in  repeating  statements
             relating to methodology.


         22.      I have worked with Mrs Sundari Jayasuriya in various roles
             for some fifteen years, both as employer and employee. She  is
             a  long  standing  and  trusted  colleague   and   leads   the
             verification team. I have  worked  with  Mr  B.B.S.E.M  Perera
             since the  formation  of  the  verification  team.  Since  the
             formation of the team, some three years ago, the  standard  of
             his work has been exemplary."


106. At [23], Dr Smith states that "[t]here has been a 'B' report issued  in
    the Appellant's name, stating the intention of the police  to  commence
    proceedings against him."


107. We had a number  of  difficulties  with  this  section  of  Dr  Smith's
    report. Firstly, regarding his comments at [21], as we  have  indicated
    above,  the   verification   report   of   Ms   Jayasuriya   does   not
    "comprehensively" set out "the procedure and methodology used".  It  is
    notably lacking in that regard.

108. Further, Dr Smith states at [23] that the "B'  report"  was  issued  in
    the name of this appellant. We wondered if that could  be  an  accurate
    statement given that the B report here given the references only to the
    other suspect, TS, prior to July 2012; see [86] and[87] above.


109. Dr Smith provided a further letter dated 16  July  2014  commenting  on
    the approach taken by the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal to the report
    of Ms Jayasuriya and states:

         "The tried and tested methodology for Sri Lankan  documents  is  to
         verify at  source.  Many  documents  from  Sri  Lanka  are  genuine
         documents but there (sic) are  obtained  and  completed  illegally.
         Therefore, the only reliable way to verify is  from  the  place  of
         issue. Therefore,  Ms  Jayasuriya  visited  Mt  Lavinia  Court  and
         requested a relevant cross check of the relevant documents and  was
         told that these documents were on file. She  then  triangulated  by
         checking the relevant documents at Bambalapitiya police station and
         was again told that the documents were on file.


         With respect, IJ Khan appears not to have  understood  the  way  in
         which we verify documents and we apologise if this is not clear  in
         our report. We also apologise for omitted the date of verification.




         We would like  to  reiterate  Ms  Jayasuriya's  findings  that  the
         documents she was asked to verify are, in her opinion, genuine  and
         that the methodology employed to reach this  conclusion  is  robust
         and, moreover, the credibility of which has never been called  into
         question before (our emphasis)."


110. With respect, without any intention  to  question  the  bona  fides  of
    either Dr Smith or Ms Jayasuriya, we  found  that  this  letter  raised
    further concerns about how Ms Jayasuriya or Port Hall  Consultancy  Ltd
    conducted the assessment of the court documents.


111. Dr Smith's letter  states  that  Ms  Jayasuriya  "was  told"  that  the
    documents were on the Mount Lavinia Magistrates'  Court  file  and  the
    Bambalapitiya police file. This suggests that she did not see the files
    herself. As above, Ms Jayasuriya's own report does not state  in  terms
    that she herself inspected the court or police files. If  she  did  not
    so, who did? Much is made here and in PJ of her bona fides (which we do
    not dispute) but we are not  satisfied  as  to  her  specific  role  in
    verifying the documents before us and do not have information as to who
    else might have been involved. Dr Smith endorses the reliability  of  a
    "Mr B.B.S.E.M Perera" but nothing  before  us  indicates  that  he  was
    involved in this particular matter.


112. We noted further that the weight afforded to the  documents  in  PJ  at
    [41] arose because of :

        "... the route by which they were obtained (two independent lawyers
        who sent them directly to the appellant's solicitor in  the  United
        Kingdom) ..."


    and:


         "... retrieved independently, it is to be stressed, by two  lawyers
         from the Magistrates' court on separate occasions ... ."


113. In the appeal before us, we do not have  anything  indicating  that  Ms
    Jayasuriya or any second lawyer obtained copies of the court file  that
    was sent by Mr Weerasooriya. Additionally, the evidence here,  for  the
    reasons given above, is  that  it  is  unclear  whether  Ms  Jayasuriya
    personally accessed the court file.

114. Still further, the only person who had access  to  the  court  file  in
    question here was neither Mr Weerasooriya nor Ms Jayasuriya,  for  both
    whom we have evidence of good standing, but Mr Jayasinghe. We  have  no
    confirmation of his qualifications or bona fides.

115. We also noted that nothing before us from Ms Jayasuriya  or  any  other
    source indicted that the arrest order signed by the Magistrate  was  on
    any  record  or  file  held  by  the  Controller  of  Immigration   and
    Emigration.


Wider Considerations


116. We have set out above our significant concerns on a number  of  aspects
    of the documentary evidence before us. There is nothing explaining  why
    the authorities would have brought a false case over 4 years after  the
    appellant left Sri Lanka, why  the  appellant's  mother  gave  evidence
    against him, the varying dates of the bus bomb incident, the references
    to a parcel bomb and a bomb concealed in a jacket, the original suspect
    being someone entirely other than the appellant when the court file was
    opened some 4 years before he is mentioned or the unexplained copies of
    the arrest warrant and further requests for such a document  by  police
    even after it was signed.

117. We noted that, beyond the court documents considered above, there  were
    other documents relied upon by the appellant in support of his claim to
    have been falsely implicated in an attempted bombing. In so far as they
    had probative value, it was not  our  view  that  anything  about  them
    indicated they could carry weight when considered against the force  of
    the matters undermining  the  documentary  evidence  as  a  whole.  The
    document at D61 "certifies" that the copies of court documents provided
    are from file B/5343/2007 but does not refer to the appellant or, given
    the general statement made, address the concerns we have set out above.
    An original of the message from the police to the appellant's mother at
    D91 asking her to attend on 5 July  2012  could  presumably  have  been
    provided but was not. Mr Weerasooriya and Ms Jayasuriya make no comment
    on this document and its provenance  so  there  is  nothing  before  us
    indicating whether it appears to be, for  example,  in  an  appropriate
    format.

118. There are other matters which we found, when the  court  documents  and
    information from Mr Weerasooriya and Ms Jayasuriya is set against them,
    reduced the weight to be afforded to those documents.

119. The appellant has shown himself to be someone of dishonesty as  he  has
    been convicted of fraud and attempted theft which he was  sentenced  to
    12 months' imprisonment. The nature of  the  convictions  was  that  he
    possessed a skimming device intended to enable him to steal money  from
    an ATM.


120. Further, as above he was found not to be  a  credible  witness  by  two
    judges in his first asylum claim.

121. There is the additional evidence before us, accepted by  the  Court  of
    Appeal at [41] of PJ that:

         "...  it is undoubtedly the case that false  documents  are  widely
         available in Sri Lanka ... ."


122. These three matters indicated strongly to us that great caution had  to
    be exercised when assessing any assertion put forward by the  appellant
    now, even where he sought to rely on the type of evidence found by  the
    Court of Appeal in PJ to be capable of attracting significant weight.

123. When the concerns we have set out that arise from an  analysis  of  the
    court documents and evidence of Mr Weerasooriya and Ms  Jayasuriya  are
    considered  together  with  the  appellant's   convictions,   lack   of
    credibility  in  his  previous  asylum  and  availability   of   forged
    documentation in Sri Lanka, our conclusion was that those documents and
    that evidence could not attract sufficient weight so as  to  show  that
    the appellant is of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities now or would
    be on return.

124. Put another way, for the reasons set out  above,  having  assessed  the
    weight to  be  placed  on  the  court  documents  and  evidence  of  Mr
    Weerasooriya and Ms Jayasuriya "after looking at all of the evidence in
    the round", it is our view that the appellant  has  not  made  out  his
    claim to be at risk on return to the lower standard of proof.

125. It was not suggested that any other aspect of the  appellant's  profile
    could lead to a risk of harm on return. Having referred to the guidance
    of the Tribunal in GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka
    CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) we  did  not  find  that  there  was  anything
    preventing his return to Sri Lanka.

Conclusion

126. We remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing  it  on  asylum  and
    Article 3 ECHR grounds.



Signed  [pic]    Date: 2 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                 APPENDIX 1

   ERROR OF LAW DECISION OF UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL AND DEPUTY UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA
                         PROMULGATED ON 7 JULY 2014


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08417/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29h May 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                                     I K
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Wass, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  who  appeals  with  permission
    against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  W  Khan
    promulgated on 26 November 2013 in which he dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State made on 21 August
    2013 to remove him from the United Kingdom consequent on refusal of his
    claim for asylum.

The Appellant's Case

 2. The appellant was born in Trincomalee, Sri Lanka where  he  lived  with
    his parents and where his father owned a mill.  In 2000 the Sri  Lankan
    Army accused the father of assisting the LTTE,  arrested  and  detained
    him and he was released only on payment of a  bribe.   The  appellant's
    cousin who was living with the family was forced to join the  LTTE;  he
    later visited them from time to time, and the LTTE brought  weapons  to
    the home for safekeeping. They family complied with  this  due  to  the
    threats made to them.  On 5 November 2007 the cousin visited and stayed
    a night; the next night the Pillayan group came to  the  house,  forced
    their way in and attacked the appellant's  father,  and  abducting  the
    appellant.  He believes this occurred because neighbours  had  informed
    on the cousin's visits.  The appellant was beaten, taken to a camp  and
    was tortured; he was also sexually assaulted.  He was  released  on  26
    November 2007 and asked to sign each week.

 3. After reporting this to the police he was  stopped  and  questioned  by
    members of the Pillayan group about his complaint.  They beat  him  up,
    took him back to their camp and tortured him again.   He  was  released
    upon payment of a bribe, travelled to Colombo and an agent was  engaged
    to facilitate his departure from Sri Lanka.  He travelled to the United
    Kingdom arriving on 15 January 2008 and claimed asylum on arrival.

 4. The appellant's first asylum claim was refused on 24 September 2009 and
    an appeal against that decision was upheld.

 5. On 5 September 2012 the appellant made representations claiming that he
    had been contacted by his mother on 3 July 2012 and that she  had  told
    him that the police had visited looking for him and  requiring  her  to
    attend the police station on 5 July  2012.   She  was  then  questioned
    about the appellant, his family and his relations with the LTTE.

 6. The family then appointed a lawyer, Asoka Weerasooirya  who  discovered
    that the police had filed a  report  on  12/13  July  2012  naming  the
    appellant as a suspect in an attempted bus bombing  in  November  2007,
    the report also stating that his mother had told the police that he had
    been a  prominent  LTTE  activist  meeting  with  various  members  and
    transporting firearms and bombs from Trincomalee  to  Colombo  and  was
    working closely in the Tamil diaspora and  the  UK.   Copies  of  court
    records and police reports and arrest warrants were  attached  and  the
    Secretary of State accepted that this was a  fresh  claim  for  asylum,
    considered it and refused it for the reasons given in the letter of  21
    August 2013.

 7. Since then, on 24 September 2013, the appellant has been  convicted  in
    the United Kingdom of offences involving dishonesty and sentence to  12
    months' imprisonment.

The Respondent's Case

 8. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter dated 21  August
    2013.  The Secretary of State considered:-

      i. that the documents supplied were  not  reliable  in  light  of  the
         guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 given  the  ease
         with which forged documents easily are obtained in  Sri  Lanka  and
         that it was not credible that official police  documents  regarding
         the same case would show the date of the incident variously as  20,
         23 or  28  November  2007  and  taking  into  account  the  adverse
         credibility findings in respect of the appellant as set out in  the
         refusal letter of 24 September 2009, she did not  accept  that  the
         appellant was suspected of involvement in an attempted bus  bombing
         or he was now subject to an arrest warrant.

     ii. Having had regard to the factors set out in GJ  and  Others  (post-
         civil war returnees)  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  she  was  not
         satisfied that the appellant was a Tamil activist  or  fell  within
         the risk categories identified.  She  was  not  satisfied  that  he
         qualified for  humanitarian  protection  and  considered  that  his
         removal to Sri Lanka would not be in breach of the United Kingdom's
         obligations pursuant to Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention
         having had regard to  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A W  Khan  sitting  at
    Kingston Crown Court on 12 November 2013.  He heard evidence  from  the
    appellant  and  submissions  from  representatives  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State.  In addition he  had  before  him
    the following:-

          i. expert report from Dr Chris Smith;

         ii. verification report from S Jayasuriya, Attorney at Law in  Sri
             Lanka;

        iii. correspondence between the appellant's  solicitors  and  Asoka
             Weerasooirya in Sri Lanka in respect of enquiries made on  his
             behalf and translations of the relevant original documents;

         iv. letter from the British High Commission in Colombo to the Home
             Office in relation to Asoka Weerasooirya;

          v. correspondence  with  the  Home  Office  indicating  that  the
             original documents had been lost by them.

10. It was put to Judge Khan by the respondent that  the  appellant  was  a
    liar [14] and that the documents in question had been  manufactured  to
    appear genuine.  In response it was put on behalf of the appellant that
    the documents had been obtained by an attorney in Sri Lanka; that there
    was nothing to suggest the attorney could not be relied  upon  and  the
    documents had been verified by a second attorney,  Ms  Jayasuriya  [15]
    and that on the basis of the expert testimony of Dr Smith, it is likely
    that the appellant would appear on a computerised stop list  accessible
    at Colombo Airport and would therefore, following GJ, be at risk.

11. Judge Khan directed himself [18] that the central issue in this case is
    whether the documents the appellant has produced  in  evidence  can  be
    relied upon to show that he was suspected of carrying a bomb on  a  bus
    some time in November 2007 and that there was  an  outstanding  warrant
    for his arrest.  He stated:-

         "In deciding whether these documents are genuine  or  not,  I  have
         paid close attention to the  document  verification  report  of  25
         September 2013 from S Jayasuriya".

12. Judge Khan found that:-

          i. he could not be satisfied  that  Ms  Jayasuriya's  report  was
             credible evidence that the documents are in fact authentic due
             to lack of detail and how it could be said that they  were  in
             fact genuine [21];

         ii. there were discrepancies as to whether the explosive  material
             carried on the bus was in a parcel or whether it was concealed
             under a jacket or some other item of clothing [23]; and, it is
             unclear from the reports when the  incident  was  supposed  to
             have taken place [23], different dates being given;

        iii. it was  unclear  why  the  appellant's  mother  would,  as  it
             appeared, have condemned him  to  the  police  in  Sri  Lanka,
             explaining his activities for the LTTE both in Sri  Lanka  and
             the United Kingdom; or, how she knew that he was doing so.  it
             was incredible that she would have stated that  the  appellant
             had visited Sri Lanka several times from the UK [24] and  thus
             attach little evidence to this part of the claim;

         iv. the documents submitted could  not  be  relied  upon  to  show
             either that the appellant actually placed a bomb on a  bus  or
             that he is innocent of this because it is a  false  allegation
             [27], the verification report  not  satisfying  him  that  the
             documents are genuine;

          v. there is no credible explanation as to why the police  in  Sri
             Lanka would suddenly have an interest in the appellant  nearly
             five years after the incident; that, having had regards to the
             previous appeal and the appellant's other witness that he  did
             not find him to be a credible witness [28 to 31];

         vi. that having rejected the appellant's claim there was an arrest
             warrant against him he did not consider he would  be  at  real
             risk on return to Sri Lanka [33]; that the appellant's removal
             to Sri Lanka would not be in breach of paragraph 276ADE of the
             Immigration Rules or Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

          i. while it was for the appellant to establish that the documents
             relied upon were reliable, that was not the question the judge
             asked, and he had erred in  law  by  considering  whether  the
             appellant   had   shown   the   relevant   documents   to   be
             authentic/genuine or not as the burden is on the respondent to
             prove that  a document is not genuine;

         ii. the judge had failed properly to explain why the report of  Ms
             Jayasuriya was not one on which he could place reliance  given
             that these also confirmed the findings of Asoka Weerasooirya;

        iii. the judge had failed to make any findings in relation  to  the
             letter provided by Mr Weerasooirya which was material  to  the
             case; and

         iv. the judge had failed to  take  into  account  the  appellant's
             evidence of why his mother had said that he had been  involved
             in LTTE activity in Sri Lanka and the UK and the finding  that
             he had been to Sri Lanka several times was not rational.

14. On 30 January  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Eshun  granted  permission
    stating that the grounds raised an arguable error  in  respect  of  the
    judge's  approach  to  the  documentary  evidence  submitted   by   the
    appellant.

15. By way of a reply to the grant  pursuant  to  Rule  24  the  respondent
    stated that judge had considered the evidence and  concluded  that  the
    documentation could not be relied upon that being  a  finding  open  to
    him.

Submissions

16. Ms Wass submitted that it was evident by  his  numerous  references  to
    "genuine" and "authentic" that the judge was  considering  not  whether
    the documents in question were  reliable  but  whether  they  had  been
    fabricated or false.  It was to be noted also that in her  report  [14]
    Ms Jayasuriya had said that the documents  were  authentic,  the  judge
    therefore  having  given  no  proper  reason  for  his  findings.   She
    submitted that Ms Jayasuriya's report was linked also to the failure of
    the judge  to  make  findings  with  respect  to  the  letter  from  Mr
    Weerasooirya as what he had found and confirmed to Ms Jayasuriya.  With
    respect to the latter, there had been no consideration to the fact that
    a respected Sri Lankan lawyer had obtained independently copies of  the
    court file in Sri Lanka there being evidence that this was possible and
    that taking this together with Ms Jayasuriya's  report,  there  was  no
    sufficient basis for the judge's findings.

17. Mr Avery submitted that there was a  distinct  lack  of  detail  in  Ms
    Jayasuriya's report as to how the documents were compared and what  was
    seen at the court.  In the circumstances the judge had been entitled to
    conclude  that  the  report  did  not  assist  him  in  assessing   the
    documentation.  He submitted that in reality the judge had applied  the
    Tanveer Ahmed test  and  had  simply  found  that  the  documents  were
    reliable.  He submitted that there were  serious  credibility  problems
    with the documentation as to when the incident took place and the other
    inconsistencies all of which had been taken into account by  the  judge
    who had reached a decision open to him bearing  in  mind  the  previous
    poor credibility findings and the appellant's most recent conviction of
    an offence involving dishonesty.

18. In reply Ms Wass submitted that what was recorded  in  respect  of  the
    submissions made by Counsel and the Presenting Officer  to  Judge  Khan
    were not in the totality of what had been said and even if so what  the
    judge needed to do was to follow the law.

Did the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the  making  of  an
error of law?

19. In his determination at [18], [19], [21] and [31], Judge Khan refers to
    the question of whether or not the  documents  in  question  which  are
    central to the appeal, are genuine or authentic. He states clearly that
    he is not satisfied that they are.

20. As Ms Wass submitted, where the  respondent  makes  an  allegation  the
    document is not genuine or is somehow false, as appears  to  have  been
    done here from the summary of the respondent's submissions,  that  must
    be proved by the Secretary of State on the  balance  of  probabilities.
    It is evident that Judge Khan wrongly considered that it  was  for  the
    appellant to prove that the documents were genuine.

21. We do not consider that, as Mr Avery submitted, the judge was  in  fact
    assessing whether the documents were reliable. That is not the language
    he used.

22. It cannot in the circumstances be properly argued that this  is  not  a
    material error as it is inevitable that his approach to the evidence of
    Ms Jayasuriya was incorrect.  Further, as Ms Wass submitted  the  judge
    does  not  make  any  findings  with  regard  to  the  evidence  of  Mr
    Weerasooirya which is of importance in assessing the documents  because
    he obtained them from a court, his bona fides as a lawyer are confirmed
    by the respondent who also confirms that such court documents  as  have
    been produced can be obtained from courts (see the letter from the  FCO
    to the Home Office).  Given that in  paragraph  14  of  her  report  Ms
    Jayasuriya refers to having checked details with Mr  Weerasooirya,  the
    error is material.

23. Whilst we note  that  the  judge  found  discrepancies  in  the  report
    particularly regarding the  date  of  the  incident  it  is  of  course
    possible that he differences between 20, 23 and 28 may be accounted for
    by poor handwriting from which documents  were  transcribed.   Further,
    the supposition that mistakes are not made in police  documents  is  at
    best tendentious.

24. Accordingly, we are satisfied that the judge did make a material  error
    of law and that it would be necessary to remake the determination.

DIRECTIONS

    1. The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge A W Khan did  involve
       the making of an error of law, and it is set  aside  to  be  remade.
       Judge  Khan's  findings  as  to  the  appellant's  credibility   are
       preserved.

    2. At the reconvened hearing, the Upper  Tribunal  will  consider  what
       weight, if any, to attach to the documents extracted from the courts
       and the police in Sri Lanka, and to the letters and reports from  Mr
       Weerasooriya and Ms Jayasuriya.

    3. Any additional material on which either party seeks to rely must  be
       served on the Upper Tribunal and on  the  other  party  at  least  7
       working days before the date of hearing, and must be accompanied  by
       a notice pursuant to rule 15 (2A) setting out  in  detail  and  with
       cogent argument why the new material should be admitted.




Signed      Date 1 July 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                                 APPENDIX 2

                   DIRECTION OF UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                               5 DECEMBER 2014


                                                    Appeal No: AA/08417/2013

                                  DIRECTION

 1. As the parties will be aware, after having  had  an  asylum  claim  and
    appeal refused,  on  5  September  2012  this  appellant  made  further
    submissions on a sur place basis claiming that he had been contacted by
    his mother on 3 July 2012 and that she had told him that the police had
    visited looking for him and requiring her to attend the police  station
    on 5 July 2012.  She was  then  questioned  about  the  appellant,  his
    family and his connections with the LTTE.

 2. The  family  then  appointed  a  lawyer,  Mr  Asoka  Weerasooriya,  who
    discovered that the police had filed a report in July 2012  naming  him
    as a suspect in an attempted bus bombing in November  2007  the  report
    also stating that his mother had told the police that  he  had  been  a
    prominent LTTE activist meeting with various members  and  transporting
    firearms and bombs from Trincomalee to Colombo and was working  closely
    in the Tamil diaspora in the UK.

 3. Mr Asoka Weerasooriya provided the appellant's UK lawyers  with  copies
    of court records, police reports and arrest warrants in support of  the
    sur place claim. The documents were stated to be found on files at  the
    Mount Lavinia Magistrates Court and the Bambalapitiya Police Station.

 4. Mr Asoka Weerasooriya was assisted in his work by another lawyer, Mr  B
    R P Jayasinghe; see Mr Asoka Weerasooriya's letter dated 29 August 2012
    at tab 3 of the appellant's bundle dated 3 September 2014.

 5. The Secretary of State accepted that the further  submissions  amounted
    to a fresh claim for asylum, considered  it  and  refused  it  for  the
    reasons given in the letter of 21 August 2013.

 6. For the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal,  a  second  Sri  Lankan
    lawyer,  Ms  Sundari  Jayasuriya,  also  provided  a  report  dated  25
    September 2013 stating that she  had  examined  the  court  and  police
    station documents.

 7. After reserving this appeal on 15 September 2014, the panel's attention
    was brought to Upper Tribunal's determination  in  AA/04690/2013.  This
    case was heard in the Court of Appeal as PJ (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1011 and remitted to the  Upper  Tribunal  to  be  re-made.  A
    hearing took place on  30  September  2104  and  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    determination of AA/04960/2013 was promulgated on 20 October 2014.  The
    same UK lawyers, ICA Solicitors, conducted both cases.

 8. The Court of Appeal decision and determination of AA/04690/2013 set out
    a similar factual scenario to that in this appeal. Paragraphs  3-10  of
    the determination of AA/04690/2013 state as follows:

         "3. On 3 April 2012 the Appellant sought asylum claiming that if he
         returned  to  Sri  Lanka  he  faced  mistreatment  because  of  the
         authorities' perceptions as to his political opinions based on  the
         connection between members of his family  to  the  LTTE.   In  that
         regard he claimed that  his  sister  joined  the  LTTE  in  1993  -
         specifically a Black Tiger's suicide squad member, who  was  killed
         on 11 May 2006 by the Sri Lankan Navy.  The Appellant's brother was
         forcibly enlisted in the LTTE in 1996 and killed  on  24  September
         1997.  His father, though not a  member  of  any  political  party,
         worked as a boatman for Colonel Soosai, the commander of  the  LTTE
         Black Sea Tiger Unit from its inception in 1992.   The  Sri  Lankan
         Navy was said to have killed the Appellant's father on  7  February
         2000 during an engagement near Mullaitivu.


         4. It was the Appellant's account that he was put under pressure to
         join the LTTE.  He claimed to have been arrested by the Sri  Lankan
         Police on 30 November 2007 with three or four other men, because  a
         bomb that did not explode was found at a railway station  near  the
         his home.  The Appellant was  held  overnight  and  released  on  1
         December 2007.  The Appellant claimed that whilst in  detention  he
         was beaten and pushed against a wall.  In due course the  Appellant
         brought his release document to the United Kingdom.


         5. The Appellant's account was that he was not charged or bailed or
         subject to reporting conditions but he nonetheless claimed to  fear
         that he would be arrested by the Army and the CID  if  returned  to
         Sri Lanka.


         6. It was the Appellant's account that  on  30  December  2011  his
         mother was told by Police Officers that the Appellant was suspected
         of having contact with the LTTE and that they were making enquiries
         about him.


         7. In consequence the Appellant made contact with  a  solicitor  in
         Colombo a Mr Jayasinghe in order to obtain advice as to what  steps
         his mother should take.


         8. It was the Appellant's case that on 13  February  2012  the  Sri
         Lankan authorities issued an arrest warrant  for  him  and  that  a
         letter was sent from a Magistrate to the Controller of  Immigration
         and Emigration stipulating that the Appellant  was  in  the  United
         Kingdom but that if he returned to Sri Lanka  he  should  be  taken
         into custody.


         9. At interview the Appellant stated that the information came from
         his United Kingdom solicitors on 16 February 2012.  On 29  February
         2012 the Appellant's British  solicitors  wrote  to  Mr  Jayasinghe
         requesting that he obtain any documents relevant to the  case.   On
         16 March 2012 Mr Jayasinghe made an  application  to  the  relevant
         court and in consequence various papers were provided on  19  March
         2012.  Mr Jayasinghe wrote to the Appellant's British solicitors on
         20 March 2012 enclosing a certified copy of a  report  and  certain
         other documents that had been provided to the court by  the  Police
         together with a cash receipt for 30 rupees (the cost  of  obtaining
         the copy documents).  The contents reveal that the  authorities  in
         Sri Lanka had linked the Appellant with the 2007 bombing that  they
         refer to as a "bomb case" at Wellawatta Railway Station and that he
         was to be arrested on arrival in Sri Lanka.


         10. The Appellant submitted additional documents in support of  his
         claim for asylum  including  a  photocopy  of  his  father's  death
         certificate stating that he died on 7 February 2000, the  cause  of
         death being "Death while the attack of Sri Lankan  Navy"  (sic),  a
         "receipt of arrest" dated 1 December 2007, an arrest warrant in his
         name dated 19 March 2012 and a letter from Mr Jayasinghe."


 9. The determination of AA/04690/2013 continues, discussing the litigation
    in the Court of Appeal,:


         "18. It was pointed  out  that  once  the  Respondent  refused  the
         Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  the  Appellant's  United   Kingdom
         solicitors wrote on 9 May 2012 to a more senior Sri Lankan  lawyer,
         Mr Weerasooriya requesting that he repeat the process  of  ensuring
         that the relevant papers originally came from the  court  and  were
         not forgeries.  He was asked to provide another set of the relevant
         materials  as  a  matter  of  urgency  including  the  "Magistrates
         Minutes" and the "Notification to the Controller of Immigration and
         Emigration dated 19 March 2012".  On 23 May  2012  Mr  Weerasooriya
         replied stating that his junior had obtained a  complete  certified
         copy of the documents that matched those produced by Mr Jayasinghe.
          For self-evident reasons they now bore a  rubber  stamp  from  the
         Magistrates' Court dated 23 May 2012 (as opposed to 19 March  2012,
         the date when Mr Jayasinghe undertook this work).


         19. Before their Lordships Mr Martin  was  recorded  as  submitting
         that both lawyers had provided evidence of  their  Bar  Association
         membership and  they  were  entered  on  the  Supreme  Court  role.
         Moreover  the  British  High   Commission   in   Colombo   provided
         confirmation, first that Mr Weerasooriya was a lawyer in Sri  Lanka
         and second that it was possible for lawyers to obtain court  files.
         Critically, it was submitted  that  the  risk  of  forgery  greatly
         diminished if the documents came directly from the court."


10. We also noted from [23] of AA/04690/2013 that:


         "23.  At the outset of the hearing Mr Martin handed to us copies of
         two documents comprising; a letter from the British High Commission
         in Colombo addressed to the UKBA and dated  28  January  2013  sub-
         headed "Sri Lankan Cases with Lawyers'  Letters"  and;  a  document
         headed "Document Verification Report" dated 10 October 2013 by Mr S
         Jayasuriya an Attorney- at-Law of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka. "




11. To summarise, in this appeal,  Mr  Asoka  Weerasooriya  was  the  first
    lawyer involved in commenting on the court and  police  station  files.
    The documents here and in the case of AA/04690/2013  indicate  strongly
    that it is the same Mr Asoka Weerasooriya who was  instructed  in  both
    cases.


12. A Sri Lankan lawyer named Ms Sundari Jayasuriya carried out the  second
    examination in this appeal,  examining  documents  held  at  the  Mount
    Lavinia Magistrates Court and the Bambalapitiya Police Station.  As  at
    [10] above, in AA/04690/2013, a lawyer named S Jayasuriya also provided
    a report attesting to the existence of documents at the  Mount  Lavinia
    Magistrates Court and the Bambalapitiya Police Station. This person  is
    referred to in the Upper Tribunal  determination  of  AA/04690/2013  as
    "Mr" but personal details provided in both cases for  this  lawyer  are
    almost identical and indicate that it is the same person, identified in
    the paperwork in this appeal as "Ms" Sundari Jayasuriya.


13. Both appeals also feature a Mr B R P Jayasinghe. In this appeal  he  is
    referred to  as  a  junior  colleague  of  Mr  Asoka  Weerasooriya.  In
    AA/04690/2013 he is named as the first lawyer to comment  on  the  case
    being brought against the appellant in Sri Lanka.


14. Both appeals concern the fabrication  of  a  case  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities showing these appellants being  involved  in  an  attempted
    bombing, those cases being brought against them some years  after  they
    left Sri Lanka, both fabricated cases producing documents held at Mount
    Lavinia Magistrates Court and the Bambalapitiya Police Station.


15. The Tribunal notes the similar personnel  and  facts  and  finds  those
    matters require further submissions from the parties.


DIRECTIONS

16. The Tribunal directs that both parties attend the Tribunal  on  Tuesday
    13 January 2015 to provide oral submissions on the common  features  of
    these two cases, namely the similarity of the  facts  of  a  fabricated
    allegation  of  involvement  in  an  attempted  bombing,  reliance   on
    documents held on files at Mount  Lavinia  Magistrates  Court  and  the
    Bambalapitiya Police Station, and role of  Mr  Asoka  Weerasooriya,  Ms
    Sundari Jayasuriya and Mr B R P Jayasinghe in both.


17. If either party wishes to submit any written documentation in  relation
    to these matters it should be filed with the Tribunal and served on the
    other party by Tuesday 6 January 2015.


18. Both parties are directed to file with the Tribunal and  serve  on  the
    other party a skeleton argument no later than Friday 9 January 2015.


19. The parties  are  on  notice  that  a  failure  to  comply  with  these
    directions may lead the Upper Tribunal to proceed  on  the  basis  that
    nothing (or nothing further) is to be said or advanced  in  support  of
    that party's case before the Upper Tribunal.


                                                   Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
                                                             5 December 2014
                                 APPENDIX 3

        DETERMINATION OF AA/04690/2012 PROMULGATED ON 20 OCTOBER 2014


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/04690/2012
                                                               AA/04691/2012
                                                               AA/04692/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 September 2014                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                         UPPER TRBUNAL JUDGE OCONNOR

                                   Between

                                     PJ
                                     AJ
                                     KJ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Jonathan Martin, Counsel instructed by Messrs ICS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant and his wife and child are citizens of  Sri  Lanka.   We
    shall refer to the first named Appellant PJ as "the Appellant" for  the
    purposes of our determination.

2.    The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student on 14  September
    2008 with a visa valid until January 2010.  His wife joined him  on  25
    January 2009 as  his  dependant.   The  Appellant's  student  visa  was
    extended to 23 July 2012 and during this process he was  granted  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  His wife returned  to
    Sri Lanka on 19 October 2010 in order to give birth and she  and  their
    child returned together to this country on 16 November 2011.

3.    On 3 April 2012 the  Appellant  sought  asylum  claiming  that  if  he
    returned to Sri Lanka he faced mistreatment because of the authorities'
    perceptions as to  his  political  opinions  based  on  the  connection
    between members of his family to the LTTE.  In that regard  he  claimed
    that his sister joined the LTTE in 1993 - specifically a Black  Tiger's
    suicide squad member, who was killed on 11 May 2006 by the  Sri  Lankan
    Navy.  The Appellant's brother was forcibly enlisted  in  the  LTTE  in
    1996 and killed on 24 September 1997.  His father, though not a  member
    of any political party, worked as a boatman  for  Colonel  Soosai,  the
    commander of the LTTE Black Sea Tiger Unit from its inception in  1992.
    The Sri Lankan Navy was said to have killed the Appellant's father on 7
    February 2000 during an engagement near Mullaitivu.

4.    It was the Appellant's account that he was put under pressure to  join
    the LTTE.  He claimed to have been arrested by the Sri Lankan Police on
    30 November 2007 with three or four other men, because a bomb that  did
    not explode was found at a railway station near the  Appellant's  home.
    The Appellant was held overnight and released on 1 December 2007.   The
    Appellant claimed that whilst in detention he  was  beaten  and  pushed
    against a wall.  In  due  course  the  Appellant  brought  his  release
    document to the United Kingdom.

5.    The Appellant's account was that he  was  not  charged  or  bailed  or
    subject to reporting conditions but he nonetheless claimed to fear that
    he would be arrested by the Army and the CID if returned to Sri Lanka.

6.    It was the Appellant's account that on 30  December  2011  his  mother
    was told by Police Officers that the Appellant was suspected of  having
    contact with the LTTE and that they were making enquiries about him.

7.    In consequence the Appellant made contact with a solicitor in  Colombo
    a Mr Jayasinghe in order to obtain advice as to what steps  his  mother
    should take.

8.    It was the Appellant's case that on 13 February 2012  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities issued an arrest warrant for him and that a letter was sent
    from a Magistrate to  the  Controller  of  Immigration  and  Emigration
    stipulating that the Appellant was in the United Kingdom but that if he
    returned to Sri Lanka he should be taken into custody.

9.    At interview the Appellant stated that the information came  from  his
    United Kingdom solicitors on 16 February 2012.  On 29 February 2012 the
    Appellant's British solicitors wrote to Mr Jayasinghe  requesting  that
    he obtain any documents relevant to the case.   On  16  March  2012  Mr
    Jayasinghe made an application to the relevant court and in consequence
    various papers were provided on 19 March 2012.  Mr Jayasinghe wrote  to
    the Appellant's  British  solicitors  on  20  March  2012  enclosing  a
    certified copy of a report and certain other documents  that  had  been
    provided to the court by the Police together with a cash receipt for 30
    rupees (the cost of obtaining the copy documents).  The contents reveal
    that the authorities in Sri Lanka had linked  the  Appellant  with  the
    2007 bombing that they refer to as a "bomb case" at Wellawatta  Railway
    Station and that he was to be arrested on arrival in Sri Lanka.

10.   The Appellant submitted additional documents in support of  his  claim
    for asylum including a photocopy  of  his  father's  death  certificate
    stating that he died on 7 February  2000,  the  cause  of  death  being
    "Death while the attack of  Sri  Lankan  Navy"  (sic),  a  "receipt  of
    arrest" dated 1 December 2007, an arrest warrant in his name  dated  19
    March 2012 and a letter from Mr Jayasinghe.

11.   In the event by letter dated 2 May 2012  the  Appellant  was  informed
    that his asylum application was refused and in giving reasons for  such
    refusal the Secretary of State concluded that the  documents  submitted
    by the Appellant did not advance his case.  In that regard reliance was
    placed in a letter from the British High Commission in Colombo dated 14
    September 2010  that  addressed  the  issue  of  fraudulently  obtained
    documents.  The letter referred to the high level of corruption in  Sri
    Lanka "and the unscrupulously actions of government  officials  at  all
    levels,  (that)  somewhat  undermines  the  issuing  process  for  many
    official documents".

12.   Notably however the letter included the following:

         "Formally it is difficult for the accused to be able  to  obtain  a
         copy of his/her own arrest warrant.   When  an  arrest  warrant  is
         issued, a copy is kept on the legal file and the original is handed
         to the police.  An accused cannot apply for  copies  of  an  arrest
         warrant  to  the  relevant  court.   However  in  practice   forged
         documents   are   easily   obtainable   throughout    Sri    Lanka.
         Additionally,  given  ongoing  and  well-documented  concerns  over
         corruption in the police it would probably not prove  difficult  to
         obtain a copy of an arrest  warrant,  although  it  would  probably
         require prior contacts within the police service".

The Proceedings

13.   It is right to say that the history of  these  proceedings  have  been
    extensively considered by the Court of Appeal in PJ (Sri Lanka)  v  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1011.

14.   At  the  hearing  before  their  Lordships  followed  the  Appellant's
    unsuccessful appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Appellant
    having subsequently and successfully obtained the grant  of  permission
    to appeal that decision, it was  heard  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 20 December 2012 and was  determined  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination disclosed  no  error  of  law  that
    justified setting their decision aside.   It  is  of  note  however  to
    record the Upper Tribunal in their determination nonetheless criticised
    the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  for  having  doubted  the  professional
    standing of Mr Jayasinghe, in circumstances when it was  argued  before
    the  Upper  Tribunal  that  since  the  same  documents  were  obtained
    separately by two lawyers "compelling reasons" needed to be provided if
    they were to be rejected as unreliable.  Notwithstanding that the First-
    tier Tribunal had described the document produced by the  Appellant  as
    being worthless and lacking in any validity, the Upper Tribunal in  all
    the circumstances determined there  had  been  no  error  of  law  that
    justifying setting aside their decision particularly when the  judgment
    was read as a whole.

15.   Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was granted on 16  October
    2013 by Sir Stanley Burnton who was  of  the  view  that  the  possible
    consequences of an individual on return to Sri Lanka who was  suspected
    of involvement in  a  bombing  meant  that  there  was  a  sufficiently
    compelling reason for the appeal to  be  heard.   Sir  Stanley  Burnton
    observed inter alia:

         "It seems to me that when the documents do come from  a  lawyer  in
         Sri Lanka, who  purports  to  confirm  their  genuineness  and  who
         effectively does say that the genuineness or not of  the  documents
         can be checked by the High Commission in Sri Lanka, it may be  that
         a different approach to the documents was appropriate."

16.   In PJ at paragraph 17 their Lordships recorded the  submission  of  Mr
    Martin (who also appeared before us) that he had based  his  appeal  on
    the proposition that as the documents were genuine then  the  Appellant
    was a refugee.  They recorded his submission in that regard as follows:



         "Both lawyers produced copies of a court  file  obtained  from  the
         Magistrates' Court in Colombo.  The documents in that file included
         a report made by S S K Dharmaratne Inspector of the Police  Station
         in  Colombo  North,  CID  which  stated  that  the  Appellant   has
         previously been arrested, that he was known to  have  three  family
         members with close LTTE connections and  that  he  was  wanted  for
         questioning  'to  decide  whether  he  had  been  engaged  in  LTTE
         terrorist activities'.  A further document on the file was a letter
         from the Magistrate to the Controller of Immigration and Emigration
         stating that the Appellant is in the UK and that he should be taken
         into custody on his return to Sri Lanka".

17.   Their Lordships further recorded Mr  Martin's  submission  that  there
    needed to be a reason of real substance in order to doubt the  veracity
    of the documents obtained from the court.

18.   It was pointed out that once the Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's
    claim for asylum the Appellant's United Kingdom solicitors wrote  on  9
    May 2012 to a more senior Sri Lankan lawyer, Mr Weerasooriya requesting
    that he repeat  the  process  of  ensuring  that  the  relevant  papers
    originally came from the court and were not forgeries.  He was asked to
    provide another set of the relevant materials as a  matter  of  urgency
    including the  "Magistrates  Minutes"  and  the  "Notification  to  the
    Controller of Immigration and Emigration dated 19 March 2012".   On  23
    May 2012 Mr Weerasooriya replied stating that his junior had obtained a
    complete certified copy of the documents that matched those produced by
    Mr Jayasinghe.  For self-evident reasons they now bore a  rubber  stamp
    from the Magistrates' Court dated 23 May 2012 (as opposed to  19  March
    2012, the date when Mr Jayasinghe undertook this work).

19.   Before their Lordships Mr Martin was recorded as submitting that  both
    lawyers had provided evidence of their Bar Association  membership  and
    they were entered on the Supreme Court role.  Moreover the British High
    Commission in Colombo provided confirmation, first that Mr Weerasooriya
    was a lawyer in Sri Lanka and second that it was possible  for  lawyers
    to obtain court files.  Critically, it was submitted that the  risk  of
    forgery greatly diminished if the  documents  came  directly  from  the
    court.

20.   It will suffice for the purposes of  this  determination  to  set  out
    below the conclusions of Fulford LJ who gave a  leading  judgment  with
    which McFarlan LJ and Arden LJ agreed at paragraphs 41 and 42 below:

         "41.     In my judgment, Judge Woodcraft doubted  the  validity  of
             these  documents  (certainly  to  a  material  extent)  on   a
             significantly false basis.  Thereafter, Judge Kekic  -  having
             accepted that Mr Jayayasinghe's status as a lawyer - failed to
             address the key issue that  then  arose  given  the  suggested
             source of these documents (a court in Sri Lanka) and the route
             by which they were obtained (two independent lawyers who  sent
             them directly to  the  Appellant's  solicitor  in  the  United
             Kingdom).  Whilst  it  is  undoubtedly  the  case  that  false
             documents are widely available  in  Sri  Lanka,  once  it  was
             established that the documents in questions originated from  a
             Sri Lankan court, a sufficient justification was required  for
             the conclusion that the Appellant does not have a well-founded
             fear of persecution.  Prima facie, this material reveals  that
             the Appellant has previously been arrested in connection  with
             a bomb, three members of his family had close LTTE connections
             and he is wanted for questioning 'to  decide  whether  he  had
             been engaged in LTTE  terrorist  activities'  but  perhaps  of
             greatest significance there is a letter from the Magistrate of
             the relevant  court  to  the  Controller  of  Immigration  and
             Emigration stating that the Appellant is in the United Kingdom
             and that he is to be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka.   In
             the absence of a sufficient reason for  concluding  otherwise,
             the inescapable conclusion to be drawn from  this  material  -
             retrieved independently, it is to be stressed, by two  lawyers
             from the Magistrates' court on separate occasions  -  is  that
             the Appellant will be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka as a
             result of links with the LTTE  and  their  activities.   Judge
             Kekic suggested that the interference to  be  drawn  from  the
             evidence that Mr Jayasinghe had 'obtained false evidence'  and
             that  'the  Appellant  had  forgotten  the  account   he   had
             previously  given  when   these   falsified   documents   were
             prepared'.   However,  in  my  view,   without   an   adequate
             explanation, it is difficult to understand how  the  Appellant
             could have falsified a  letter  from  the  Magistrate  of  the
             relevant court to the Controller of Immigration and Emigration
             ordering the Appellant's arrest which he then  placed  in  the
             court records so that it  could  later  be  retrieved  by  two
             separate lawyers.  At the very  least,  this  feature  of  the
             evidence required detailed analysis and explanation.


         42.      These documents lie at the centre of the  application  for
             protection,  and  I  consider  that  Judge  Kekic  misdirected
             herself when she concluded that they had been falsely prepared
             without providing any reasoning as to how the Appellant  could
             have infiltrated  forged  material  into  the  court  records,
             particularly since there is no suggestion that the lawyers had
             been  involved  in  any  discreditable  conduct".    (Emphasis
             added).

21.   The Lordships thus decided to allow the appeal but remit the  case  to
    the Upper Tribunal for a rehearing.

22.   Thus the appeal came before us for this purpose on 30 September  2014.



23.   At the outset of the hearing Mr Martin handed  to  us  copies  of  two
    documents comprising; a letter from  the  British  High  Commission  in
    Colombo addressed to the UKBA and dated 28 January 2013 sub-headed "Sri
    Lankan Cases with Lawyers' Letters" and; a  document  headed  "Document
    Verification Report dated  10  October  2013  by  Mr  S  Jayasuriya  an
    Attorney- at-Law of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka.

24.   In summary the letter from the BHC Colombo confirmed  the  bona  fides
    of  Mr  Weerasooriya  noting  that  he  was  registered  with  the  Bar
    Association.

25.   Further, the letter which was generic  in  form  and  not  necessarily
    specific to this particular case confirmed that an  official  from  the
    Bar Association  of  Sri  Lanka  had  advised  that  court  files  were
    available to lawyers and this would include copies of  any  handwritten
    notes.  The DVR of Mr  Jayasuriya,  who  had  been  instructed  by  the
    Appellant's British solicitors to yet further verify  the  authenticity
    of the documents produced, included the following verification:

         "Our investigations/enquiries at the Bambalapitiya  Police  confirm
         that the above name (PJ) was arrested by the  Bambalapitiya  Police
         in a search operation of  a  house  in  ..  Wellawatta  Colombo  on
         30/11/2007.  He was arrested together with four  other  persons  in
         relation to the above case.


         Police records confirm that Mr PJ was released on  Police  bail  by
         the Bambalapitiya Police on 01/12/2007.  Bambalapitiya Police lock-
         up records were checked and Mr PJ's name is on record.


         Notification  of  arrest  of  PJ's   Bambalapitiya   Police   dated
         01/12/2007 is genuine and issued by the Bambalapitiya  Police  when
         he was released on the said date.


         The Court records  were  checked  at  the  Magistrates  Court,  Mt.
         Lavinia and we  confirmed  that  the  case  records  including  all
         attached 'B' reports, airport notification and journal entries  are
         authentic.  There is a file on case number B4852/2007 on record  at
         the Mt. Lavinia Magistrates' Court.


         Police records at the Bambalapitiya Police also confirmed that  the
         'B' reports was filed in the MC, Mt. Lavinia.


         The court records were  checked  at  the  Chief  Magistrates  Court
         Number 3 at  Colombo-12  and  we  confirm  that  the  case  records
         including  all  attached  'B'  reports,  airport  notification  and
         journal entries and authentic.  There is  a  file  on  case  number
         B8144/3/2012 on record at the Chief Magistrates Court at Hulftsdrob
         in Colombo-12.


         Police records at the Modara  Police  also  confirm  that  the  'B'
         reports were filed in the Chief Magistrates Court at Hulftsdrob  in
         Colombo-12.  I did not request detail of the  investigation  as  my
         task  is  limited  to  verification  of  the  authenticity  of  the
         documents sent for verification and not to make a judgment  on  the
         contents.


         Notice to Controller of Immigration and Emigration -  We  conducted
         investigation under Bandaranayake International Airport and confirm
         that the notice issued by the Magistrate requesting the  arrest  of
         the suspects  is  genuine  and  on  record  at  the  Controller  of
         Immigration and Emigration.  As the suspects are said to be evading
         arrest by repatriating abroad the notice has been  issued  ordering
         the arrest on return to Sri Lanka.


         I also contacted Mr Asoka  Weerasooriya,  Attorney-at-Law  who  had
         provided  a  letter  addressed  to  Mr   Ambananden   Sooben,   ICS
         Solicitors, stating that he had instructed his junior and  filed  a
         motion and obtained the same certified copies of the court records.
          Mr Weerasooriya confirmed that he had issued the letter  and  also
         reconfirmed the findings  of  investigation.   I  do  not  know  Mr
         Weerasooriya personally but I have heard of his work as an Attorney-
         at-Law by repute.  He is a well-known and respected lawyer  in  Sri
         Lanka who was attached to the Attorney  General  Department  before
         starting private practice in Sri Lanka.


         Opinion


         Based on the information received it is my  opinion  the  documents
         (Case Ref's: B4852/2007 and B8144/3/2012) sent for verification  is
         authentic".

26.   Ms Isherwood informed us that the DVR had only been seen and  received
    by her that morning.  She told us that the Respondent had  an  interest
    in verifying documents.  She accepted that nothing had been done by the
    Secretary of State to try and verify the documents produced apart  from
    the BHC letter of 28 January 2013 (see above) and asked to confirm that
    Mr Weerasooriya had registered at the Bar in Sri Lanka.

27.   Ms Isherwood stated that she wanted to take instructions although  she
    was "not sure what on yet" we granted her request that we  should  rise
    while she made her enquiries.

28.   Upon our return to the hearing  room  Ms  Isherwood  informed  us  the
    Respondent had been in contact with Colombo and  understood  that  they
    could obtain a response/report hopefully within fourteen days as to the
    veracity of the documents upon  which  the  Appellant  relied,  but  Ms
    Isherwood continued the difficulty was the amount of corruption in  Sri
    Lanka.  However, at this point we reminded her that this had  been  the
    standpoint of the Secretary of State in this case from  the  outset  it
    was addressed by their Lordships in PJ.  Two lawyers  independently  of
    each other whose status was not questioned by the  Secretary  of  State
    had already made it clear that the documents were genuine and reliable.
     We thus queried of Ms Isherwood why in such  circumstances  a  further
    delay in this case would be justified?

29.   When further pressed to explain our what basis Ms Isherwood sought  to
    persuade us that it was  in  the  interests  of  justice  to  grant  an
    adjournment mindful of the wealth of evidence  already  before  us,  Ms
    Isherwood explained that if as a result of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    further enquires she found that she could  herself  place  reliance  on
    them then it would be the Respondent's position that she  would  accept
    that the Appellant was at risk.

30.   Not surprisingly, Ms Isherwood's adjournment  request  was  vigorously
    resisted by Mr Martin who inter alia pointed out the Secretary of State
    had had two and a half months in which to make her enquiries since  the
    promulgation of the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  PJ.   The
    Respondent might have also thought it sensible if so  minded  to  check
    the veracity of the documents given they had  been  in  her  possession
    since April 2012.  The Appellant's life  had  been  on  hold  for  long
    enough.  Mr Martin submitted that the just and timely disposal of  this
    appeal warranted that it should proceed to its  conclusion  today.   It
    was simply too late in the day to seek an adjournment.

31.   We refused Ms Isherwood's adjournment request.  We considered that  Mr
    Martin's observations were well-founded.  The documents  concerned  had
    indeed been in the Secretary of State's possession  since  April  2012.
    There had been ample opportunity to make appropriate enquiries but  the
    Respondent had failed to do so.  Promulgation of the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in PJ took place in July 2014 over two months previously.   We
    concluded that for those reasons and given  the  evidence  cumulatively
    before us but quite apart from  their  Lordships'  observations  in  PJ
    included reports of the two  lawyers  originally  involved  and  now  a
    further report from a third lawyer  there  was  in  the  circumstances,
    ample evidence before us to consider and determine the outcome of  this
    appeal.

32.   We further observed that the letter from  the  BHC  dated  10  October
    2013 was a document that featured in the hearing in PJ and was  in  the
    possession  of  the  Treasury  Solicitor.   The  fact   that   internal
    difficulties meant that Ms Isherwood  was  not  in  possession  of  the
    document until today was in such circumstances not  a  factor  that  we
    could take into account in her favour.   This  case  had  been  in  the
    appeal track for some considerable time and we were further minded  and
    sensitive to the stress and anxiety and uncertainty thus faced  by  the
    Appellant who had come to the hearing today expecting for his  case  to
    proceed.  The just disposal of this appeal and the interests of justice
    warranted that we should do precisely  that  and  thus  Ms  Isherwood's
    adjournment request was refused.

33.   There was common ground between ourselves and the  parties'  that  the
    outcome  of  the  appeal  turned  upon   our   consideration   of   the
    documentation before us and the weight that we  decided  to  attach  to
    those documents.  In that regard we asked Ms  Isherwood  if  she  could
    clarify the Respondent's position specifically as  to  whether  if  the
    Tribunal found the documents to be reliable such as significant  weight
    could be attached to them, was it the  Secretary  of  State's  position
    that in such circumstances it would  be  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    would be at real risk if now  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.   Ms  Isherwood
    responded that whilst she appreciated the significance of  our  enquiry
    the position remained that she would continue to rely on the  Secretary
    of State's Letter of Refusal 2 May 2012.

34.   We were informed by Mr Martin that he  did  not  intend  to  call  the
    Appellant to give oral evidence before  us  and  the  parties  were  in
    agreement  that  the  hearing  should  now  proceed  on  the  basis  of
    submissions only.

35.   At the conclusion of their respective  submissions  we  were  able  to
    inform them that we had no difficulty in concluding  that  this  appeal
    should be allowed for the  reasons  that  would  follow  in  this,  our
    determination.

Assessment

36.   Our starting point has been the findings of their Lordships in PJ  not
    least those expressed by Fulford LJ at paragraphs  41  and  42  of  his
    judgment (above) who, considered of "greatest significance" the  letter
    from the  Magistrate  of  the  relevant  Court  to  the  Controller  of
    Immigration and Emigration stating that the Appellant was in the United
    Kingdom and that he was to be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka.  His
    Lordship had continued that "In the absence of a sufficient reason  for
    concluding otherwise, the inescapable conclusion to be drawn from  this
    material - retrieved independently, it is to be stressed by two lawyers
    from  the  Magistrates'  court  on  separate  occasions,  is  that  the
    Appellant will be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka as  a  result  of
    links with the LTTE and their activities".

37.   His Lordship's observations have been  reinforced  by  the  production
    before us of the letters handed in by  Mr  Martin  comprising  the  BHC
    Colombo letter of 28 January 2013 and the Document Verification  Report
    of the Attorney-at-Law in Sri Lanka Mr S Jayasuriya not least in  terms
    of those aspects of each of those documents  that  we  have  identified
    above.  Taking this we have had no  difficulty  in  such  circumstances
    mindful of the overwhelming accumulation of evidence  in  support  that
    the documents concerned are reliable and are such that  we  can  attach
    significant weight to them.  It follows that we find that the Appellant
    not least to the lower standard of proof has  convincingly  established
    the truth of his account.  Indeed and as an  example,  the  Appellant's
    account of his arrest and  detention  following  the  discovery  of  an
    unexploded bomb near  his  home  has  been  clearly  confirmed  by  the
    documents and reaffirmed in the DVR of 10 October 2013 submitted by  Mr
    Jayasuriya.

38.   It was notable and indeed to Ms Isherwood's  great  credit,  that  she
    accepted that the bona fides  of  Mr  Jayasinghe  and  Mr  Weerasooriya
    lawyers in Sri Lanka  was  not  challenged.   She  accepted,  that  the
    evidence clearly established that such documents did indeed  appear  in
    the court records.

39.    In  particular  whilst  it  was  her  submission  that  although  the
    documents in their form might be genuine their content might be  false,
    Ms Isherwood recognised that the issue of as she put  it  "the  content
    and weight to be placed on it"  was  a  highly  significant  factor  in
    determining whether or not this Appellant would be at real risk if  now
    returned to Sri Lanka.

40.   In that regard Ms Isherwood recognised that whatever  the  genuineness
    of the content of those documents given her acceptance that  they  were
    on  the  evidence  on  the  court  records,  that  if  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities found them they would not question that the  Appellant  was
    the subject of an arrest warrant and indeed that he was required to  be
    arrested upon return to Sri Lanka.

41.   We therefore enquired of Ms  Isherwood  as  to  where  that  left  the
    Secretary of State's case.  If the Respondent was not  challenging  the
    bona fides of  the  lawyers  and  not  suggesting  that  the  documents
    concerned were not on the court records then  it  would  surely  follow
    that the Appellant would upon arrival at Sri Lanka Airport be found  to
    be on a "Stop List" and in such circumstances a person who would be  at
    real risk of persecution.

42.   It is right to state that Ms Isherwood's brief response was  that  she
    continued to rely on the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

43.   Whilst that letter  made  reference  to  the  availability  of  forged
    official documents in Sri  Lanka  was  notable,  as  indeed  Mr  Martin
    pointed out in his closing submissions that  at  paragraph  24  of  the
    Respondent's Letter of Refusal she had cited a letter from the  BHC  in
    Colombo dated 14 September  2010  concerning  forged  and  fraudulently
    obtained documents and that the passages relied upon from  that  letter
    claimed inter alia that it was  common  knowledge  that  persons  could
    obtain an ID card or passport in any  identity  they  wanted  with  the
    right contacts.   The  Visa  Section  regularly  saw  forged  education
    certificates  and  bank  statements  and  employment  references.   The
    passages cited did not however identify the documents  upon  which  the
    Appellant in the present case relied  in  the  category  of  forged  or
    identify.  There was no reference in that letter to  documents  on  the
    Court record or letters from Magistrates  of  relevant  Courts  to  the
    Control of Immigration Emigration.

44.   We have reminded ourselves that in HK [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1037  it  was
    held  inter  alia  that  instead  of  asking  whether  an  account  was
    inherently implausible, one should look at the evidence and ask oneself
    whether for example it is consistent with the background  material  and
    any expert evidence in  support  whether  such  evidence  was  of  good
    quality.  That is the approach that we have taken in our  consideration
    of  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's  account  and  claims.   Our
    assessment of his credibility  has  been  helped  considerably  by  the
    documentary evidence that the Appellant has been  able  to  produce  in
    support of his claims that are indeed consistent with his account  such
    that  not  least  the  lower  standard  of  proof  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's account is credible.

45.   That however is not the end of the story because whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's credibility was in question  the  issue  that  we  have  to
    determine is whether in his particular circumstances  he  would  be  at
    real risk if now returned to Sri Lanka.  For this purpose we have taken
    full and careful account of the guidance of  the  Tribunal  in  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) a
    decision subsequently approved by the Court of Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829 that we have applied against the  backdrop  of  the
    facts as we have found them.

46.   The Tribunal in  GJ  concluded  that  the  focus  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    government's concern has changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.
     The LTTE in Sri Lanka itself was a spent force and there had  been  no
    terrorist incident since the  end  of  the  civil  war.   The  Tribunal
    identified  the  current  categories  of  persons  at  real   risk   of
    persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka whether in detention
    or otherwise.

47.   In that regard and at (7)(d)  of  their  headnote  the  following  was
    stated:

         "(d)     A person's whose name appears  on  a  computerised  'stop'
             list accessible at the airport, comprising  a  list  of  those
             against whom there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.
              Individuals whose name appears on  a  'stop'  list'  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities in pursuance of such order or warrant".

48.   In light of our findings and in common with  the  views  expressed  by
    their Lordships in PJ we too have come to the "inescapable  conclusion"
    to be drawn from not least the documentary material before us retrieved
    independently by two lawyers from the Relevant  Magistrates'  Court  on
    separate occasions and subsequently reaffirmed by yet a third lawyer Mr
    Jayasuriya, that in the Appellant's circumstances he would  undoubtedly
    be arrested on his returned to Sri Lanka as result of  links  with  the
    LTTE and their activities in consequence of his family connections with
    the LTTE.  We find in  common  with  their  Lordships  those  documents
    indeed lie at the centre of the application for protection  and  as  we
    have already stated for the above reasons they are documents  to  which
    we can attach significant weight.  As found by the Tribunal in GJ those
    on a stop list are those in respect of whom arrest  warrants  had  been
    issued and/or court orders.  We am satisfied that an arrest warrant has
    indeed been issued in relation to this Appellant that he  is  therefore
    undoubtedly at real risk of detention and ill-treatment at the point of
    return.

49.   For the above reasons, the Appellant's appeal is therefore allowed  on
    asylum grounds and under Article 3 of the ECHR.  No separate Article  8
    ECHR argument was advanced.  The Appellant is not entitled to the grant
    of humanitarian protection.

Conclusion

50.   We remake the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  on  asylum  and
    human rights (Article 3 ECHR) grounds.

      This was dictated at the end of the Winscribe - many thanks

      Add Guidance to the present case

    We note that at paragraph 20 of  the  Respondent's  Letter  of  Refusal
    under the sub-heading "Supporting Documents"  it  was  noted  that  the
    Appellant had submitted:

            "Affidavit dated 19 March 2012 attesting to the  fact  that  you
        are believed to be collecting  money  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
        distribution in Sri Lanka for the use of the LTTE organisation".


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

