
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08191/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th July 2015                    |On 27th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL BAIRD


                                   Between

                           Mrs Sara Mekonnen tolla
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Smith - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnson - Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Sara Mekonnen Tolla, a citizen  of  Ethiopia  born
    19th May 1985.  She appeals against the decision of the Respondent made
    on 2nd October 2014 to refuse to grant asylum under paragraph 336 of HC
    395 (as amended) and to refuse leave to enter the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  was
    initially heard on 19th November  2014  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Smith who dismissed it.  The Appellant appealed against  that  decision
    and on 5th May 2015 having heard submissions, I found that there was  a
    material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in that Judge Smith failed to properly consider all the evidence in the
    round.

 3. I now proceed to remake the decision.

 4. The Appellant left Ethiopia on 22nd September 2012 and arrived  in  the
    UK on 13th November 2012.  She claimed asylum the next day.

 5. No request was made for an anonymity direction  in  this  case  and  it
    seems to me that none is necessary.

The Basis of the Appellant's Claim for Asylum

 6. The Appellant claims that if she were returned to  Ethiopia  she  would
    have a well-founded fear of persecution on account of her race and  her
    political opinion.  She claims to be a member of the Oromo ethnic group
    and a supporter of the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF).  Her brother was a
    member of the OLF and she began supporting the party in 2006.

 7. In 2007 she went to Dubai to work as  a  domestic  servant  and  whilst
    there met and married her husband, named by  the  Respondent  as  Brian
    Mokwy.  She and her husband then returned to Ethiopia where they rented
    a property.  She made an application for a visa to  travel  to  America
    with her husband but this was refused.  Her husband was then assigned a
    post in the UK and on 18th February 2008 she  applied  for  a  visa  to
    accompany him.  A visa was granted with an expiry date of 28th February
    2011.  Her husband applied for a visit visa to take her  to  Mexico  on
    holiday and this was granted but he did not actually take her to Mexico
    because he had to work.  She remained in the UK  waiting  for  him  but
    although he did return briefly in December 2008, he  was  working  away
    and at that point she took a job working as a cleaner  for  Leeds  City
    Council and rented a room there.  After two years living and working in
    Leeds her husband told her to return to Ethiopia and said he would sort
    everything out so that she could go to the USA with him.  She went back
    to her family home in Ethiopia where she resided with her siblings  and
    started to work in her uncle's restaurant as a cashier.  She  witnessed
    at first hand the suffering of the Oromo people as a  result  of  which
    she became a member of the OLF on 10th May 2011  and  from  that  point
    started  to  do  work  for  them,  collecting  money  and  distributing
    leaflets.

 8.  The  Appellant  claims  that  she  suffered  some  racial  abuse  from
    neighbours which was reported to the police by her brother.  The police
    spoke to the neighbours but it made no difference.  On 30th  June  2012
    she was attending an OLF meeting  at  her  home  when  the  authorities
    raided the house and discovered  a  list  and  notebook  detailing  the
    outgoings of the cell.  They asked  the  Appellant  why  she  had  been
    involved in an OLF meeting.  She and the other people  at  the  meeting
    were arrested and taken to prison.  She was separated  from  her  group
    and placed in a cell with other women and remained in  detention  until
    13th September 2012 during which period she was  subjected  to  regular
    beatings and was raped once by a police officer.  She  became  pregnant
    as a result of the rape.  Her sister visited her at the end of July  or
    beginning of August 2012 but she saw no-one else.   On  13th  September
    2012 a police officer told her she would be released that  evening  and
    later he returned and took her out of the prison where she was  met  by
    her uncle who told her that he had bribed the  officer  to  effect  her
    release.  The officer had  said  that  she  should  leave  the  country
    immediately.  An agent was found who took her to Sudan  and  eventually
    she arrived in the UK.  She has had no contact with her  husband  since
    April or May 2012.

Decision of the Secretary of State

 9. The Secretary of State does not accept that the Appellant is  of  Oromo
    ethnicity.  In reaching this decision the Secretary of State set out at
    great length various features of Oromo ethnicity, concluding  that  the
    Appellant  had  demonstrated  ignorance  of  the  Oromo  culture  which
    fundamentally undermines her claim to be Oromo.  The Secretary of State
    noted that the Appellant had said in her interview that the Oromo  have
    a unique system of administration  called  the  Gadaa  System  but  was
    unable to provide any details of how this system works.   She  appeared
    to know nothing of the Oromo calendar which forms the framework of  the
    Gadaa System and according to which its schedules  are  governed.   The
    Appellant had mentioned another  cultural  aspect,  Irecha,  which  she
    described as "an Oromo cultural thing,  is  celebrated  on  the  Sunday
    after Meskel, the finding of the  cross  and  it  is  always  on  17/09
    (Ethiopian calendar)".  She went on to say that on  Irecha  Day  people
    tend to reconcile, to forget their problems and negotiate.   They  talk
    about their own cultures and 'all things like this'.  The Secretary  of
    State goes on to set out her understanding of  Irecha  and  whilst  she
    accepted that the Appellant had given the correct dates relative to  it
    she found that she had not stated the  correct  purpose  of  the  event
    which is to  thank  Waaqaa  for  the  blessings  and  mercies  received
    throughout the past  year  at  the  sacred  grounds  of  Hora  Harsadi,
    Bishoftu and Oromia.

10. The Secretary of State  also  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant does not speak the Oromo language although she claims to have
    some understanding of it.  The Appellant said they only  spoke  Amharic
    at home as her mother was  from  the  Shoa  Oromo  who  reside  on  the
    outskirts of the city and do not speak Oromo but mainly  Amharic.   The
    Secretary of State accepted that it is reasonable  that  the  Appellant
    was brought up speaking Amharic but criticised her for not having taken
    the trouble to learn Oromo, given that she claims to be proud to be  an
    Oromo and that she claims to have joined the OLF because she wanted  to
    protect the culture and language of her people.

11. With regard to her claim to be a member of the  OLF  the  Secretary  of
    State considered that the information the Appellant had given about the
    party is in the public domain and readily accessible.  She  lacked  in-
    depth knowledge of the party which must be considered inconsistent with
    having been  an  active  member.   The  Secretary  of  State  found  it
    implausible that the Appellant would have meetings at her home when her
    brother had previously reported  problems  from  the  neighbours.   The
    Secretary of State does not accept that the Appellant was arrested  and
    ill-treated as claimed.



Evidence at the hearing

12. A bundle of documents was provided for the hearing.

13. I have a statement from the Appellant dated  5th  November  2014.   She
    names her husband as Brail Macquee.  She says her mother died in  2003.



14. She says that the OLF's main aim is to avoid colonisation and  to  free
    the  Oromo  people.   The  core  policy  is  the  struggle  for   self-
    determination.  It is an illegal organisation and has been since  1992.
    It was formed in 1973 by an Oromo  nationalist.   She  joined  in  2011
    having been a supporter since 2006.  She describes the circumstances of
    her arrest.  She describes the ill-treatment to which she was subjected
    and how she escaped and left Addis Ababa on 26th September 2012.

15. In response to the refusal letter she says that the Gadaa System  is  a
    system only used in the remote areas of Ethiopia and  it  is  currently
    dying out.  The Secretary of State failed to take into account that she
    is from Addis Ababa where the Gadaa System is not  used.   Neither  the
    Oromo calendar nor the language is  used  in  her  area.  Many  of  the
    aspects of the Oromo culture are not practised in  the  cities.   There
    was no pattern of meetings for the  neighbours  to  pick  up  on.   The
    meeting at which she was arrested was the first they had had for  three
    or four months.  She and her husband  are  no  longer  together.   They
    separated about six years ago, their last contact having  been  in  May
    2012.  They did not agree on certain aspects of  their  future  and  he
    kept making excuses about  their  future.   She  grew  tired  of  these
    excuses and decided to leave.

16. I have a letter dated 10th November 2014 from the OLF representative in
    the UK, Bersisa Berri, who confirms the Appellant to be a supporter  of
    the OLF.  She had  phoned  her  in  the  middle  of  October  2014  and
    introduced herself to her.  She told her that she had been a  supporter
    of the OLF since May 2011  and  was  involved  in  contributing  money,
    distributing leaflets and attending cell meetings every month.  She had
    been arrested in June 2012 and detained for two months.  Ms Berri  says
    that she interviewed the  Appellant  on  the  phone,  asked  her  basic
    questions about the OLF and received convincing evidence that she is an
    OLF supporter. She said she  is  an  Oromo  by  ethnicity  because  her
    grandfather has a typical Oromo name and her origin is from  the  Oromo
    region.  When Ms Berri  asked  her  why  she  cannot  speak  the  Oromo
    language she replied that she was born and educated  in  a  city  where
    mostly  Amharic  was  spoken.   She  concludes  that  in  the  volatile
    political situation currently existing in Ethiopia it is very  unlikely
    that any individual Oromo who is not involved in  the  existing  regime
    would be safe to go back to Ethiopia.  There are instances of  deported
    Oromo asylum seekers having been arrested on  arrival  in  Ethiopia  or
    shortly afterwards and she  believes  that  the  Appellant  would  face
    similar persecution on her return.

17. I have a birth certificate for the Appellant's daughter born in England
    on 4th June 2013.

18. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant who adopted her statement.  At
    the start of the hearing Ms Johnson sought to lodge a large  bundle  of
    documents relating to Facebook  activity  by  the  Appellant.   It  was
    difficult  to  see  the  significance  of  these  documents  which  the
    Appellant's representative had  had  no  opportunity  to  study  or  to
    discuss with her client.  I declined to accept that evidence along with
    some  photographs  provided  by  the  Appellant's  representative.   No
    submission was made that these were relevant to the appeal.

19. Ms Johnson in cross-examination asked the Appellant why  there  was  no
    evidence that she had left the UK after arriving here in 2008 through a
    UK port.  I did  point  out  to  Ms  Johnson  at  this  point  that  my
    understanding was that that the UK border staff did not keep records of
    who leaves the  UK.  The  Appellant's  passport  would  not  have  been
    stamped.  She suggested that the Appellant would have had tickets - her
    ferry ticket for example.  The Appellant  responded  that  the  tickets
    were taken off her when she boarded.  She was asked why she did not ask
    the issuer for copies. She was asked  why  she  had,  as  she  claimed,
    bought the tickets  from  Ethiopian  Airlines  in  London  rather  than
    locally.  She said that someone told her that that is what  she  should
    do.  She could not remember where the Ethiopian Airlines office was.

20. She was asked why she had no evidence  of  her  work  with  Leeds  City
    Council and why she had no medical records of her pregnancy.   She  was
    asked why she had no GP records.  She said that she did not  know  that
    such evidence would be necessary.

21. When she was asked how often she was raped she responded "twice".   She
    could not give the dates but said it was when she was in prison.  There
    was then very lengthy and detailed questioning about  this.   She  said
    she was in prison from 30th May to 13th September 2012 and had been  in
    prison for about two weeks when she was first raped.  The  second  rape
    was about a week after the first.  It  was  put  to  her  that  in  her
    interview at question 134 she said she had only been raped  once.   She
    said it was twice.

22. She was asked why they insisted on having a meeting in their house when
    they knew the neighbours were watching them and disapproved.  She  said
    the neighbours were not aware that the meeting was taking  place.   She
    was unable to say how the authorities knew about the meeting.

23. She said she last spoke to her husband in 2012. She last saw him  face-
    to-face in December 2008.  She has not started divorce proceedings.  He
    lied to her.  She has not told  him  about  the  child.  When  she  was
    initially asked if he resided with her in Ethiopia she said he did not,
    then she said they lived together for two years.  She last applied  for
    a visa to go to the USA in 2008.  When she  was  in  Ethiopia  she  was
    always waiting for him to join her there.

24. She rented a house there for a while before she came to  the  UK.   She
    was asked about the address that she gave on the application  form  and
    said that was her parents' house.  She was  asked  why  she  gave  that
    address if she was currently renting a house  with  her  husband  at  a
    different address and said that the Embassy wanted the address  on  her
    passport and she gave them that.   She  said  for  confirmation  of  an
    address in Ethiopia they always expect you to provide evidence that you
    own the property.

25. She said that it is not safe for her siblings   if she contacts them on
    the phone or on the Internet.  Her brother is still  in  prison.   When
    she was asked why he would still be held in prison when  she  had  been
    released she responded that the family do not know where  he  is,  they
    just feel sure he is  in  prison.  Her  family  have  not  visited  her
    brother.  She was asked why the letter from the OLF  does  not  mention
    that her brother is in prison and said that she did tell Mr  Berri  but
    he did not put that into the letter.  Ms Johnson pointed out  that  the
    letter does talk of other OLF people detained  in  Ethiopia  so  it  is
    strange that it does not mention her brother.

26. In her submissions Ms Johnson  said  she  would  rely  on  the  refusal
    letter.  She submitted that the evidence of the  Appellant  is  neither
    credible nor consistent.  She asked me to take into  account  that  she
    had given the wrong address on the application form and her explanation
    for this is not credible.  She was inconsistent about her knowledge  of
    her husband's rank in the air force.  She told the ECO that her husband
    was about to be transferred to Suffolk so why would she  not  be  going
    there with him.  Her husband left the UK a  week  after  arriving  here
    with her.  She said in her screening interview that the main purpose of
    coming to the UK was to become a housewife.  She also said she was here
    to try to reconcile with her husband so why did she leave the UK to  go
    back to Ethiopia.  She was in breach of the terms of her  visa  because
    she was not living with her  spouse.   There  is  no  evidence  of  her
    employment with Leeds City Council.   She  could  give  no  information
    about her departure from the UK to return to  Ethiopia.   There  is  no
    evidence of her re-entry.  There is no explanation as to  why  she  did
    not claim asylum at port on re-entry.

27. There is doubt about the dates of her pregnancy.  The child was born on
    4th June 2013.  If she was raped in July the  child  would  be  due  in
    April.  If the child was conceived on 14th or 21st June  the  due  date
    would be March 2012.  She said the child cannot be the  consequence  of
    the rape so her evidence on that is untrue.   There  are  no  maternity
    records.  There is doubt as to whether she was  raped  once  or  twice.
    She was asked in the interview what date she was raped and said it  was
    the end of August 2012.

28. Ms Johnson said is it is implausible that they would have a meeting  in
    her house given the interest of the neighbours and the activities.

29. The OLF letter has got the period of  detention  wrong.   There  is  no
    mention of the Appellant's brother's arrest. The  Appellant  apparently
    did not contact the OLF for confirmation of her membership until  after
    her application had been refused.  She asked me not to accept that  the
    Appellant's brother is in prison.  There is  no  corroboration  of  her
    attendance at protests in the  UK.   There  is  no  evidence  that  the
    Ethiopian authorities monitor Internet  communication.   She  submitted
    that the Appellant would get financial help to  return  voluntarily  to
    Ethiopia.

30. In her submissions Ms Smith  said  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  is
    credible.  She was arrested, beaten and raped prior to  being  released
    on payment of a bribe.  She would be at risk on return.  The  issue  of
    whether or not she had left the UK to return to Ethiopia was not raised
    in the refusal letter and it is unreasonable to expect her to have kept
    tickets but in any event any  documents  she  had  were  taken  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities when she was arrested.  It was not reasonable  to
    have expected her to keep information and evidence  of  her  work  with
    Leeds City Council.

31. In her interview and in her statement she said she was raped at the end
    of the August 2012 which would be consistent with a child  having  been
    born at the beginning of  June  but  today  at  the  hearing  she  gave
    different evidence.  Ms Smith  asked  me  to  bear  in  mind  that  the
    Appellant was being asked to relate a traumatic event  and  it  is  not
    surprising that she was confused.  She did have some knowledge  of  the
    OLF and was not asked to elaborate on any of her answers.

Burden and Standard of Proof

32. The burden is on the Appellant to show with regard to the asylum appeal
    that returning her would expose her  to  a  real  risk  of  an  act  of
    persecution for reasons set out in  Regulation  6  of  The  Refugee  or
    Persons in Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations
    2006.  With regard to Humanitarian Protection she would  have  to  show
    substantial grounds for believing that she would face a  real  risk  of
    serious harm as defined by paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules  or
    face a real risk of a breach of her protected human rights.

Findings and Decision

33. I have given very careful consideration to all the evidence put  before
    me in this case.  The Appellant was subjected to a very thorough cross-
    examination  by  Ms  Johnson  and  it  is  the  case  that  there  were
    inconsistencies in her evidence. I  agree  with  the  comments  in  the
    Refusal Letter about her lack of knowledge of the  Oromo  language.   I
    really find it very  difficult  to  understand  how  she  said  in  her
    interview that she was raped once and in oral  evidence  that  she  was
    raped twice.  I do not accept that she would not vividly remember  such
    traumatic events. If it happened twice she would presumably be  fearful
    from the first time. I do not accept that she would have made a mistake
    about this especially in light  of  her  subsequent  pregnancy.  It  is
    difficult not to take the view that if she became pregnant as a  result
    of the rape - a very traumatic discovery  -  she  would  be  relatively
    clear about the likely date of conception of her  child,  but  she  was
    not. Her evidence of the  dates  of  the  two  rapes  was  not  at  all
    consistent. I do accept that if as she said at her  interview  she  was
    raped at the end of August 2012 her baby born on 4th  June  2013  could
    have been the result of this rape but she said in  oral  evidence  that
    she had been raped twice and the dates she  gave  were  two  weeks  and
    three weeks after her arrival at the prison on 30th May 2012,  far  too
    early to result in the birth of her child in June.

34. She was inconsistent and vague about whether or not she had lived  with
    her husband in Ethiopia, again giving contradictory evidence. She  gave
    an implausible explanation for not having given the  address  at  which
    she was actually living on her application for a visa. It is  difficult
    to comprehend why an Entry Clearance Officer  would  want  any  address
    other than an applicant's home  address,  the  one  at  which  she  was
    legally resident and could be contacted by post or visit.

35. I question why she would leave it so late to get  the  letter  from  Ms
    Berri and more importantly why Ms Berri would fail to mention that  her
    brother was in prison. As Ms Johnson pointed put, she referred to other
    members of the OLF being detained  in  Ethiopia.   She  says  that  she
    interviewed the Appellant on the phone, asked her basic questions about
    the OLF and received convincing evidence that she is an  OLF  supporter
    yet failed to mention what must be one of the most  convincing  aspects
    of her account, i.e. the fact that her  brother  was  in  prison  as  a
    result of his support for the OLF. The Appellant was incidentally  very
    vague about her brother's whereabouts, declaring that he was in  prison
    but when pressed for detail saying that the family just assume he is in
    prison.  This apparent lack of effort to check whether he is in  prison
    or not does not sit well with the Appellant's claim   that  her  sister
    visited her in prison and her family arranged her release and departure
    from Ethiopia.

36. The Appellant's account of her marriage was  vague.  It  is  not  clear
    where they spent their time or what actually went wrong. She  was  also
    inconsistent in her description of her husband's rank.

37. I would also say that I agree with Ms Johnson  that  however  irregular
    and infrequent the meetings held at the Appellant's home, it is  highly
    unlikely that she would hold them  there  in  the  knowledge  that  the
    neighbours knew what was going on  and  were  likely  to  report  them,
    bearing in mind the background  information  on  the  attitude  of  the
    authorities to the OLF and the ill-treatment meted  out  to  the  Oromo
    people.

38. I find therefore that the Appellant has not established to the standard
    of proof required that she is Oromo or that she was  a  member  of  the
    OLF. I do not accept her account as credible.

39. With regard to Article 8 ECHR no particular submissions were made.  The
    Appellant clearly does not meet the requirements of paragraph  276  ADE
    of the Immigration  Rules.  There  is  nothing  before  me  to  warrant
    consideration of Article 8 outwith the Rules.  The  Appellant  does  of
    course have a family life with her young daughter  but  it  is  in  the
    child's best interest to be with her  mother  and  there  would  be  no
    interference with that family life as they  would  return  to  Ethiopia
    together.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

The Appellant has not established a right to Humanitarian Protection in  the
UK.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Date: 21st August 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

