
                                    [pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08080/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 December 2016                            |On 15 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     B Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay, Counsel, instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a resumed hearing following my decision promulgated on 31 March
    2016 in which I found that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred  in
    law in respect of the Appellant's appeal (the error of law decision  is
    annexed to the current decision).

 2. In summary, I found that whilst the First-tier Tribunal had found  that
    the Appellant had not evaded  or  deserted  from  military  service  in
    Eritrea, it had found that the Appellant left that  country  illegally.
    On this basis the judge should have gone on and considered the issue of
    risk on  return  in  detail,  having  regard  to  all  of  the  country
    information put before him.  His failure to do so rendered his decision
    unsafe and I therefore set it aside.  In doing so I  issued  directions
    to the parties and the Upper Tribunal's administration.  The matter has
    eventually come back to me.



The hearing before me

 3. I confirmed with both representatives that they had read and considered
    my error of law decision, and that this appeal now falls to be  decided
    in light of the recent country guidance in  MST  and  Others  (national
    service - risk categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 443 (IAC).

 4. With his customary fairness, Mr Tufan accepted that in view of  what  I
    had said in paragraph 4 of my error of law decision (with reference  to
    what the First-tier Tribunal had found at paragraphs 38 and 40  of  its
    decision) it was  now  difficult  for  the  Respondent  to  resist  the
    Appellant's case, although he was not conceding the matter.  He  sought
    to rely on the reasons for refusal letter  but  acknowledged  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had accepted that this  particular  Appellant  left
    Eritrea illegally and there had been no challenge to that finding.   He
    had nothing more to add.

 5. Mr Lay simply relied on his skeleton argument.



My remaking of the decision in this appeal

 6. As I announced to the  parties  at  the  hearing,  I  am  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal.

 7. Whilst it is true that certain  material  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
    claim  were  rejected  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  a  separate  but
    nonetheless very significant aspect of it was accepted, namely that  he
    left Eritrea illegally.

 8. In light of the clear country guidance set out in  MST,  the  Appellant
    would on return be regarded with sufficient hostility so  as  to  place
    him at real risk of persecution for the Convention  reason  of  imputed
    political opinion and/or treatment contrary  to  Articles  3  and/or  4
    ECHR.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and is set aside.

I determine that the Appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom  would  be
in breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention and would also  be
unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

I therefore remake the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 14 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



To the Respondent

No fee is payable in this case and so there can be no fee award.

Annex 1: Error of law decision

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08080/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2016                             |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     B Y
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Raoul, Counsel, instructed by Bankfield Heath
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Crawford (the judge), promulgated on 27  July  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal was against  the
    Respondent's decision of 5 May 2015, refusing the protection claim made
    on 3 December 2014.

 2. This is  one  of  the  increasing  numbers  of  appeals  from  Eritrean
    nationals refused by  the  Respondent  on  the  basis  of  new  country
    information which suggests that the position of nationals  returned  to
    Eritrea now may not be as potentially  dangerous  as  set  out  in  the
    country guidance case of MO (illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC).  The  new  information  in  question  consists
    mainly of the much-publicised Danish Immigration Service's Fact Finding
    Report of November/December 2014.



The judge's decision

 3. The judge did not accept that the Appellant  had  been  called  up  for
    military service, had deserted from such service, or even that  he  was
    an evader (paragraphs 33, 38, and 40).

 4. However, the judge did accept  that  the  Appellant  had  left  Eritrea
    illegally in 2010 (paragraphs 38 and 40).

 5. Notwithstanding this residual finding in the  Appellant's  favour,  the
    judge went on to accept the contents of the Danish report and  conclude
    that he was not at risk on return (paragraph 40).



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds do not challenge the findings  on  evasion  and  desertion.
    Instead they assert that the judge erred in failing to  consider  other
    country information which criticised the Danish report.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on
    19 August 2015.



Decision on error of law

 8. At the hearing before me Mr  Dewison  very  fairly  accepted  that  the
    judge's approach to the issue of risk on return was flawed.

 9. There is a clear material error of law in this case. The judge entirely
    failed to consider any of the country information put  forward  by  the
    Appellant. This information went  to  the  reliability  of  and  weight
    attributable to the Danish report.

10. If the judge in fact had this information in mind, he  failed  to  give
    any reasons for rejecting it.

11. Furthermore, the judge failed to say why the  contents  of  the  Danish
    report were such  that  it  justified  a  departure  from  the  country
    guidance case of MO.

12. The judge's decision is set aside.

13. As the findings on the evasion of and desertion from  military  service
    are unchallenged, they are preserved.



Disposal

14. Ms Raoul suggested that I should remake the decision  on  the  evidence
    before me.

15. I have decided to take a different course. As I  write  this  decision,
    the Upper Tribunal has, as far as I know, heard, or is in  the  process
    of hearing, country guidance cases in the  linked  appeals  of  M  S  T
    (AA/07733/2015), T M (AA/06369/2015, M Y K  (AA/11206/2014),  and  Adem
    Ibrahim Aman (DA/00924/2014).  These  cases  are  considering,  amongst
    other issues, the Danish report,  the  expert  Dr  Kibreab,  and  other
    competing country information.

16. In light of this, it is appropriate to  adjourn  the  remaking  of  the
    decision in the present appeal  until  after  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    promulgated its new country guidance. The appeal shall be  retained  in
    the Upper Tribunal.



Anonymity

17. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant from serious harm, having regard to the interests of  justice
    and the principle of proportionality.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is adjourned for a continuation hearing to follow in due course.

Directions to the parties:

   1. Both parties shall liaise with the Upper Tribunal with respect to  the
      listing of the continuation hearing at North Shields;
   2. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal on evasion  of  and  desertion
      from military service in Eritrea are preserved;
   3. Any further evidence  relied  upon  shall  be  filed  with  the  Upper
      Tribunal and served on the other side no later than  10  working  days
      before the next hearing.

Directions to Administration:

   1. The appeal is adjourned, for a date to be fixed once the  new  country
      guidance cases on Eritrea are promulgated;
   2. The parties will liaise with Listings when fixing a new date;
   3. The appeal is to be listed at North Shields;
   4. The appeal shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford;
   5. There is a one hour time estimate for the next hearing;
   6. No interpreter is required.


Signed                              Date:  30 March 2016


H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

