
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08917/2014
                                                               AA/08920/2014
                                                               AA/08921/2014
                                                               AA/08922/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2015                   |On 26 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                          H s H S (FIRST APPELLANT)
                         Z H S S (SECOND APPELLANT)
                          Z H SS (THIRD APPELLANT)
                         A H S S (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C Simmonds of Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellants who have claimed asylum.   This
    order prohibits the disclosure directly or indirectly (including by the
    parties) of the identity of the appellants.  Any disclosure and  breach
    of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    remain in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or court.

Introduction

 2. The appellants are citizens of Iraq.  The first appellant was born on 4
    July 1973.  He is the father of the second and third appellants who are
    his daughters and of the fourth appellant, his son who was born  on  19
    December 1995.

 3. The appellants initially arrived in the UK in  October  2013  and  were
    granted leave to enter until 29 January 2015.

 4. On 22 July 2014, the first and fourth appellants applied for an  asylum
    and an extension of their leave on that basis.  The  second  and  third
    appellants sought leave as the first  appellant's  dependants.   On  10
    October 2014, the Secretary of State  rejected  the  first  and  fourth
    appellants' claims for asylum and refused to  grant  further  leave  to
    each of the four appellants.

 5. The appellants appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing,
    in a determination promulgated on 10 March 2015 Judge Burnett dismissed
    the appellants' appeals.  The  judge  rejected  the  first  and  fourth
    appellants' claims as not being credible.

 6. The appellants appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  Initially,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal refused permission but on 23 June 2015 the Upper Tribunal
    (UTJ Blum) granted the appellants permission to appeal.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Appellants' Claim

 8. The basis of the appellants' claim for asylum is  that  the  first  and
    fourth appellants had returned to Iraq on 27  June  2014  in  order  to
    facilitate the fourth appellant's application  to  Baghdad  University.
    Whilst in Iraq, on 2 July 2014 the first appellant witnessed  a  number
    of people loading bombs into the backseat of a car parked in the garage
    of the house  adjacent  to  the  first  appellant's  home.   The  first
    appellant recognised  some  of  the  items  as  being  handheld  rocket
    launchers.  The next day, 3 July 2014, the first appellant reported the
    incident to the police.  A number of soldiers went to the house  and  a
    number of individuals were arrested.  The first and  fourth  appellants
    did not initially return to  their  home  but,  on  7  July  2014  they
    arranged to meet the first appellant's brother at the home.  The  first
    appellant's brother arrived before them and was confronted  by  someone
    who shot him.  Following that, the first and fourth  appellants  stayed
    with a cousin and returned to the UK on their valid visas  on  10  July
    2014.  Thereafter, the appellants claimed asylum fearing they too would
    be killed.

The Judge's Decision

 9. In his determination, Judge Burnett did not accept the  credibility  of
    the accounts of the first and fourth  appellants.   He  considered  two
    expert reports which he did not find helpful (see paras 66 and 67).  In
    addition, Judge Burnett  considered  two  documents  submitted  by  the
    appellants in support of their  claim  -  an  "arrest  warrant"  and  a
    "statement of investigation".  In relation to  those  documents,  Judge
    Burnett considered that there were inconsistencies with the appellants'
    evidence.  At para 68 he said this:

         "68. I have noted that there is no engagement in the expert reports
             with the documents entitled 'arrest warrant' and 'Statement of
             Investigation'.  These are odd documents.  The document titled
             'Arrest Warrant' is not an arrest warrant at all but a  report
             of the appellant attending the police  station  and  reporting
             what he had seen.  It  also  then  refers  to  the  arrest  of
             individuals.  This report contains  inconsistencies  with  the
             appellants account.  It states that two of  the  accused  were
             arrested and three fled.  It refers to a 'booby trapped cycle'
             not explosives loaded into a car.  I give  no  weight  to  the
             document."

10. At paras 70 - 73, Judge Burnett also identified inconsistencies in  the
    evidence given by the first and fourth appellants and also that it  was
    "implausible" that the first appellant would remain in his  house  with
    his son having witnessed what was happening next door and that  it  was
    "incredible" that he had been  able  to  witness  such  events  in  the
    circumstances where it was dark  and  the  individuals  concerned  were
    using torches.

The Submissions

11. Mr Simmonds, who represented the appellants,  relied  upon  the  single
    ground of appeal.  That ground argues that the judge was wrong  in  law
    to identify in para 68 of his determination inconsistencies between the
    appellants' account and the "arrest warrant" as it  had  been  accepted
    before the judge that there had been  mistranslations  in  the  "arrest
    warrant".

12. In the course of  his  submissions,  Mr  Diwnycz  who  represented  the
    respondent read out the Presenting Officer's record of  the  proceeding
    and I also consulted the judge's Record of Proceedings.  It  was  clear
    from both that the  first  appellant  contested  the  accuracy  of  the
    translation of the "arrest warrant".

13. Mr Simmonds relied upon an email from the translator of  the  document,
    Mr Phillip Gordon dated 24 March 2015 in which he accepted  that  there
    had been mistranslations in his original translation  and  attached  to
    the  ground  was  a  corrected  translation  of  the  "arrest   warrant
    document", now headed "record of seizure".  In  particular,  Mr  Gordon
    accepted that he had mistranslated the word "ajala" in the  context  of
    Arabic used in Iraq to mean "wheel" or "bicycle" when it meant in  Iraq
    "vehicle".  He also pointed out that the translation as  a  "record  of
    arrest" was more likely to be accurate as  a  "record  of  seizure"  of
    articles.

14. Mr Simmonds submitted that it was procedurally unfair for the appeal to
    be determined on the basis of an inaccurate translation and  he  relied
    upon the case of MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  00105  (IAC)
    that the failing need not  be  through  any  fault  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where "some material evidence ...  was  not  considered"  with
    resulting unfairness.

15. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the Rule 24 response and pointed out that  there
    had been no application by those  representing  the  appellant  for  an
    adjournment in order to obtain a true translation of the document.   He
    submitted that the appellants had chosen to carry on  with  the  appeal
    but he accepted, as  a  result  of  a  letter  dated  15  October  2015
    submitted at the hearing, that the appellant  had  raised  a  complaint
    with their previous representatives that  they  had  not  corrected  an
    inaccurate translation of the documents prior to the hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

16. It is clear from the record of proceedings both of the  judge  and  the
    Presenting Officer that the first appellant did  not  accept  that  the
    translation of the document then headed "arrest warrant" but now headed
    "record of seizure" was accurate.  The email of Mr Gordon  demonstrates
    that he, as the translator, accepted that the  translation  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal did contain mistranslations.

17. Whilst I accept that no application was made for  an  adjournment,  the
    fact nevertheless remains that the judge did not grapple with the first
    appellant's evidence that the translation was inaccurate.  On the basis
    of the translation as put before him, the judge relied upon it in  para
    68 in reaching his adverse credibility finding  inconsistencies  (which
    may well not have existed had the translation  been  accurate)  between
    the "arrest warrant" document and the appellants' evidence.

18. It is not clear why the appellants'  representative  did  not  seek  an
    adjournment in order to  clarify  the  claimed  mistranslation  of  the
    document.  Perhaps, particularly  in  hindsight,  it  would  have  been
    prudent to do so.  However, the fact remains that the  judge  proceeded
    to base part of his reasoning for his adverse credibility finding  upon
    a document which objectively has been mistranslated.   The  judge  took
    the mistranslated version of the document into account in assessing the
    appellants' credibility.  In effect, he proceeded  upon  a  mistake  of
    fact and, in my judgment, that resulted in  a  procedural  irregularity
    and unfairness in the hearing.  Whilst his  reasoning  in  para  68  in
    reliance upon the  mistranslated  document  formed  only  part  of  his
    overall reasoning for concluding that the appellants' account  was  not
    credible, I am unable to say that had he not  taken  the  mistranslated
    document into  account  he  would  inevitably  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion on credibility.  He might have but I cannot be sure that  he
    would  have.   Therefore,  his  error  was  material  to  his   adverse
    credibility finding.

19. For these reasons, the judge erred  in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse
    credibility finding and in dismissing the appellants' appeals.

Decision

20. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellants' appeals involved the making or an error  of  law.   The
    First-tier Tribunal's decision cannot stand and is set aside.

21. Given the nature of the fact-finding required and bearing in mind  para
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, it is appropriate  to
    remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  rehearing
    before a judge other than Judge Burnett.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

