
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08767/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 May 2016                       |On 13 July 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                              Mr Hamad Atshane
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Saddiqui, Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            NOTICE OF ABANDONMENT

1.   The appellant obtained a grant of permission to challenge the  decision
    of First-tier Judge Brunnen dated 17 May  2015  dismissing  his  appeal
    against a decision made by the  respondent  on  25  September  2014  to
    cancel his status as a refugee.  The appellant had been granted refugee
    status on 27 March 2013 on the basis that he was an undocumented Bidoon
    from Kuwait.

2.   At the outset of the hearing Mr Saddiqui explained that  the  appellant
    would not be attending because he had gone to Denmark to  make  contact
    with  members  of  his  family.   Given  that  information  I  have  no
    alternative but to treat the appellant's appeal as  abandoned  pursuant
    to s.92(8) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  which
    stipulates that "when an appellant brings an  appeal  from  within  the
    United Kingdom but leaves the  United  Kingdom  before  the  appeal  is
    finally determined the appeal is to be treated as abandoned".

3.   I would record, however, my  finding  that  had  the  appeal  not  been
    statutorily abandoned, I would have found an error of law  and  re-made
    the decision by allowing the appeal.  My reasons (which concurred  with
    those expressed by Mr Harrison for the  respondent  during  discussion)
    would have been: (a) there has been no challenge to the judge's finding
    that the appellant is a Bidoon from Kuwait; (b) under  para  399A(viii)
    of the Immigration Rules a person's grant of asylum will be revoked  if
    "his misrepresentation or omission of facts including the use of  false
    documents were decisive for the grant of asylum"; (c)  on  the  judge's
    unchallenged findings the appellant's misrepresentation related to  his
    claim that he was arrested and detained by the  authorities  in  Kuwait
    (para 45); (d) the judge  found  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to
    discharge the onus of proof on her to show that he was  an  Iraqi;  (e)
    the respondent had failed to discharge the onus of proof on her to show
    that the primary basis on which the respondent  granted  the  appellant
    asylum, that he was an undocumented  Bidoon,  has  been  undermined  by
    subsequent evidence; (f) the fact that the  appellant  accepted  before
    the judge that he and his family had  been  able  to  register  in  the
    censuses of 1970 and 1975 (paras  34  and  46)  did  not  amount  to  a
    withdrawal of his claim to be an  undocumented  Bidoon  since,  on  the
    authority of NM (documented or undocumented  Bidoon:  risk)  Kuwait  CG
    [2013] UKUT 356 at (iv) of the head note:
         "It must be assumed that Bidoon who did not register  between  1996
         and 2000, and hence  did  not  obtain  security  cards,  are  as  a
         consequence undocumented Bidoon, though this must be  seen  in  the
         context of the evidence that most Bidoon carry security cards."

    This proposition remains uncontradicted by Home Office  OGN  issued  in
    February 2014; (g) accordingly although  the  appellant  did  commit  a
    misrepresentation it was not one that was "decisive" to  the  grant  of
    asylum.  My finding would thus have been that in failing to so find the
    First-tier Judge materially erred in law and her decision must  be  set
    aside.

4.   For the same reasons the decision I would have re-made would have  been
    to allow the appeal as the  respondent  had  failed  to  discharge  the
    burden of showing that the grant of asylum to the appellant  should  be
    revoked or cancelled.

5.   For the above reasons,

    The appeal is statutorily abandoned.


[pic]
Signed   Date: 13 July 2016

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
