
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08486/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13th August 2015                  |On 17th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     B A
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvin (instructed by Luqmani Thompson and
                    Partners, Solicitors)
For the Respondents:   Mr K Norton (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant  with regard to a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Asjad) promulgated on 7th April 2015 by which it dismissed  his  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him leave to remain
    in the UK and to remove him to Afghanistan.

 2. The Appellant came to the UK in 2010 and claimed asylum.  He  was  then
    aged 13.  His claim was rejected on 9th April 2010  but  he  was  given
    leave to remain in accordance with  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
    until 8th April 2013.  He did not then appeal the asylum decision.

 3. He made an application for further leave to remain within the  currency
    of his leave on asylum grounds.  It was the refusal of that application
    that was the substance of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal erred in excluding  the
    evidence of  the  Appellant's  social  worker  and  in  making  adverse
    credibility findings based on inconsistencies between his  evidence  in
    2015 and his asylum interview in 2010 without making allowances for his
    youth then.

 5. I agree that the Decision and Reasons is unsustainable.

 6. At paragraphs 2 to 4 of the Decision and  Reasons  the  Judge  explains
    that the Appellant's representatives wished  to  call  the  Appellant's
    Social Worker to give evidence.  There was  no  statement  of  evidence
    although the Social Worker had written a letter but, due to an error by
    the representatives, it was absent from the bundle.   The  Judge  noted
    that the bundle itself had been lodged late in breach of directions and
    the evidence sought to be adduced was also  in  breach  of  directions.
    She set out the chronology of the  proceedings  up  to  that  date  and
    excluded the evidence.  In so doing she erred.  It  is  lamentably  the
    case that both Appellants' representatives and the Secretary  of  State
    all too frequently ignore directions from the Tribunal as to the filing
    of evidence. In asylum appeals in particular, given what is  at  stake,
    it is never appropriate to exclude evidence.  The  Secretary  of  State
    will not be disadvantaged because if the Home Office Presenting Officer
    needs time to consider/investigate late evidence an  adjournment  would
    be appropriate.  In this case the evidence, according  to  the  grounds
    was potentially crucial.  The Social Worker was the person  responsible
    for the Appellant's ongoing care and would inform the Tribunal  why  it
    was that he was still not living independently despite  having  reached
    18, as would normally be the case.  The Social  Worker  would  also  be
    able to inform the Tribunal about the Appellant's mental state.  It  is
    difficult to see how his risk on return to Afghanistan and his  ability
    to live safely there could be  given  the  anxious  scrutiny  necessary
    without that evidence.

 7. It was also an error of law to make adverse credibility findings  based
    on inconsistent evidence without explaining why  that  was  appropriate
    given the Appellant was only 13 at the time of his  substantive  asylum
    interview.  No allowance was made for that.

 8. Additionally, I note that although the Judge referred to there being an
    expert report before her she then does not deal with it.  It  is  clear
    from the file that it related to documents and the Judge did  not  deal
    with that report.  That is also an error of law.

 9. For these reasons the Decision and Reasons cannot stand and  I  set  it
    aside in its entirety.  As the Appellant has not  had  a  fair  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal it is appropriate  to  remit  it  for  a
    fresh hearing on all issues before that Tribunal.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal having made an anonymity  direction  I  see  no
    reason not to continue it.


Signed   Date 13th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction regarding anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed   Date 13th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
