
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08133/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21 January 2014                              |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                      Manaf Omar Abdulrahman Al-Mansab
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Siddique, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Manaf Omar Abdulrahman Al-Mansab, was born  on  26  June
    1983 and is a citizen of Yemen. He had appealed against decision of the
    respondent dated 9 August 2013 to refuse to grant  him  asylum  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraph
    10A of Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.  The First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Sarsfield)  in  a  determination  promulgated  3  October  2013,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The first ground of appeal concerns errors allegedly made by the  judge
    in his analysis of the evidence.  First, at [14], the judge found  that
    there was "no evidence relating to  the  16FM  (16  February  Movement)
    other than a letter (post)."  The appellant claimed to be a  member  of
    the 16FM group, an opposition political party in South Yemen.   As  the
    appellant's grounds point out, the judge's finding that there  was  "no
    evidence" relating to the group was not accurate; the judge had  before
    him  an internet news article (with translation)  in  the  respondent's
    bundle of documents which clearly refers the group.

 3. Further, at [17], the judge made a number of detailed findings some  of
    which (it is not disputed) were factually inaccurate.  The judge refers
    to a letter from a lawyer who has visited the appellant  in  detention.
    Mention is made in the letter of two other individuals seeking to visit
    the appellant ("activists"), the judge  recorded  that  there  was  "no
    evidence to support the claim that [those individuals]  were  activists
    and the appellant only ever mentioned a visit by a lawyer,  not  anyone
    else so this contradicts his own evidence."  As the grounds point  out,
    there was no inconsistency in the appellant's own evidence because  the
    lawyer had explained in his  letter  that  the  activists/human  rights
    observers had not been allowed into prison to speak with the  appellant
    although  they  had  attempted  to  enter  the  prison.   It  was   not
    surprising, therefore, that the appellant himself, having received only
    a visit from the lawyer and not the activists/human  rights  observers,
    should only mention the lawyer.

 4. In the same paragraph, the judge refers again to  the  lawyer's  letter
    and noted that the letter "refers to questioning [paragraph 5] that the
    appellant has never mentioned."  Again, that finding was not  factually
    accurate; at [19] of his own witness statement, the appellant  referred
    to the questioning.

 5. At [18] of the determination, the judge referred to  a  memo  dated  24
    March 2013 which had prevented  the  appellant  from  travelling.   The
    judge went on to observe that "this [memo] did not stop  the  appellant
    entering Yemen from Egypt on 26/03/12 as he claimed."  Later, the judge
    refers to the appellant's "re-entry to Yemen on 26/03/12."Any reader of
    the  determination  would  be  left  in  no  doubt  that  the  apparent
    inconsistency had diminished the appellant's credibility in the mind of
    the judge. In  the  appellant's  witness  statement  [16  and  34]  the
    appellant refers to having entered Yemen on 6 March 2013 not  26  March
    2013.  There was no reason, therefore, why the  appellant  should  have
    been stopped from entering on that date  since,  at  the  time  of  his
    entry, the memorandum had not been issued.

 6. Ms Pettersen, for the respondent, did not seek to take issue  with  the
    submissions made in the grounds of appeal.  Indeed, it  is  clear  from
    any perusal of the evidence which was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the criticisms of the determination are all substantiated.

 7. The judge has inaccurately referred to there having been no evidence of
    matters which were referred to, sometimes in more than  one  place,  in
    the appellant's written evidence.  Whilst  a  single  minor  inaccuracy
    might not disturb a determination, the fact  that  there  are  numerous
    errors in this determination have led me to conclude that the  decision
    is not safe and should be set aside.  In addition to the errors which I
    have referred to above, I note at [18]  that  the  judge  refers  to  a
    number of dates which are simply not  accurate.   The  judge  has  also
    somewhat carelessly referred at [24] to the appellant having no risk of
    serious harm should  he  return  to  Kuwait,  rather  than  Yemen.   In
    addition, I find that the judge's findings at [21] are unclear.  It  is
    not apparent from that paragraph whether the judge actually found  that
    the appellant had knowledge of the South Yemen Movement or  whether  he
    was present at a meeting to prepare to commemorate independence; use of
    the word "may" leaves these matters in doubt.

 8. I direct that  none  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination shall stand and that the hearing shall be  determined  de
    novo.  In the light  of  the  extensive  evidence  of  fact  which  the
    Tribunal will need to consider and make findings in respect of  afresh,
    I find that the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for the decision to be remade by a judge other than Judge Sarsfield.

DECISION

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  3  October
    2013 is set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  the  decision
    to be remade by that Tribunal.






Signed                              Date 11 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
