
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08069/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2016                   |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                     k c
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Siddique, a solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of the Gambia.  She came to  the  UK  on  15
    May 2009 as a dependent spouse of her husband [SB].  Mr [B] is  also  a
    citizen of Gambia.  At the time her husband was undertaking a course of
    study.  He returned to Gambia in July 2012 and  resides  in  the  Bakau
    area of the country.
2.   The appellant was born on 20 March  1987  and  is  from  the  Busumbala
    Village.  She is a Mandinka.  She is the only daughter  of  her  mother
    and father but has a stepmother and two  half-sisters  from  a  further
    relationship.  Her family continue to live in Busumbala.  At the age of
    6 she was forced to undergo FGM  and  because  of  her  own  experience
    became opposed to that immoral practise.  But there is a history of FGM
    in the family with her grandmother practising that  procedure  and  her
    family strongly supporting it.  She finds those practices distressing.

3.   The appellant claimed that if she returned to her  village  her  family
    would insist that she perform the procedure on others.   She  would  be
    forced to take up her position and her family would abandon her if  she
    refused to do it.  They would even threaten to kill her.

Immigration History

4.   The appellant applied for asylum but the respondent decided  to  refuse
    to vary her leave to enter  or  remain  in  the  UK  and  make  removal
    directions under paragraph 336 of HC 395 on  25  September  2014.   The
    appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (FTT).  The
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judges  Kelly  and  Heap.   Miss
    Kaddy was granted  anonymity.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heap  ("the
    Immigration Judge") found that  the  appellant  had  given  a  credible
    account of her family history in Busumbala  and  she  genuinely  feared
    that she would be a person required to perform FGM.  He concluded  that
    the appellant's account of having undergone that procedure herself  was
    truthful, that her mother was an FGM practitioner, that such  practices
    were widespread in the country and that the  appellant  would  probably
    have to take up that role if she returned to Gambia.  There is  a  real
    risk of her return to Gambia coming to  the  attention  of  the  family
    members as Gambia is a "small" country where  "news  travels  quickly".
    Given the prevalence of FGM amongst Mandinka ethnic groups, which  make
    up about 42% of the population, it  was  the  FTT  concluded  that  the
    appellant "cannot reasonably be expected to internally  relocate".   If
    she went to live with her husband in Bakau,  a  predominantly  Mandinka
    area, she would quickly expect to be recognised and word would be  sent
    back to her family who would come to get her.  At paragraph 53  of  the
    decision, Judge Heap considered the possibility of protection from  the
    police/security services.  He accepted the appellant's  case  that  she
    could not do so.  He did not give any reasons for that conclusion.   He
    did, however consider that the appellant's husband would not be able to
    protect her from threats and reprisals.  Indeed, were he to  do  so  he
    would be the subject of such threats and reprisals himself.  The police
    in Gambia would tend to regard her case as a domestic one which  should
    not warrant their involvement.  The judge accepted that there had  been
    a "not inconsiderable delay in ... claiming asylum" (in fact,  of  more
    than four years) but accepted the appellant's evidence in its entirety.
     Judge Heap concluded that the appellant may not have been aware of her
    ability to make a claim for asylum until seeking advice  and  this  was
    not fatal  to  her  credibility.   The  appellant  should  be  afforded
    humanitarian  protection  in  the  UK  under  paragraph  339C  of   the
    Immigration Rules having regard to the substantial risk that she  would
    be put to death because of her refusal to practice FGM.  She could  not
    "reasonably be expected to internally relocate as that would not negate
    the inherent dangers that she faces if she is to return to Gambia".

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

5.    The  Upper  Tribunal  appeal  was  launched  by  an  application   for
    permission lodged on 3 August 2016.   In  her  grounds  the  respondent
    states that the FTT failed to properly consider the matter of  internal
    relocation  and  sufficiency  of  protection  including   whether   the
    appellant could relocate to Banjul, the capital city.  In a  population
    of 1.7 million and a densely populated capital it was  incredible  that
    "news travels (sufficiently) quickly" to put the appellant at risk.  In
    any event, it is either unduly harsh or not and that the FTT failed  to
    grapple with this question.  Furthermore, the FTT  failed  properly  to
    assess whether the authorities were in fact "unable  or  unwilling"  to
    protect the appellant.  The point made at paragraph 54 of the  decision
    was that it had been the respondent's contention at  the  hearing  that
    the appellant's expert's report by an anthropologist instructed on  the
    appellant's behalf  called  Pamela  Kea  was  based  on  "out  of  date
    information".  It was wrong for the Immigration Judge to deal  with  it
    in this way.  The age of the information brought to her  being  weighed
    in the balance.  It was no answer to state, as the FTT  had,  that  the
    respondent had not filed any evidence to rebut  the  evidence  for  the
    appellant, which was akin to putting a burden on  the  respondent  that
    did not exist.

The Hearing

6.   At the hearing it was submitted on behalf of the  respondent  that  the
    Immigration Judge had not  dealt  sufficiently  with  the  adequacy  of
    protection or internal relocation and  that  he  placed  weight  on  an
    expert report without properly indicating where  the  burden  of  proof
    lay, if such burden existed.  The Judge Heap was required to say why he
    came to the conclusions he came to and it was clearly an error of  law,
    in the respondent's submission, that the expert  report  seemed  to  be
    based largely on the notion that "news travels fast" within Gambia when
    the real issue was whether it was reasonably safe for the appellant  to
    go back to Bakau where the appellant's husband lived.  It was difficult
    for the respondent to identify how it would be the case that those from
    the appellant's home village of  Busumbala  would  identify  where  the
    appellant was within a country the  size  of  Gambia.   The  respondent
    submitted that in the absence of clear findings,  Judge  Heap  had  not
    reached conclusions that were open to him and, in so far as he is to be
    taken to have found that there was an inadequacy  of  state  protection
    for the appellant in Albania, Judge Heap was wrong. The conclusion  did
    not coincide with the country guidance evidence which was summarised in
    the respondent's refusal letter at paragraphs  26  et  seq.   In  those
    paragraphs the respondent identifies the extent of a functioning police
    force and other security services within Gambia.  Overall the  question
    was whether the evidence was adequate.

7.   Mr Siddique, however indicated that  the  appellant's  credibility  had
    been  accepted  and  that  internal  relocation  and   sufficiency   of
    protection  were  issues  which  took  into  account  the   appellant's
    credibility.  He relied  on  the  case  of  K  [2013]  UKUT  00062  and
    submitted that the appellant  was  a  well-known  person  in  that  she
    resembled her mother and she had  accompanied  her  mother  to  various
    ceremonies in different parts of the country.  It was accepted that the
    family had connections with the airport.  I was referred  to  paragraph
    50 of the decision.  The population of Gambia  was  not  enormous  (1.7
    million - about the size of Birmingham or similar cities).  The  First-
    tier Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that  internal  relocation  was
    reasonable and had addressed the points in paragraph 56 about the  safe
    return  of  the  appellant  to  her  husband.   The  FTT  indicated  at
    paragraphs 52 and 56 that it was necessary to look at whether there was
    a safe place for the appellant to go and had  made  sound  findings  in
    that regard.  The police in Gambia obviously existed but they  did  not
    intervene in domestic situations.  The expert  had  fully  covered  the
    points raised by the respondent in the  submissions  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal indeed, had  contributed  to  the  country  guidance  material
    relied upon.  The FTT had made a decision which was open to it and  the
    appellant could not safely return to Gambia.  She could  not  seek  the
    protection of the authorities.  I was entitled to  treat  the  evidence
    presented by the respondent as not sufficiently dealing with the points
    raised by the appellant in terms of her fear  of  safe  return  to  her
    husband and his village.

8.   Finally the respondent submitted that it  was  not  simply  a  case  of
    preferring one lot of evidence over another.  There was  no  burden  as
    such on the respondent; the test was whether it  was  unduly  harsh  to
    expect  the  appellant  to  relocate  within  Gambia   before   seeking
    international protection four years after first coming to  the  UK.  In
    addition, it was  incumbent  on  the  FTT  to  ask  whether  the  state
    protection  was  adequate  in  Gambia.  If  there  was  adequate  state
    protection, the asylum and human rights claims  fell  away  altogether.
    Given that the appellant had not used  the  resources  of  the  Gambian
    state which were available to her it could not be said on  these  facts
    that there was an inadequacy of state protection.

My findings

9.   Having carefully heard the arguments presented by both parties I  found
    the matter finely balanced.  Mr  Siddique  made  a  forceful  case  for
    explaining  why  the  issue  of  internal   relocation/sufficiency   of
    protection was adequately  dealt  with  by  the  FTT  and  why  it  was
    intimately tied up with  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  credibility.
    However, having carefully weighed up the arguments of both parties, and
    with some hesitation, I have nevertheless concluded that  the  FTT  has
    not properly reasoned the  issue  of  internal  relocation/adequacy  of
    protection.  I refer to  the  dismissal  of  the  suggestion  that  the
    appellant could avail herself of  the  protection  of  her  husband/the
    police/security services in Gambia in paragraph 53 of the decision.  It
    seems to me that before reaching that conclusion the FTT ought to  have
    properly analysed the facts and given clear reasons.  It did  not  give
    any reason for saying why the appellant should  not  avail  herself  of
    those possible means of protection available to her.

10.   Secondly,  the  issue  does  not  turn  on  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's account, which will be allowed to stand. It  turns  on  the
    objective analysis of  the  facts  and  then  answering  the  question:
    whether there was an adequacy of state protection in Gambia?

11.  Thirdly it was necessary to ask  whether  there  was  a  safe  internal
    flight alternative available to the appellant or  whether  it  was,  in
    fact, unduly harsh for her  to  avail  herself  of  that  option?   The
    respondent is entitled to pursue those arguments in this case  and  did
    so at the FTT and before this Tribunal.

12.  I am  not  satisfied  from  reading  the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the
    decision at paragraphs 50 et seq that the FTT applied the correct test.
     As the respondent says in her grounds of appeal, the FTT  appeared  to
    place a burden on the respondent in  this  regard.   That  is  not  the
    correct legal position in the sense  that  the  respondent  needs  only
    establish the primary facts giving rise to a possible  internal  flight
    alternative. As  has  been  referred  to,  the  question  for  internal
    relocation is whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant  to
    internally relocate.  It does not answer this question to suggest  that
    the appellant would be recognised on her return to the airport or  that
    Gambia is a country where "news travels fast".

13.  I found the reasons given at paragraph 58 for being satisfied that  the
    appellant could not be expected to internally relocate which would "not
    negate the inherent dangers she faces ... in Gambia" to be  excessively
    vague given the evidence placed before the FTT. In  the  circumstances,
    some further reasoning would be needed before the FTT could reach  such
    a conclusion.

14.  As far as disposal is concerned, both  advocates  accepted  that  if  I
    concluded that the reasoning of the FTT  is  inadequate,  it  would  be
    appropriate for me to go on and remake the decision.  I will give  that
    decision below.

Discussion

15.  The appellant, who came to the UK in 2009, but  did  not  claim  asylum
    until August 2013, nevertheless was found to be credible  by  the  FTT.
    Two issues, however, have been highlighted before the Upper Tribunal:

    (1)  Whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to be  expected
         to relocate to Bakau or another part of Gambia given that she is an
         adult who has not herself ever been  forced  to  operate  on  girls
         subject to FGM and whether it is good enough to accept the evidence
         of Dr Kea, an anthropologist expert employed by the appellant, that
         "news travels quickly" in Gambia?


    (2)  Whether there is a  sufficiency  of  state  protection  in  Gambia
         having regard to the fact that the appellant  has  a  husband  from
         whom she is not estranged and that the country  has  a  functioning
         police force if indeed, her family were to find  her  in  whichever
         part of Gambia she chooses to settle?

16.  The FTT appeared to place the burden on the  respondent  to  show  that
    there was an adequacy of state protection but, with respect,  it  would
    be better to describe the position to be that  the  respondent  had  to
    establish the primary facts necessary to place  the  issue  before  the
    FTT.  The appellant has the burden of showing an insufficiency of state
    protection in accordance with the  Horvath  principle.   The  appellant
    could not point to any insufficiency of state protection in Gambia,  on
    the contrary, it had a functioning police force that has  attempted  to
    control acts of violence directed towards  women.   As  the  respondent
    observed in her refusal, the appellant had failed to  demonstrate  that
    the non-state agents she claims to fear (i.e. her family) would have an
    influence over her above that of the state.

17.  Secondly, the FTT failed to consider whether it would be  unduly  harsh
    for the appellant to relocate to a different part of  Gambia.   She  is
    from a large tribe (42% of the Gambian population).  Although there  is
    an extremely high incidence of FGM in the tribe that does not mean that
    there is no place within Gambia to which she can go and  be  reasonably
    safe.  In one of those areas there is no reason to expect that she will
    be required to implement FGM. I have regard to the fact that Bakau is a
    substantial city in a  country  of  11,300  square  kilometres  with  a
    population of 1.735 million.   It  is  simply  not  credible  that  the
    appellant could not settle at some place in  Gambia,  for  example  the
    capital, rather than in her home village.  She would be able to  access
    the police service if needed.

18.  With respect, it was not primarily an issue of expert evidence  but  an
    issue of weighing up the evidence overall and  considering  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant  to  internally  relocate
    before seeking international protection.   I have  found  clearly  that
    there was a safe internal flight alternative to  seeking  international
    protection and accordingly, the  international  obligations  which  are
    said to be placed on the respondent do not arise.

19.  The appellant now has the option of  returning  to  Gambia  voluntarily
    and reintegrating with her husband, with whom she  has  been  separated
    since 2012.  It is not unreasonable to expect her to do  so  given  the
    above.

Notice of Decision

19.  I set aside the decision of the FTT and substitute the decision of  the
    Upper Tribunal which is:

    (1)  to dismiss the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
         respondent to refuse asylum.  I also consider that  the  respondent
         was  entitled  to  consider  the  appellant   had   no   right   to
         international humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  Finally, the appellant's protected human rights
         under the ECHR were not engaged.

    An anonymity direction was made and I maintain the anonymity direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as no fee was payable.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

