
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08387/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 January 2016                        |On 7 March 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                    j l l
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTion Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Simpson who in a decision promulgated on 5  October  2015  refused  the
    appellant's appeal against a removal decision of the Secretary of State
    dated 30 September 2014, following  a  refusal  to  grant  him  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and protection under the European Convention.

 2. The history is as follows.  The appellant claimed asylum on 5  November
    1998 and that application was refused on 22 August 2000.   From  August
    2000 he did not make any face-to-face  contact  with  the  Home  Office
    until he began to report in August 2011 and he  waited  until  December
    2013 to lodge  further  submissions.   His  further  submissions  of  3
    December 2013 were in fact treated as a fresh claim.  He  claimed  that
    he left China illegally and he had problems with the authorities before
    he left  China,  and  his  imputed  political  opinion  would  lead  to
    persecution.  Essentially the  appellant  claimed  that  he  was  in  a
    property dispute whereby the government authorities wished to  demolish
    his property and he disagreed.  An ensuing  struggle  resulted  in  him
    being accused of hitting an officer which led to his arrest.  He states
    that the officers arrested him and put him in a car but he escaped from
    the car while the vehicle was in  motion.   He  believed  he  would  be
    arrested and detained by the authorities and chose to escape  and  fled
    to the UK.

 3. The appellant claimed that owing  to  the  above  incident  he  was  of
    adverse interest to the authorities in China. The respondent maintained
    that he had failed to provide any evidence to support this and although
    he stated that the authorities would have arrested and detained him had
    he not escaped from the hospital, he had not provided any  evidence  of
    arrest warrant, wanted  notices,  court  orders  or  any  documents  to
    support this claim.   It  was  noted  he  still  had  family  in  China
    therefore and his family were able to send any  supporting  documentary
    evidence to him regarding the claim.

 4. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing it was submitted that there were  no
    matters  giving  rise  to  a  discrepancy  or  implausibility  in   the
    appellant's claim and the basis of the refusal  was  that  he  had  not
    furnished  supporting  documentation.   It  was  submitted   that   the
    appellant's difficulty was that when his application in 1998  had  been
    refused, he had not been aware of this refusal and in 2012 and 2015  he
    was not able to produce evidence going  back  to  1998.   He  has  been
    unable to provide the evidence.  It was  submitted  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that it would  have  been  open  to  the  respondent  to  have
    informed the appellant's representative that  the  appellant  could  be
    interviewed.  It was also submitted  that  the  appellant  had  brought
    himself back to  the  attention  of  the  authorities.   There  was  an
    explanation for this.  It was an unreasonable expectation on  the  part
    of the respondent that those escaping persecution should be required to
    produce documentation in support.  It was submitted that  the  question
    was whether the appellant had told the truth in 1998 [31]  and  it  was
    said on his behalf that his account was  consistent  with  the  country
    information and with regard to the issues raised concerning his contact
    with  his  family,  and  the  account  the  appellant  had  given   was
    sustainable.   In  addition,  because  of  the  circumstances  of   him
    departing China and the length of time since his departure  and  having
    had no  contact  with  his  family  he  would  not  be  able  to  avoid
    imprisonment through payment of a fine.   Those  facts  were  different
    from those submitted in relation to XH  (illegal  departure  -  risk  -
    return) China CG  [2202]  UKIAT  01478  and  the  appellant  should  be
    considered for Article 3 protection.

 5. At the hearing in essence Mr Nicholson relied on  the  written  grounds
    for permission to appeal which encapsulated that there was a  delay  in
    the promulgation of the determination, there was no  indication  as  to
    whether the appellant's account was accepted as true.  There  had  been
    speculation on the part of the judge and a reversal of the standard  of
    proof in determination of the human rights claim.

 6. Mr Avery submitted that the delay in promulgation of the  determination
    was not  considerably  over  the  three  months  within  which  it  was
    appropriate to decide a decision.  The key issue was one of credibility
    and  that  the  point  was  that  the  appellant   had   not   produced
    documentation and should have done.  He had merely made an asylum claim
    and then absconded.  The judge had not rejected the appeal on the basis
    of the inconsistencies in the oral evidence.

 7. Despite Mr Avery's attempts to defend the  determination  it  is  clear
    that there was an issue of credibility raised within  this  appeal  and
    that submission is clearly recorded in the determination  at  paragraph
    31 as part of the submissions  of  the  appellant.   The  question  was
    whether the appellant had told the truth in 1998.  Although  the  judge
    indicates that there was now evidence that  the  authorities  in  China
    issued  persons  such  as  the  appellant  official  documents  in  the
    circumstances that he  described  there  was  no  evidence  that  those
    documents were issued  when  the  appellant  departed  from  China  and
    although the appellant clearly gave oral evidence at the appeal hearing
    there was no evidence on the face of the decision that the judge did in
    fact engage with the oral evidence or the explanations of the appellant
    in relation to his failure to produce the documentation.

 8. The consideration of this appeal engages issues of  credibility,  which
    in turn involves consideration of the  explanations  of  the  appellant
    regarding the documentation, or rather lack of  it,  presented  to  the
    Tribunal, but it is axiomatic in asylum appeals that  corroboration  of
    an account through documentary evidence is  not  necessarily  required.
    It is whether it is reasonably expected to be available and clearly the
    appellant's oral evidence in relation to his explanations for this were
    pertinent.  As stated in RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868 at  paragraph
    18:

         "Another factor which usually  figures  prominently  in  a  court's
         consideration of the effect of delay upon the safety of  the  lower
         court's or  Tribunal's  decision  is  that  there  were  issues  of
         credibility for the court or Tribunal to consider; and that, in the
         long passage of time until preparation of the decision, the court's
         or the Tribunal's memory of the often subtle features  relevant  to
         an assessment of credibility may well have  dimmed.   But,  as  the
         Secretary of State has, in effect, always  conceded,  such  is  the
         factor  entirely  absent  from  this  case.   The  adjudicator  had
         described the respondent as 'in general, a credible witness';  and,
         before the Tribunal, his credibility was not in issue.   Indeed  he
         did not even give oral evidence."

 9. That is not the case in this matter and it is  clear  that  credibility
    was a factor to be taken  into  account  and  the  appellant  did  give
    extensive evidence.

10. Although it was submitted that the Secretary of State argued it  was  a
    carefully written determination that there is no  record  of  what  the
    appellant said in oral evidence and no record of the  cross-examination
    and moreover no attempt to engage with that  record  of  oral  evidence
    within the findings themselves albeit that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision and subsequently the  judge's  decision  following  determined
    that the appellant had failed to substantiate his claim. The  appellant
    had, as recorded, offered to be interviewed by the Secretary  of  State
    and clearly gave evidence at the appeal hearing.

11. That said, nowhere did the judge indicate that he did not  believe  the
    appellant and there appeared to be  no  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's credibility itself.  There was no engagement with the claim
    by the appellant that he had lost contact with his family and therefore
    was unable to be in a position to  request  documentary  evidence  from
    them even if it were available.

12. That leads on to the third ground of challenge which was that the judge
    engaged in speculation.  I have already referred to this above  on  the
    basis that the  judge  appeared  to  apply  the  consideration  of  the
    evidence and the objective evidence as it is now rather than  in  1998.
    The judge did consider paragraph 43 that  the  authorities  would  have
    issued arrest warrants  against  him  but  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had made "no efforts over the  course  of  sixteen  years  to
    obtain from China any evidence to support his  claim".   This  did  not
    engage with the appellant's submission that the appellant had not  been
    aware of his refusal up until 2012 and  he  was  not  able  to  produce
    documents going back to 1998.

13. There is further support for the contention that the judge had erred in
    speculating in relation to the appellant's case and HK v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037,  paragraph  39  was
    cited whereby Lord Justice Neuberger stated,

    "inherent probability, which may be helpful in many domestic cases, can
    be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate, factor to rely on in  some
    asylum cases.  Much of the evidence will be referable to societies with
    customs and circumstances which are very different from those of  which
    the members of the fact-finding Tribunal have any  (even  second  hand)
    experience.  Indeed, it is likely that  the  country  which  an  asylum
    seeker has left will  be  suffering  from  the  sort  of  problems  and
    dislocations with which the overwhelming majority of residents in  this
    country will be wholly unfamiliar.  The point is well-made in  Hathaway
    (on law of refugee status) [1991] at page 81: "in assessing the general
    human rights information, decision makers must constantly be  on  guard
    to avoid implicitly re-characterising the nature of the risk  based  on
    their own perceptions of reasonability."

14. As I have pointed out the judge did engage in speculation at  paragraph
    43 although there was a reference at paragraph 28 that  there  was  now
    evidence that the authorities issued  persons  such  as  the  appellant
    official documents I am not persuaded that there was evidence that this
    was the case in 1998.

15. Again at paragraph 47 the judge states:

         "Having regard to XH above, I consider that there is a  sufficiency
         of basis upon which to conclude that if  returned  to  China  there
         remain persons in the Appellant's family  circle  to  whom  he  may
         reasonably be able to turn to assist with discharging any fine that
         may be raised against him for  having  like  many  others  departed
         China illegally."

16. The judge did not appear to engage with the facts in this case that the
    appellant's claim was that he was not in contact with  his  family  and
    indeed, at paragraph 48, the judge noted that the friend with  whom  he
    was living did not appear to support him at the hearing.

17. As such I find that there was an inadequate reasoning  in  relation  to
    the findings of XH and this is an error of law.

Notice of Decision

I find that The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set
aside the decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date 29th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

