
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08063/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2014                          |On 4 December 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                        Ms SYEDA FATIMA ZAHRA HAROON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. It is not in issue that the appellant is a national of Pakistan who was
    born on 6 November 1978.  She entered the United Kingdom on 7 February
    2011 with a UK Tier 4 student visa valid until 29  June  2012.   On  17
    July 2012 she made an appointment to attend the Asylum  Screening  Unit
    and did so on 15 August 2012 when she claimed asylum.

 2. The appellant said in her asylum interview that  she  had  undergone  a
    marriage against her will when she was 26 years old and  that  she  had
    been subjected to extreme domestic violence at the hands  of  her  "now
    estranged" husband.  He joined her in the  United  Kingdom  around  two
    months after her arrival and although his abuse of her during that time
    was confined to verbal threats he scared her enough to leave him  which
    she did in mid-April 2012.  By then he had called his father  and  told
    him that the appellant had threatened to report him to  the  police  in
    the UK.  Her father-in-law implied that she  would  be  harmed  on  her
    return to Pakistan and she thereafter received e-mails from him.

 3. On 29 August 2012 the appellant's asylum claim was refused and she  was
    served with a decision to remove her.  As stated  in  the  reasons  for
    finding that the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law such that the
    determination fell to be set aside it was significant that no  material
    facts in the appellant's case were rejected by the respondent  although
    the decision-maker stated that it was uncertain whether  she  had  been
    the subject of domestic violence.  This appeared to have  been  on  the
    basis that the medical evidence upon which the appellant relied did not
    state the cause of her injuries.

 4. The key reasons given for rejecting her claim for asylum were  that  as
    an educated and professional woman she was not at real  risk  of  being
    killed or made subject to inhuman or degrading treatment on her  return
    to Pakistan, and that she would be able  to  relocate  from  Lahore  to
    another area of Pakistan where she would be able to live independent of
    her family.  She had not explained how it was that her  family  or  her
    husband's father would be able to  find  her  in  Pakistan  should  she
    relocate to another large city.

 5. The appellant appealed unsuccessfully to the First-tier Tribunal.   The
    determination which was promulgated on 17 September 2012 was set  aside
    by the Upper Tribunal on grounds of procedural unfairness and  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal on 1 October 2012 with the  direction  that
    the remitted appeal was to be on a  de  novo  basis  with  no  findings
    preserved, and the appellant was to prepare for  that  hearing  on  the
    assumption that her credibility was in issue in all respects.

 6. After a number  of  adjournments  and  considerable  delay  the  appeal
    ultimately came before Judge Elek  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  whose
    decision was set aside at a hearing on 8 May 2014 by a panel comprising
    the Honourable Mrs Justice Andrews DBE and myself.

 7. Although setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge we
    did not set it aside in its entirety for  the  following  reason.   The
    First-tier judge looked at the scars which the appellant asserted  were
    caused by injuries suffered as a result of  her  husband  beating  her.
    Although the medical reports produced by the appellant made no allusion
    to domestic violence the judge accepted  that  the  injuries  sustained
    were  consistent  with  her  account  and,  taking  into  account   the
    background evidence of violence against women in Pakistan to which  the
    judge had referred  in  detail,  she  accepted  that  there  were  some
    incidents of domestic violence. To that extent therefore a key issue of
    credibility was resolved in the appellant's favour.

 8. The representative for the Secretary of State at the hearing before  us
    agreed that the fact findings of domestic violence made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should be preserved and as a result  that  part  of
    the claim was not any longer an issue before me at the resumed hearing.



 9. There are a very large amount of documents before me.   I  do  not  set
    them all out here but  the  main  ones  comprise:  -  the  respondent's
    refusal  bundle  which  includes  a  typed  record  of  interview;  the
    appellant's bundle numbered 1-289; the respondent's  skeleton  argument
    and documents referred to; the respondent's  written  submissions;  the
    appellant's skeleton argument, and the expert report of Mrs Uzma Moeen.



The Appellant's Evidence

10. The appellant gave oral evidence before me in English.  She  relies  on
    three written statements.  The first and second in time are very  short
    and were written by her when she was detained at  Yarl's  Wood  Removal
    Centre in 2012.  The most recent statement is dated 7  May  2014  which
    was produced for the error of law hearing.

11. I have read those statements.  I have  also  read  the  record  of  the
    interview that took place  on  15  August  2012.   I  have  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant and she has been cross-examined at  length.
    My conclusion  is  that  the  appellant  has  been  telling  the  truth
    throughout.  Her evidence has been consistent and has  not  wavered  or
    changed in more than two years.  On cross-examination she did not  move
    her position.  She did not give monosyllabic answers but was willing to
    expand to explain those answers more fully.  I refer to the e-mails and
    why I accept the truth of them later in this decision.

Submissions

12. Mr Melvin submitted that the case of SN & HM (Divorced women - risk  on
    return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283 still provides relevant guidance
    in cases such as this.  Although that case is now some  ten  years  old
    the general questions that judges should ask  themselves  in  cases  of
    this kind are probably the same as they were  then  and  these  are  as
    follows:-

      a) Has the claimant shown a real  risk  or  reasonable  likelihood  of
         continuing hostility from her husband (or former  husband)  or  his
         family members, such as to raise a real risk of serious harm in her
         former home area?

      b) If yes, has she shown that she would have no  effective  protection
         in  her  home  area  against  such  a  risk,  including  protection
         available from the Pakistani State, from her own family members, or
         from a current partner or his family?

      c) If yes, would such a risk and lack  of  protection  extend  to  any
         other part of Pakistan to which she could reasonably be expected to
         go (Robinson [1997] EWCA Civ 2089, AE &  FE  [2002]  UKIAT  036361)
         having regard to the  available  State  support,  shelters,  crisis
         centres, and family members or friends in other parts of Pakistan?

           I agree that judges need to grapple with the matters set  out  in
SN & HM.

13. Mr Melvin submitted also that the appellant had deliberately sought  to
    mislead the Tribunal.  Nothing  suggests  that  the  e-mails  are  from
    Pakistan.  He generally took issue with their makeup and the  way  they
    concluded.  Would her mother really sign an e-mail in her full name?

14. As to the appellant's "expert's" report there was no record  that  Uzma
    Moeen is a recognised expert or that her evidence has ever been  tested
    by the Upper Tribunal and she appears to be a lawyer with  no  academic
    country experience relating to Pakistan and is employed by Asian  Legal
    Advice Service who appear to  be  a  group  of  legal  experts  at  the
    University of London.  Mrs Moeen is no more than an advocate seeking to
    assist the appellant and her evidence is no more than an argument  with
    the findings made by the Upper Tribunal in the  last  country  guidance
    decision KA & Others (Domestic violence - risk on return)  Pakistan  CG
    [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC).  There is nothing that  supports  the  assertion
    that anyone can  find  anyone  else  in  Pakistan  which  is  a  highly
    populated country.  The experts in the case of KA & Others were Drs Lau
    and Balzani who were instructed by the appellants' representatives with
    Dr Shah being instructed by the respondent.

15.  I  have  read  and  considered  the  appellant's  skeleton   argument.
    Furthermore I have had regard to the submissions from  Ms  Brown.   She
    made reference to the COI report from the Home Office  in  relation  to
    women;  the  Pakistan  background  information  including   actors   of
    protection; and internal relocation and the "women" section of the  COI
    report of July 2013.  This was updated as far  as  Pakistan  women  are
    concerned on  14  July  2014  and  is  therefore  the  most  up-to-date
    information before me.  Also before me is the  expert  opinion  of  Mrs
    Uzma Moeen which is dated 7 May 2014 to which there is an addendum  and
    an e-mail dated 11 November 2014.

My consideration of the evidence

16. I have borne very much in mind that the appellant  is  an  intelligent,
    well educated and capable woman.  Mr Melvin asked me to find that the e-
    mails that were produced that appeared to support her position  were  a
    complete fabrication but I do not find that  they  are.   At  an  early
    stage at interview the  appellant  was  asked  about  the  e-mails  and
    whether she was the sole author of all of them. She responded that some
    of them she wrote herself and some of them she did not.  For  instance,
    the e-mails to two NGOs she wrote herself but "I took  a  bit  of  help
    from my friends with the  NGOs  as  it's  a  bit  professional".   (See
    questions 79-82). She did not seek to exaggerate or mislead with regard
    to those e-mails.

17. Having said that I have noticed that there are one or  two  matters  to
    which I do not have answers.  They were not canvassed at  the  hearing.
    For instance, in an e-mail from The appellant's mother of May  10  2012
    she states the following:-

         ".......Your brothers are also of my opinion so be careful  we  are
         not going to appreciate you to  come  back  here  with  divorce  or
         separation.  Coz if anything wrong happens with you we will not  be
         responsible, we will only be crying and moaning on  your  fate,  so
         mind this here is no place for you.  You know we can't help you  in
         any case.  I don't want my sons to go for mishappenings as well.  I
         want them to live respectfully and not going for quarrels, I  don't
         to lose them, they also have their families, I am so scared for all
         this, do compromise with your husband and live with him."

    However, in an e-mail some four days later  (D14  of  the  respondent's
    bundle) the appellant's mother refers to

         "... still the  people  living  here  are  stubborn  towards  their
         customs, they will not spare you rather they will shoot your father
         and brother".

18. The appellant has said throughout that she has only one brother  so  it
    is difficult to understand  why  her  mother  would  have  referred  to
    "brothers" in the e-mail of 10 May and yet only to one brother in  the
    later e-mail.

19. There is a further e-mail from the appellant's mother dated May  11  in
    which there is reference also to  one  brother.  It  may  be  that  the
    explanation is in the appellant's mother's relative lack of fluency  in
    the English language.  These are relatively minor matters and were  not
    put the appellant at  the  hearing  and  I  do  not  consider  that  of
    themselves these matters damage her credibility but they make  me  wary
    of accepting all that the appellant has said is the truth.

20. Considering further the e-mail  trail  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the
    appellant's visa ran out  on  29  June  2012.   The  appellant  was  in
    correspondence with  her  mother  prior  to  the  expiry  of  the  visa
    expressing her wish to go back home (D12  in  the  respondent's  bundle
    dated Friday May 11 2012).  In that e-mail the appellant says,  amongst
    other things, that she came to London to escape  from  everything,  and
    that her husband promised he would change his behaviour.   The  thought
    of being back in Pakistan and living with him scared  her.  This  is  a
    "begging" e-mail for her to be allowed to go back home to live with her
    family rather than to have to live in Pakistan with her husband or  his
    family.

21. The e-mails from her mother roundly  reject  the  suggestion  that  the
    appellant should return to her parents but they also cast some light on
    the attitude of the society in which the  appellant  lived  to  someone
    such as the  appellant  and  to  the  position  of  women  in  Pakistan
    generally.  The appellant's mother makes it very plain that she accepts
    that the  appellant's  husband  is  not  mentally  fit,  but  that  the
    appellant still has to live with him and that the appellant's mother is
    not in a position to help the appellant.

22. On 13 May 2012 the appellant acknowledges the point made by her  mother
    that it may affect "your family badly".  This elicits the response that
    the appellant's in-laws are very stubborn and they will not  spare  the
    appellant .....

         "... and us as well they will kill your brother or they  will  harm
         your sister, I can't protect you, nobody is here  to  help  you  or
         your family; if court takes any decision in  your  favour  here  in
         Pakistan, still the people living here are stubborn  towards  their
         customs, they will not spare you rather they will shoot your father
         and brother."

    Later that month the appellant sent two e-mails  to  NGOs  in  Pakistan
    referring to her plight and the fact that her student visa was about to
    expire and also that she was planning to return to Pakistan.  Those  e-
    mails make clear that the appellant does not  want  to  live  with  her
    husband as she wants a divorce but refers to her parents being  against
    this and not wanting to help her in any way.  She states  that  she  is
    very stressed out and lost and does not really know what to do  because
    she fears that her husband is going to take out all his  anger  on  her
    and will hurt her.  She refers also to not being in  contact  with  her
    husband as they do not live together and she does not know what are his
    plans.  She would not be staying with her in-laws and  her  parents  do
    not want her back and she is not safe "in both places".

23. The evidence is, and it has  not  been  controverted,  that  she  heard
    nothing in response  to  those  e-mails.   There  are  further  e-mails
    passing between the appellant and her friends in Pakistan who tried  to
    intercede with  her  family  without  success.  On  13  July  2012  the
    appellant's friend Zunaira Iqbal writes as follows:-

         "I am doing fine.  But I am really worried  about  you.   I've  met
         your family today again.  I didn't find  any  change  than  before.
         Even this time they were very rude to me.  I was hoping  that  they
         might be thinking about you but I was  wrong.   They  are  like  as
         before mean minded.

         Fatima! sweetheart try to understand they are  not  thinking  about
         your protection, life and happiness.  They are  still  holding  the
         issue of their dignity and  self-pride.   I  tried  my  hardest  to
         convince them but in vain.

         Don't come to Pakistan in these circumstances.  It's not  safe  for
         you.  My pr(a)yers are for you dear, take care of your health.   My
         last advice for you is stay there in any case."

24. It is reasonable to assume that it was this last  e-mail  that  finally
    triggered the appellant making an appointment on 17 July 2012 to attend
    the Asylum Screening Unit.

25. The appellant's evidence at the hearing was that her contact  with  her
    friends in Pakistan diminished over a period  "slowly  slowly"  because
    she is worried about what action her  father-in-law  may  take  against
    them.  They are her good friends and she does not want them  to  be  in
    trouble and she is scared to contact anyone.  Her parents have disowned
    her - and there are documents in the papers to evidence  this.   It  is
    likely that in part her parents disowned her to appease the appellant's
    father-in-law in some measure with the hope that by doing so they would
    secure  their  own  protection.  Alternatively,  I  am  alive  to   the
    possibility that this is  purely  contrived  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's contention that she has no one to whom she  could  turn  in
    Pakistan.

26. Having heard evidence from the appellant that was tested  under  cross-
    examination and having considered all these matters in the round I find
    that the e-mails are not false ones  for  the  purpose  of  aiding  the
    appellant's application. Although  she  is  intelligent,  educated  and
    capable and could have been afforded considerable help by  her  friends
    and family to manufacture evidence I do not  find  that  this  is  what
    occurred. It would have been a formidable task to set up such  a  story
    over a number of months. The e-mails make sense in  context  and  apart
    from the presence of one e-mail from the appellant's  mother  in  which
    some of the contents are unexplained all the others are consistent, fit
    well together, and accord with the  appellant's  oral  evidence.  As  a
    result I find that  the  appellant's  family  members  no  longer  have
    contact with the appellant. This is because of the  problems  that  the
    appellant's father in law has made for the family as a  result  of  the
    breakdown of the appellant's marriage  and  the  shame  that  this  has
    brought upon them.

27. As to the appellant's friends in Pakistan I do  not  accept  so  easily
    that there is any likelihood that they could be  in  trouble  with  the
    appellant's father-in-law by keeping in contact with the appellant  and
    this is because I do not understand by what means he would be  able  to
    make trouble for them or know that they were still in contact.  I  have
    considered also that it helps the appellant's case not to be in contact
    with anyone in Pakistan but I prefer  the  view,  because  I  find  the
    appellant credible, that this is not a deliberate ploy on her  part  to
    distance herself from friends and family.

28. I find that the appellant could have done more to contact NGOs or other
    possible sources of help in Pakistan to establish what help  she  might
    obtain from them.  One e-mail to two organisations written in 2012 does
    not indicate to me that she has made a big effort to establish how  her
    own country might be able to help her live without fear of harm.  It is
    likely in my view that she has  persuaded  herself  that  whatever  the
    future holds it is not  a  future  in  Pakistan  because,  subjectively
    anyway, she fears that her father-in-law will be able to establish  her
    whereabouts anywhere in  Pakistan  and  cause  her  harm  for  bringing
    dishonour to his own family.

29. What of her father-in-law?  There are two e-mails from him.  The  first
    is dated August 11 2012 and states as follows:-

30. "Fatima,

         I have been trying to reach you through phone but you have not been
         attending my calls lately.  I need to  talk  to  you  about  a  few
         issues and I hope you will understand and not disappoint me.  First
         of all who do you think you are?   I  got  you  married  to  Haroon
         despite of him being married to Bina just because I wanted  you  to
         give my family a grandson which you have been unable  to  do.   The
         only reason I went out of my way to get you married  was  this  but
         you have disappointed us.  Secondly I'm giving you  the  option  to
         come to Pakistan and stay with me because I will never let you stay
         anywhere else.  If you are thinking that you will stay in  Pakistan
         and I will not find out then you are mistaken because that's  never
         going to happen, I am not a kid I have a lot of contacts  with  the
         police and army it's not very hard for me to use those contacts  to
         find you in case you come back and hide somewhere.  Fatima you know
         it very well that if and when I say something I mean it, and I have
         been saying that to you for quite sometime now.  I hope you realise
         this well before time, if you don't want to get  into  trouble.   I
         still don't understand the reason why you want to take divorce from
         Haroon.  The reasons you give to me for that  decision  don't  make
         much sense because everyone here beats his wife so you are not  the
         only one who had to suffer and go through it.  How  many  women  do
         you know who do not have to go through it.  So stop complaining all
         the time and try to work on this relationship.  I have told you all
         these things so many times so I am not going to repeat myself  over
         and over again.  All I have to say is that you know Haroon's mental
         condition very well do you know you can expect anything  from  him,
         its nothing new you have been living with him for so many years you
         have an idea so don't even think for leaving him.  Come to Pakistan
         and settle this issue without creating a scene otherwise  you  will
         be responsible for the consequences.  I think you are in denial.  I
         want you to take my calls so  I  can  make  arrangements  for  your
         ticket."

    A further e-mail from the same person is dated 11  September  2012  and
    says as follows:-

         "Fatima,

         I have been trying to contact you but your  mobile  number  is  not
         going through and why are you ignoring  my  phone  calls?   I  just
         heard that you are trying to get some sort  of  protection  in  UK.
         What do you think that would you be able to do  so.   Fatima  don't
         even think that you would be able to humiliate me  and  my  family.
         You know me and my resources very well that if I  am  able  to  get
         updates about your activities living in Pakistan I  can  very  well
         get you back to you homeland.  Do  not  do  this  to  me  you  have
         already done whatever you wanted to do in UK it's unacceptable  and
         a matter of social honour for me now.

         I have contacted to my friend who works in airport and passed  your
         details to him that as soon as you will land I  will  be  informed.
         So it is better for you to contact me before getting in any trouble
         due to all this just come back quickly."

31. As we observed at the error of law hearing on  any  view  that  message
    contains not so thinly veiled threats and might be regarded  as  giving
    rise to a legitimate concern that if she were to return to Pakistan the
    appellant might not get as far as a women's refuge, because  she  would
    be tracked down before she even left  the  airport.   It  supports  the
    appellant's case that her father-in-law has friends in high places  and
    that she could not hide from him simply by going to live  elsewhere  in
    Pakistan.  It must have been of  concern  to  the  appellant  that  she
    attended the Screening Unit on 15 August 2012 and claimed asylum but by
    11 September her father-in-law was already aware that she was  claiming
    "some sort of protection" in the United Kingdom.

32. Furthermore the appellant's mother wrote an e-mail on  4  October  2012
    which said as follows:-

         "Fatima,

         I have heard from one of my friends  that  you  have  appealed  for
         asylum, Fatima! What  the  hell  are  you  doing?   Why  are  (you)
         creating problems  for  us,  your  father-in-law  came  day  before
         yesterday, and threat us that if we are going to you in allowing to
         give you shelter in our house, he will  harm  your  younger  sister
         Maryam, we are really scared.  We can't bear this situation, we are
         old and nobody is our strength here, they mean what they  say,  you
         know they have long hands, your father is scared and worried, he is
         not allowing you to come here ever, he says  you  are  disgust  for
         him,  he  is  ashamed  for  being  your  father,  you're   creating
         disrespect and disgrace for him, he is saying he will rather prefer
         to die instead to bear this disgrace.  He is ashamed  to  face  all
         relatives, all are calling names on  him.   Why  don't  you  accept
         Haroon and bear him, live with him don't go anywhere don't think to
         come to us, we can't afford any mishappening.

         For your kind information your brother Ali has left us, he has gone
         somewhere else with his family, he  don't  want  to  stay  with  us
         because of you, as you are disgrace for him as well, he will  never
         help you, he says, I don't want any problems for my family.  Fatima
         is your daughter, I can't help her creating danger for my wife  and
         kids, rather I will kill her.

         Now it is up to you to make life miserable for us or help  yourself
         there.  Your father-in-law is behaving madly, he will  never  spare
         you as you have made troubles for their family, it is their  insult
         that their daughter-in-law has decided to leave Haroon  their  son,
         Fatima make sure we are not in favour of you, therefore don't  ever
         try to comeback, they will harm you in all ways.  They will kill us
         or kidnap Maryam.

         Regards".

33. Another e-mail from the appellant's mother is dated 26 October 2012 :-

         "Fatima,

         I am getting all news of you, you are not following our  rules  and
         are not respecting our values.

         You are  not  a  good  daughter,  you  can't  expect  our  terrible
         condition, Fatima we are unable to bear the burden of your in-laws.
          They are continually harassing us, your brother has  left  us,  he
         has gone away with his family, why should  he  put  his  family  in
         danger, your father-in-law is saying again and again that they will
         not leave you, once they reach you.

         They are saying that we are hiding you somewhere so they will  harm
         us.  You can understand your sister is in danger.  Nobody  is  here
         to help us, what to do?  Tell me  should  we  go  for  suicide,  or
         should we allow them to abuse us daily outside our gate.

         Finally your father has decided to disown you so from now  you  are
         no one to us.  Mind this we are nothing to  you  we  are  going  to
         inform your in-laws to forgive us and do whatever they  want,  they
         are freehand, we are helpless.

         Bye."

My Findings of Fact.

34. As I accept the appellant's evidence and the truth of the  e-mails  for
    reasons already given some of the salient facts that I  find  are  that
    the appellant entered into a marriage in Pakistan when she was 26 years
    of age to a man who was already married and had two daughters.  She did
    this against her will.  Shortly after the marriage her  husband  became
    abusive to her, both verbally and  physically.   She  has  always  been
    extremely unhappy in that marriage.  She came to the United Kingdom  in
    February 2011 to study.  Her husband followed her here and although  he
    was verbally abusive he was not physically  violent  to  her,  probably
    because  the  appellant  threatened  to  report  him  to  the   police.
    Nevertheless the relationship did not improve and when the chance arose
    she moved to another address with the family with  whom  she  had  been
    staying.

35. Following her move there  has  been  no  contact  at  all  between  the
    appellant and her husband.  His whereabouts are not known to her.   Her
    parents are not supportive of her and, certainly, in 2012  reached  the
    stage that they were being harassed by the appellant's father-in-law to
    the extent that they disowned her publicly. Her father-in-law has  made
    threats which are not empty ones as he was able to establish  that  the
    appellant was claiming protection in the UK very soon  after  she  made
    her asylum claim.  As far as the appellant  knows  divorce  proceedings
    have not commenced either in the United Kingdom or in Pakistan.   There
    is no suggestion from the appellant or anyone else that  the  appellant
    has been or is in a relationship such that she might be accused by  her
    husband or in-laws of being an adulteress.  In oral evidence before  me
    she said she had finished with men.  Presumably that was on  the  basis
    of her experience with her husband.

Uzma Moeen's report

36. As far as the report from Uzma Moeen is concerned I have considered the
    points made by Mr Melvin and will go so far as to say that I treat with
    some caution what she has to say.  In her report she says  that  as  an
    experienced expert she  fully  understands  that  it  is  her  duty  in
    providing written expert reports and giving evidence to assist the Home
    Office or the court and that this duty overrides any obligation to  the
    party which has engaged her.  She has complied  and  will  continue  to
    comply with this duty.  She states  also  that  she  is  producing  the
    report as an expert witness on matters within her  expertise,  personal
    research and as a specialist in Pakistani law and practice.  She  gives
    details of her academic career and I note that she has provided reports
    to the Tribunal in other cases. In the ones that have been produced  to
    me, at least, there is no suggestion that  she  has  not  prepared  her
    reports in an objective manner or is in any other way not to be treated
    as an expert.

37. My concern, such as it is, and why I treat with some caution  what  Mrs
    Moeen has to say, arises from the error that she acknowledges that  she
    made and to which she refers in her addendum opinion of 6 October 2014.
    In paragraph 86 of her report of 7 May 2014 she made reference  to  the
    risk that the appellant might face returning to Pakistan with a  "young
    daughter".  "I must clarify that the  reference  to  a  child  in  this
    paragraph is inserted by error while  formatting  the  document".   She
    goes on to say that a detailed analysis of her report would  show  that
    it was not based on an assumption that the appellant would be returning
    to Pakistan with a  child.   The  difficulty  with  that  is  that  the
    reference to formatting suggests that this was  a  mistake  made  while
    cutting and pasting using material from another report.  There must  be
    a concern that in circumstances where each case is  fact  specific  and
    opinions are given on the basis of those facts a mistake such  as  this
    gives the appearance that in providing the opinion certain  facts  have
    been  taken  into  account  where  they  should  have   not   been   or
    alternatively have not been taken into account and  should  have  been.
    On balance, however, and in the light of  the  detail  into  which  Mrs
    Moeen has entered which is clearly specific to this appellant my  fears
    that this might be less than an expert opinion have been  allayed.   To
    find the report unreliable on the basis of one error would be close  to
    irrationality and I am unable to find any other errors even  though  at
    times it appears that the report appears  to  suggest  that  any  woman
    returning to Pakistan on her own would find no protection. If  that  is
    the suggestion I reject it. The country guidance case of  KA  &  Others
    and other cases do not support such a view.

38. The report refers in places to KA & Others which was a  case  heard  in
    April 2010 and is therefore now more than four and a half years old.

39. I note in paragraph 125  of  KA  &  Others  that  honour  killings  are
    described as a custom in which mostly women and some men  are  murdered
    after accusations of sexual infidelity.  The killers seek to avenge the
    shame that victims are accused of bringing to  their  families.   As  I
    have stated already there is no evidence before me that  the  appellant
    is at risk of an  honour  killing  by  reason  of  any  alleged  sexual
    infidelity.  At paragraph 15  of  her  report  Mrs  Moeen  states  that
    thousands of women are murdered in the name  of  honour  due  to  their
    actual or  perceived  "immoral"  or  "irreligious"  behaviour  and  for
    bringing shame to their families.

40. I note also that the Home Office in its refusal letter dealt with  this
    issue on the presumption that there is an effective legal mechanism  to
    deal with violence against women in Pakistan and that reforms  are  now
    in place to assist women in situations similar to the appellant and has
    suggested internal relocation to avoid the likely  harm.   However,  in
    Mrs Moeen's opinion, based on objective evidence in Pakistani  society,
    women like the appellant who seek  to  extricate  themselves  from  the
    violence of their husbands (independent of their families' wishes)  are
    seen as rebellious and adulterous and are often  chased,  tracked  down
    and eventually exterminated by their estranged husbands, in-laws,  even
    by their own families to restore their honour.  In  paragraph  16  some
    women who seek divorce or separation  suffered  mutilation  i.e.  their
    nose, ears and hair are cut off by angry  revengeful  husbands  or  in-
    laws.  Acid throwing is another abuse inflicted on women to "teach them
    a lesson".  The appellant herself referred to  her  fears  of  an  acid
    attack in oral evidence.

41. Mrs Moeen has given a few examples of well publicised  honour  killings
    that do not do more, in my finding, than indicate that they  occur.   I
    have no idea how many married couples there are in Pakistan but I  note
    that the population was  estimated  in  July  2008  to  be  nearly  173
    million.  I am more prepared to accept the point that women in Pakistan
    are seen as the repository of family honour - although not regarded  as
    honourable in themselves - and any perceived  slight  to  that  honour,
    whether true or not must be punished.  Mrs Moeen states that it must be
    punished and adds "in the most brutal way".  I am  not  persuaded  that
    every perceived slight to honour is punished in a brutal way but on any
    view there are repercussions in circumstances of  perceived  slight  to
    honour.

42. At paragraph 30 of the report Mrs Moeen takes issue with the Tribunal's
    view in KA & Others  regarding  reduction  in  violence  against  women
    and/or crime of honour killing in Pakistan due to legislative  reforms.
    The Tribunal observes that

          "the legislative reforms introduced  during  the  past  decade  to
         safeguard women against  violence  and  abuse,  in  particular  the
         Honour Killings Act 2004 and the adoption in 2006 of  the  Criminal
         Law Amendment Act to facilitate the prosecution of honour  killings
         have clearly had a significant effect."

    However, that was not all that the Tribunal said in  paragraph  212  of
    its decision.  It stated that it is clear from the background  evidence
    that honour killings remain a serious problem  in  Pakistan;  something
    like 600 women are killed each year in  such  killings.   The  Tribunal
    rejected the view that honour killings are as prevalent and  entrenched
    a problem as the experts and the authors of a report  called  "Safe  to
    Return?" contend that it was. Firstly,  the  Tribunal  found  that  the
    worst examples of the phenomenon  are  largely  confined  to  areas  of
    Pakistan where the Jirga systems still holds sway, such as  the  North-
    West Frontier Province.  Secondly, it  is  clear  that  the  continuing
    incidents of honour killings are predominantly located in  rural  areas
    of Pakistan, not in the urban areas.  Only then did the Tribunal go  on
    to  find  that  the  implementation  of  legislation  clearly   had   a
    significant effect.  Mrs Moeen at paragraph 34 onwards has been able to
    provide the latest  statistics  in  relation  to  honour  killings  and
    physical violence crimes which show that there  is  not  the  slightest
    indication that those crimes have decreased.  She also  refers  to  the
    other findings made in paragraph 212 of KA & Others and  provides  some
    evidence that show that a large number of women were victimised in  the
    province of Punjab and  in  the  capital  city  of  Islamabad  and  the
    Metropolitan City of Karachi indicating that honour killings are not  a
    "Jirga" based crime.  Her conclusion is that the Government of Pakistan
    is systematically failing to  provide  adequate  protection  for  women
    against abuses in the custody of  the  state  and  in  the  family  and
    community.  She opines that it is  reasonably  likely  that  once  (the
    appellant) returns to Pakistan  she  would  be  tracked  down,  chased,
    tortured and killed or mutilated either  by  her  own  family,  in-laws
    and/or estranged husband in the name of honour for bringing  shame  and
    disgrace to the family.

43. In paragraph 45 she finds that there is no realistic  possibility  that
    the state authorities in Pakistan will be of any meaningful  assistance
    to the appellant if she needs their help.

44. The report proceeds to comment  on  "all  female  police  stations"  in
    Pakistan and indicates there are none.  She opines at paragraph 55 that
    if returned to Pakistan if the appellant were to seek  assistance  from
    the police if it is needed it is likely that  she  would  face  serious
    hostility. The police as an institution have systematically  failed  to
    protect the common man - much less vulnerable women - and emerge  as  a
    failed and corrupt institution.

45. What of women shelters and NGOs?  In paragraph  61  and  following  Mrs
    Moeen notes that  state  and  private  shelter  homes  for  women  have
    miserably failed to protect women from the  clutches  of  criminalising
    opportunists much less to say from their own families, husbands/in-laws
    or extended family who would be after their lives  for  one  reason  or
    another.  The living  conditions  of  these  shelters  reinforce  women
    subordination  and  oppression  by  establishing  control  over   their
    sexuality and mobility instead of  providing  them  with  a  supportive
    environment  where  they  could  rebuild  their  own  lives.   Although
    agreeing that Pakistan is a large country more than half the population
    of all women are reportedly  subject  to  some  form  of  risk  due  to
    domestic and other forms of violence.   Given  the  limited  number  of
    shelters and/or safe houses the evidence shows that it  is  unrealistic
    to believe that they can provide any system of  real  protection  to  a
    lone woman such as the appellant.  Evidence that a  few  hundred  women
    have been  helped  is  neither  here  nor  there,  and  it  is  not  by
    coincidence that many  organisations  including  Amnesty  International
    warn that the number of shelters and refuges available in  Pakistan  is
    totally inadequate.  In her opinion it is a stretch too far  to  assume
    that a few  refuges  in  a  few  urban  areas  in  Pakistan  can  offer
    meaningful and effective protection to vulnerable women  who  fear  for
    their lives either by their own family members of any other opportunist
    criminals in Pakistan.

46. At paragraph 66 the most recent COIR  of  9 August  2013  is  said  to
    provide  all  sorts  of  self-contradictory  and  contrasting   reports
    regarding availability and  sufficiency  of  protection  to  vulnerable
    women by state authorities and  shelter  homes  maintained  by  NGOs  n
    Pakistan.  It is to be noted that the information provided in the  UKBA
    COIR of August 2013 at 23.171 is in sharp  contrast  to  the  realistic
    assessment of working with any such women's organisation in Pakistan.

47. At paragraph 23.173 and 23.174 of the same report I  pause  to  comment
    that the COIR is not necessarily self contradictory simply  because  it
    gives examples of evidence which is  produced  from  different  sources
    providing opposing views. It must be that such evidence is produced and
    referred to in an effort to enable an objective view  to  be  taken  by
    decision makers.

48. I note further that in KA &  Others  at  paragraphs  236  and  237  the
    Tribunal finds that the focus has to be not only on  the  provision  of
    available and adequate centres and refuges  but  also  on  the  general
    position of women who make use of such centres will find themselves  in
    in the longer term.  Referring to  the  "Safe  to  Return?"  report  it
    informed the Tribunal that although  in  several  centres  and  refuges
    women are expected to leave after a relatively short  time,  those  who
    run them do sometimes allow women to stay  longer  and  sometimes  even
    allow them back.  Paragraph 67 of the expert's report notes that mostly
    the shelter homes provide a temporary relief to vulnerable women.   The
    COIR with reference to the Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
    noted that sources indicate that shelters, both government and NGO run,
    try to reconcile victims with the  perpetrator  of  domestic  violence.
    According to the Shirkat Gah representative this occurs "sometimes"  as
    managers of shelters often believe that it is "safer" for women  to  go
    home.

49. Mrs Moeen then deals with  the  option  of  internal  relocation.   She
    agrees that Pakistan is  a  large  country  and  that  there  are  many
    vulnerable individuals living in that country.  However at paragraph 75
    of the report she talks  of  the  State  of  Pakistan  controlling  all
    information and important  data  of  its  citizens  through  compulsory
    registration with the  National  Database  and  Registration  Authority
    (NADRA).  It is mandatory for every citizen over 18  years  of  age  to
    register and to acquire a Computerised National Identity  Card  (CNIC).
    Every citizen needs a CNIC to seek employment, obtain accommodation, to
    buy and sell property, to open a bank account or  business,  to  get  a
    passport, etc.  Even the police or local authorities  in  Pakistan  are
    now bound to keep records of all tenants in their  localities.   It  is
    imperative for all landlords and employers to keep photocopies  of  the
    CNICs; the NADRA mobile SMS verification system is  available  for  the
    convenience of the public, in addition to public  and  law  enforcement
    agencies.  The public can verify any registered citizen instantly using
    their mobile phone.  The service is beneficial for the general  public,
    as it would allow them to verify the credentials  of  the  people  with
    whom  they  are  making  business  deals  and  can  also  verify  their
    employees, household workers, maids, etc.  At paragraph 78 since it  is
    imperative in  Pakistan  for  all  landlords,  and  employers  to  keep
    photocopies of these CNICs of their tenants or their employees, in  Mrs
    Moeen's opinion if they wanted to therefore it is  highly  likely  that
    her own family, her husband and/or  her  in-laws  who  would  hold  her
    personal  details  could  easily  get  greater  information  about  her
    whereabouts to that available to the public by winning  favour  of  the
    police or clerks of the NADRA offices (which  are  established  in  all
    cities and also have a central life database) by a simple  bribe  which
    is common practice in Pakistan.

50. In paragraph 80  Mrs  Moeen  is  aware  that  the  appellant  has  work
    experience in Pakistan but her profile would be changed if she  returns
    to Pakistan now.  She would be living  on  her  own  without  any  male
    member support.  In Pakistani society economic opportunities  for  such
    women are marked by gender bias and social stigma  attached  to  single
    women/working women.  This is so because people are  extremely  curious
    about one's family circumstances.   A  single  woman  could  not  avoid
    constant unwanted attention from inquisitive neighbours  and  male  co-
    residents in whatever accommodation she might secure, if she could even
    afford anything like a place to live by herself.  "I do not think" that
    the appellant would be safe  living  as  a  single  woman  anywhere  in
    Pakistan  because  Mrs  Moeen   is   acutely   aware   of   the   moral
    unacceptability of such an independent existence for a woman who  tries
    to remain respectable in Pakistan.  A single woman  would  be  seen  by
    many men in Pakistan as "fair game".  She would find  it  difficult  to
    protect herself, on her own in such a male  dominated  society  against
    unwanted advances by such men or even against rape or serious  physical
    harm.  The conclusion on that point is that being a  single/lone  woman
    it would be very difficult for her to find a respectable way to survive
    in Pakistani society because living alone and finding work she would be
    stigmatised as a  woman  with  bad  character  and  loose  morals.   At
    paragraph 23.96 of the COIR:

         "The Immigration and Refugee Board  of  Canada  (IRB)  noted  in  a
         response by its Research Director, dated  14  January  2013,  that,
         according to a representative from the Human Rights  Commission  of
         Pakistan it is "next to impossible" for  a  single  woman  to  live
         alone in Pakistan due to  prejudices  against  women  and  economic
         dependence."

51. The report of Mrs Moeen paints a very grim picture of life for women in
    the position of the appellant in Pakistan.  She has argued with some of
    the conclusions that were reached in  KA  &  Others  which  as  I  have
    mentioned previously is a case that is more than four and a half  years
    old.  Assuming that her report is correct - and there is none from  the
    respondent other than the COI report -   then  little  has  changed  in
    Pakistan in recent years for women, some of the conclusions reached  by
    the Tribunal in KA &  Others are simply wrong and a firm conclusion  is
    reached that the appellant will be in serious  trouble  on  her  return
    there.

52. I add for completeness that there is nothing to indicate  that  an  FIR
    has been issued against the appellant.  This is the first step that  is
    taken in a criminal case but then it  is  difficult  to  know  how  the
    appellant would have found out if one had been issued given that she is
    not in touch with anyone in Pakistan and she  has  not  actively  given
    information as to where she is living in the UK.

Conclusions

53. The appellant claims to be a refugee  whose  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would breach the UK's obligations under the Refugee  or  Person
    in Need of International Protection  (Qualification)  Regulations  2006
    and also that to remove her would breach the UK's obligations under the
    Human Rights Convention.  The burden rests upon the appellant to  prove
    that at the date of the hearing of the  appeal  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that she satisfies those requirements.

54. In Shah & Islam HL [1999] Imm AR 283 the House of Lords held that women
    in Pakistan constitute a particular social group because they share the
    common immutable characteristic of gender.  In a reported  case  of  AW
    (Sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT  31  (IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that there is systemic sufficiency of  state  protection
    in Pakistan but that an  assessment  has  to  be  made  as  to  whether
    effective  protection  is  available  in  relation  to  the  particular
    circumstances and profile of the person about whom a decision is to  be
    made.

55. On the facts that I have found the appellant suffered domestic violence
    at the hands of her husband and she received no protection in  relation
    to it.  On one occasion the evidence I accept is that the appellant was
    thrown down the stairs by her husband and kicked hard by him.   One  of
    their neighbours heard the appellant's screams and  called  the  police
    but the appellant's father-in-law bribed the police and they went away.
     This fits entirely with the background evidence.   Furthermore  it  is
    chilling evidence of the circumstances for many if not  most  women  in
    Pakistan to read of the attitude of the  appellant's  father-in-law  in
    his e-mail of August 11 2012:

         "The reasons you give to me for that decision (a reference to  the
          decision of the appellant to seek a divorce from  his  son)  don't
          make much sense because everyone here beats his wife  so  you  are
          not the only one who had to suffer and go through  it.   How  many
          women do you know who do  not  have  to  go  through  it  so  stop
          complaining all the time and try to work on this relationship."

56. I am satisfied that the appellant's father-in-law has made threats  and
    also that the appellant would receive no  help  from  her  parents,  or
    brother. Her sister is in no position to help her either.  On return to
    Pakistan she might be able to renew her friendships there but from what
    she said in evidence she would not wish to get her friends into trouble
    and it is apparent that she believes they would be in trouble  if  they
    took her side.

57. Although her  father-in-law  has  said  that  through  his  contact  or
    contacts at the airport he would be able to find her anywhere that  may
    not be the case upon her arrival but accepting what Mrs Moeen says, and
    bearing in mind that wherever she went the appellant would need to find
    accommodation and a job, she would appear on  the NADRA. If her father-
    in-law is as vengeful as I accept he appears to be  the  lapse  of  two
    years since any communication would be unlikely to aid the appellant in
    avoiding him.  There is evidence from the appellant and her parents  as
    well as the father-in-law himself that he has friends  in  high  places
    and influence in Pakistan  and  I  accept  that  evidence.  His  family
    background, his actions, and his knowledge of the  appellant's  actions
    lead me to conclude that he is likely to carry out or will  attempt  to
    carry out his threats.

58. The appellant may be able to go to a shelter of some sort but being  an
    educated woman she makes the very good point that it  would  be  easier
    for her to avoid her father-in-law if she were a village girl who could
    be integrated into a village without notice but as  an  educated  woman
    she would need a job to survive.  The position of women in Pakistan  in
    the same situation as the appellant since KA & Others was  decided  has
    not improved and I am not persuaded that the  shelters  that  might  be
    available to the appellant would give adequate protection other than in
    the short term on the facts as I have found them to  be.  Even  if  the
    report of Mrs Moeen paints a more pessimistic picture than is  in  fact
    the case for the majority of women I am not deciding this matter on the
    balance of probabilities. To the lower standard the appellant  succeeds
    in showing that there would not  be  adequate  protection  for  her  in
    Pakistan and that she is in danger of suffering treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 ECHR. On the particular facts of this case the appellant runs
    a substantial or real risk of serious injury or worse and the state has
    not provided adequate protection and is  not  in  practice  capable  of
    providing it for her.

59. Bearing in mind all those circumstances the appellant succeeds  in  her
    asylum claim.

Decision

60. This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds. As  a  result  the  appellant
    does not require Humanitarian Protection and that ground of  appeal  is
    dismissed. The appellant's appeal on Human Rights grounds under Article
    3 ECHR is also allowed.

61. No anonymity direction was sought and the circumstances do not  warrant
    one being made so I make no such direction.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


