
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08129/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2015                   |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     WJ
                       (anonymity direction NOt made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. E. Stuart King of Counsel, instructed by JD
                    Spicer Zeb Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan promulgated on 23 June 2015  in  which
    he allowed WJ's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent and to WJ as the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The application properly raises  concerns  that  the  IJ  had  not
         properly conducted the hearing, whereby he failed to avail  himself
         of the complete  arguments  presented  by  the  Appellant  and  the
         Respondent but short circuited the process to conclude  the  issues
         of credibility,  well-founded  fear  of  persecution,  returnabilty
         (sic) and proportionality of the decision on the results of the age
         assessment alone.   The  Secretary  of  State  was  precluded  from
         presenting her case, which was unfair and a significant  procedural
         error."

 4. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.

Submissions

 5. Ms Isherwood submitted that the  decision  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of  law.   I  was  referred  to  paragraph  [9]  of  the
    decision.  Points had been raised by the Respondent in the reasons  for
    refusal letter.  With reference to paragraph [24] of decision,  neither
    representative  had  had  a  chance  to  address   the   points   made.
    Discrepancies were referred to in paragraph [24].   With  reference  to
    the Rule 24 response this did not address the conduct of the hearing.

 6. Ms Stuart King  relied  on  the  Rule  24  response.   Given  that  the
    challenge was to the decision made under the  case  management  powers,
    the Respondent had to identify where she had  been  put  to  an  actual
    disadvantage as a  result  of  the  case  management  decision,  or  to
    demonstrate that an apparent disadvantage was  so  clear  that  justice
    could not be said to have been done  [7].   The  Respondent  complained
    that she was prevented  from  cross-examining  the  Appellant  but  the
    Respondent would only have been able to cross-examine the Appellant  if
    he had been called to give evidence [9].  It was  not  pleaded  in  the
    grounds that the judge reached conclusions not properly open to him  or
    which were inadequately reasoned [13].

 7. Regardless of the Appellant's claim, the judge found him to be entitled
    to refugee status as a result of his  age  and  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence from the Red Cross that he would be returning  to  Afghanistan
    as an unaccompanied minor, see paragraph [28] of  the  decision,  [13].
    It was submitted that his findings on risks to children in  Afghanistan
    were not flawed particularly given the fact that he had  regard  to  LQ
    (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005  and  AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16 (IAC).

 8. At the hearing she further submitted that the Respondent had not argued
    that the judge had not been entitled to reach the findings that he did,
    but that she wanted an opportunity to cross-examine the Appellant.  She
    submitted that there would be an error of  law  had  the  Secretary  of
    State been prohibited from cross-examining the Appellant.   However  it
    was not an error of law  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  have  been
    deprived of this as no request had been made for the  Appellant  to  be
    produced.  From the evidence  provided  it  did  not  appear  that  any
    request had been made.  She submitted that this was a  procedural  case
    management decision by the judge.  On  the  evidence  before  him,  the
    judge had reached findings which  were  open  to  him.   There  was  no
    dispute that the findings about the Appellant's age were unsustainable.



 9. She submitted that, in  consideration  of  his  protection  claim,  the
    Appellant was still a minor and would be returned as a lone minor.  The
    documentary evidence from the Red Cross showed that they had failed  to
    find the Appellant's family.  He had a protection claim solely on  that
    basis and there had been no challenge to that conclusion.

10. Paragraph [24] of the decision referred to the Appellant's fear of Hizb-
    E-Islami  and  the  authorities.   This  paragraph   acknowledged   the
    Respondent's challenges to his credibility but  found  that  given  his
    age, and applying  the  required  standard,  his  account  was  broadly
    consistent.  No challenge had been made to this  finding.   The  letter
    from the Red Cross dated 30 March 2015 had been before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

11. It was submitted that the appeal against  the  decision  was  based  on
    speculation  that  something  else  might  have  come  out  in   cross-
    examination.  There was no material error of law.  The complaint in the
    grounds was that it was an unusual way to approach case management, but
    the grounds failed to identify a material error of law caused  by  that
    approach.  The Respondent had not demonstrated how the findings of fact
    made by the judge had been affected.  The judge had  been  entitled  to
    make the decision that he did on the evidence before him.  He explained
    why he had approached the case in the way that he did.

12. In response Ms Isherwood submitted that there  had  been  a  procedural
    error and therefore the findings could not stand.  She  submitted  that
    the Red Cross continue to  search  for  the  Appellant's  family.   The
    Respondent did not  accept  that  he  was  an  unaccompanied  minor  as
    acknowledged in paragraph [16] of the decision.  She  stated  that  age
    was the starting point but was not the end of the road given  that  the
    asylum claim had not been believed.

13. She submitted that the Appellant did not fall under the criteria in  LQ
    and AA in the way stated because the Respondent had not  been  able  to
    put her case.  This affected the findings  in  paragraph  [28]  of  the
    decision.

14. Ms Stuart King responded that, even if  the  judge  had  erred  in  not
    allowing submissions on LQ and AA, the Respondent  had  not  identified
    how this was a material error of law.  She had not identified  why  the
    judge had not been entitled to make the findings that he did.

Error of law

15. I have carefully considered the grounds and the decision.  At paragraph
    [9] it states:

         "The representatives both accepted at the start of the hearing that
         the first matter to be determined was the Appellant's age.  If  the
         Appellant was still a minor, as he maintains, both  representatives
         accepted that the position taken by the Respondent in  the  reasons
         for refusal letter would be largely unsustainable.  This was mainly
         because the refusal letter is predicated  on  the  Appellant  being
         returned to Afghanistan as an adult."

16. At paragraph [16] the decision states that the Respondent accepted that
    the Appellant was an unaccompanied minor on his arrival in  the  United
    Kingdom.  "However the Respondent did not accept that the Appellant was
    still an unaccompanied minor.  The Respondent submitted that  as  a  19
    year old male, with no medical conditions, he would have little trouble
    relocating to Kabul."

17.  Later  in  the  same  paragraph  it  states  that   the   Respondent's
    representative   "helpfully   confirmed   in   submissions   that   the
    Respondent's position was that the Appellant would be  returned  as  an
    adult.  She did not seek to persuade me that if the Appellant was still
    a minor that he would not continue  to  fall  within  the  Respondent's
    policy on unaccompanied minors and would not be at risk  by  virtue  of
    his age".

18. The judge then went on to  analyse  the  age  assessment  reports.   In
    paragraph [23] he finds that applying the lower standard, the Appellant
    has made out his age and is a minor.

19. Paragraph [24] states:

         "It was not suggested that if the Appellant was the age  maintained
         that many of the Respondent's challenges to his credibility and his
         asylum claim fell away.   I  find  for  the  sake  of  completeness
         however that given his age and applying the lower standard  I  find
         that although his account was not without any  discrepancy  it  was
         nevertheless broadly consistent not only  within  itself  but  also
         with the country evidence.  In  light  of  this  I  find  that  the
         Appellant's family  did  flee  their  home  area  following  attack
         because of the family's involvement  with  Hizb-E-Islami  and  that
         they remained in hiding in Jalalabad.  I find  that  the  Appellant
         has a subjective fear of both Hizb-E-Islami and the authorities  in
         his home area and that this is well founded given the  killing  and
         kidnap of his uncles  and  the  disappearance  of  his  father  and
         brother."

20. The judge found that the Appellant was a minor.  In paragraph  [24]  he
    acknowledges that there were some  discrepancies  in  his  account  but
    finds that the account was "broadly  consistent"  both  internally  and
    with the background evidence.  In the light of this finding  the  judge
    finds that the Appellant has a well-founded fear both of  Hizb-E-Islami
    and of the authorities.

21. The judge then finds that  the  Appellant  falls  within  the  at  risk
    categories identified in recent country guidance [25].  He  finds  that
    the Appellant is an unaccompanied minor [26], and finds that given that
    he would be returned as an unaccompanied minor to Kabul  where  it  was
    accepted that the reception facilities were  inadequate,  he  would  be
    entitled to refugee status.

22. I find that the judge heard submissions on and took  into  account  the
    reports as to the Appellant's age.  The Appellant did not give evidence
    and was not cross-examined. The Respondent now submits that the failure
    to allow cross-examination is a  procedural  error  of  law  which  has
    disadvantaged the Respondent.  In the grounds it states that the  judge
    took the wrong approach "since it presupposes that nothing would emerge
    from cross-examination which would cause him to take a different view".



23. However, the Respondent has not disputed the judge's findings as to the
    Appellant's age.  The judge clearly finds that the Appellant is the age
    he claims to be and is still a minor.  The judge has  also  found  that
    the Appellant would be unaccompanied  on  return  to  Afghanistan.   At
    paragraph [16] of the  decision  it  is  noted  that  the  Respondent's
    representative did not seek to persuade the judge that if the Appellant
    was still a minor he would not fall within the Respondent's  policy  on
    unaccompanied minors.

24. I have considered the evidence which was before the First-tier Tribunal
    from the Red Cross including the most recent letter which was dated  30
    March 2015.  This states:

         "We refer to your enquiry of 24 July 2014 and very much regret that
         enquiries for the sought person  and  your  accompanying  relatives
         have been unsuccessful."

    Later in the letter it states:

         "The ICRC were able to speak to Imam Azim, who informed  them  that
         the entire enquirer's family moved from the village to  an  unknown
         destination some years ago, and he does not have any news of them."

25. The Appellant's bundle contains various  letters  from  the  Red  Cross
    including letters arranging appointments for the Appellant as early  as
    October 2013.  In the reasons for refusal letter at  paragraph  34  the
    Respondent stated that the Appellant had not provided any  evidence  to
    suggest he had made attempts to trace his family via the Red Cross.  It
    is clear from the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant had  been  in  contact  with  the  Red  Cross  who  had  been
    attempting to trace his family.  The most recent letter indicated  that
    the Red Cross had not been able to locate any  of  his  family.   Given
    this, the judge's finding that the Appellant would be unaccompanied  on
    return to Afghanistan is a finding which was open to him.  Additionally
    the judge had found, given the Appellant's age and applying  the  lower
    standard, that the  Appellant's  account  was  broadly  consistent  and
    therefore accepted that the Appellant's family had fled their home area
    following attack because of their involvement with Hizb-E-Islami.

26. Given that the judge found that the Appellant was a minor who would  be
    returning unaccompanied to Afghanistan, a finding  for  which  he  gave
    reasons and, given the evidence before him from the Red  Cross,  was  a
    finding  he  was  entitled  to  make,  how  the  Respondent  has   been
    disadvantaged by her failure to be able to cross-examine the  Appellant
    is not apparent.  The judge is clear that, even if he had not been able
    to accept  that  the  Appellant's  family  had  been  targeted  by  the
    authorities, which he finds in paragraph [24], that he would have found
    he would be entitled to refugee status because of his age and the  fact
    that he would be an unaccompanied minor [28].  It was  acknowledged  in
    paragraph [16] that it was not argued on behalf of the Respondent  that
    if the Appellant was still  a  minor  he  would  not  fall  within  the
    Respondent's policy on unaccompanied minors.

27. Although the  Respondent  has  identified  what  she  claims  to  be  a
    procedural error in the conduct of  the  hearing,  she  has  failed  to
    demonstrate that this is a material error given  the  findings  of  the
    judge who found that the Appellant  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Afghanistan due to being an unaccompanied minor.   There  has  been  no
    challenge in the grounds to the finding  that  an  unaccompanied  minor
    returning to Afghanistan would be at risk on return.

Notice of Decision

The decision does not involve the making of an error on a point of  law  and
I do not set it aside.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   Date 21 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
