
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber   Appeal number: AA/08148/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 March 2015                     |On 21 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                               XIAO NIAN WANG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Ms E Lagunju, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
    For the Respondent: Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of China, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State of 26 September 2014  to
    refuse her application for asylum. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Sanderson
    dismissed the appellant's appeal and she now appeals with permission to
    this Tribunal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's account and the appellant's delay in  claiming  asylum  and
    went on to accept that the appellant's account of events  in  China  is
    broadly credible. These findings are not  challenged.  In  summary  the
    Judge therefore accepted  that  in  2009  the  appellant  challenged  a
    decision made by the Chinese authorities to compulsorily  purchase  her
    land by lodging  an  appeal  with  the  Gui  Lin  City  Government  who
    subsequently decided to  maintain  the  decision  made  by  the  County
    Government. He accepted that the appellant then attempted  to  sue  the
    Government and that officials came to demolish two sheds she had  built
    on her land and that a fight broke out in which she  defended  herself.
    In January 2010 she was arrested by police and  detained  during  which
    time she was beaten unconscious. She was taken to hospital and  escaped
    from there. She returned to her home area and remained in hiding whilst
    her relatives arranged for her departure from China  using  snakeheads.
    She entered the UK and worked until she paid off the snakeheads who did
    not allow her to claim asylum. She claimed asylum when she had  cleared
    her debt.

 3. Having made these findings the Judge found that he did not accept  that
    the appellant's actions amounted to a  'political  act'  or  that  they
    would be seen  to  be  a  political  act  by  the  Chinese  authorities
    sufficient to engage the Refugee Convention [38]. The  Judge  concluded
    that the dispute was 'basically a local  land  dispute'  and  that  the
    appellant had adduced no evidence to show that she would be subject  to
    criminal or administrative detention in rehabilitation  through  labour
    camps or 'black jails' where there would be a risk of torture, abuse or
    mistreatment. The Judge considered paragraph 339K  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in relation to the appellant's previous persecution but concluded
    that it is not likely that such behaviour will be repeated  given  that
    the appellant left China three and a half years ago and no evidence has
    been adduced that she would be at real risk of ill treatment on  return
    [38].

 4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in finding that the appellant's  past  experiences
    in China did not amount to a political act in  light  of  her  evidence
    that during the interrogation the police wanted her to admit  that  she
    organised  villagers  against  the  government,  that   the   Americans
    supported them and that they were against the Chinese communist  party.
    It is further contended that in finding that the appellant had  adduced
    no evidence that she would be subject  to  criminal  or  administrative
    detention in rehabilitation through labour camps or 'black jails' where
    there would be a risk of torture, abuse or mistreatment the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to have regard to  the  appellant's  evidence
    that she is wanted by the authorities in  China  following  her  escape
    from hospital and that  there  had  been  continuing  interest  in  her
    whereabouts after her escape as the police had come to her aunt's house
    asking about her whereabouts.  It is further contended that  the  Judge
    had failed to give 'good reasons' as required by paragraph 339C of  the
    Immigration Rules for concluding that the appellant  would  not  be  at
    risk on return in light of her previous persecution.

 5. Ms Lagunju submitted that the Judge's findings as  to  risk  on  return
    were inconsistent with the background evidence he set out at paragraphs
    23-28 of the determination. She submitted that the Judge's  conclusions
    cannot be correct in light of his findings that the appellant's account
    is objectively and  internally  consistent.   She  submitted  that  the
    appellant is both a petitioner and as set out in  paragraph  24  and  a
    person who had initiated a legal challenge as set out in  paragraph  27
    of the Judge's determination.

 6. Mr Kandola submitted that it was up to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the
    appellant's claim was based on a local land dispute notwithstanding his
    finding that the appellant had challenged the decision in  relation  to
    her  land.  He  submitted  that  the  Judge's  finding  amounts  to  an
    application of HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 in relation to the issue
    of what the appellant would do upon her return. He submitted  that  the
    Judge's finding that the appellant would not be harassed on  return  to
    her home area must be based on the assumption that the appellant is not
    going to continue in her behaviour upon her return. In the  alternative
    he submitted that there is a viable internal relocation option open  to
    the appellant.

 7. Ms Lagunju responded by submitting that all land disputes are local and
    that the appellant's involvement in a local  land  dispute  brings  her
    within  the  background  evidence.  She  submitted  that  there  is  no
    distinction in the background evidence between a land dispute which  is
    local and one which is not. It is the treatment of those  who  petition
    or challenge land decisions which is relevant. She submitted that there
    was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  as  to  how  the
    appellant is likely to behave if returned. In any event  she  submitted
    that this is not the question here, the issue is that the appellant has
    a profile as a petitioner who escaped  from  police  detention  and  is
    therefore likely to encounter difficulties  on  return.  She  submitted
    that the background evidence cited by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  at
    paragraph 28 states that internal  relocation  is  unlikely  to  be  an
    option in a case like this.

Error of law

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made very clear findings  of  fact  which
    have not been challenged. He helpfully set out the relevant  background
    evidence from the China Operational Guidance Note of 12 October 2013 at
    paragraphs 23 - 28 of his determination.

 9. In my view the  difficulty  with  the  decision  is  that  the  Judge's
    conclusions at paragraph 38 are not consistent with the evidence before
    him or the background evidence he sets out.  He  accepted  all  of  the
    appellant's case. This included the appellant's  claim  in  her  asylum
    statement that she and others from her village went to the Gui Lin City
    government to submit an application for a review  of  the  decision  to
    take their land, that she and others from the village  went  to  Li  Pu
    County Court to sue the government,  that  the  court  ruled  in  their
    favour but the county government ignored the court  decision  following
    which the appellant was arrested, detained and beaten up and  that  she
    escaped from hospital where she was under police guard.  The  appellant
    also said in her asylum statement that whilst she was in hiding  police
    shot a protestor during a fight in her village and that  she  is  still
    wanted by the authorities in China because she escaped from custody and
    that police had come to her aunt's house to ask about  the  appellant's
    whereabouts.

10. In considering risk on return the Judge erred in  concluding  that  the
    appellant's actions would not be seen as a political act  in  light  of
    the  evidence  before   him   that   citizens   risk   punishment   for
    demonstrating, that there is  growing  public  anger  against  unlawful
    activity by officials  especially  land  confiscation  and  that  those
    petitioning the  government  faced  restrictions  on  their  rights  to
    assemble and raise grievances [23-24]. The evidence is that  despite  a
    ban by regulations, retaliation against petitioners continues and  that
    petitioners are routinely harassed, detained and tortured [24] and that
    those who peacefully resist forced eviction or sought to protect  their
    rights through legal channels risked detention,  imprisonment  and  re-
    education through labour [27]. In my  view  this  evidence  supports  a
    conclusion that actions such as petitioning, protesting or taking legal
    action in relation to land disputes are capable  of  amounting  to  the
    demonstration of an imputed or  real  political  opinion  and  thus  of
    engaging the Refugee Convention.

11. I also conclude that the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that there is no risk that the persecution suffered
    by the appellant in the past  will  be  repeated.  Ms  Lagunju  rightly
    submitted that there was no evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to support a finding that  the  appellant  would  not  engage  in
    further petitions or challenges upon her return. In any event the Judge
    failed to take account of the fact that the appellant had escaped  from
    custody and may well risk arrest on the basis of her past  actions  and
    escape.

12. In light of these errors I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remake it. As there is no challenge  to  the  findings  of
    fact they are all preserved.

Remaking the decision

13. The appellant took part in petitions to the Gui Lin City government and
    a challenge to the Li Pu County Court as a result of which she came  to
    the attention of the police. She was arrested, detained and  beaten  by
    the police and escaped from custody when  being  treated  in  hospital.
    This account is consistent with the information contained in the  China
    Operational Guidance Note set out in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    determination. According to the appellant the authorities came  to  her
    aunt's house to look for her after her escape.  On  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's account  of  events  in  China  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is at risk of persecution on return to  her  home  area.  The
    Operational Guidance Note states that  where  an  appellant  fears  the
    Chinese government internal relocation is unlikely to be an option. The
    appellant in this case fears the government and  I  am  satisfied  that
    internal relocation is not an option for her.

14. In light of all my findings above I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant
    faces a real risk of persecution  or  breach  of  her  protected  human
    rights in China.

Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum  grounds.  As  a
    result the appellant does not require Humanitarian Protection and  that
    ground of appeal is dismissed. The appellant's appeal on  Human  Rights
    grounds under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR is also allowed.



Signed      Date: 20 April 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


