
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08827/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |         Determination           |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 25 March 2015                          |         On 10 April 2015        |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     SKM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse of Counsel, instructed by Haris Ali,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   Beach dismissing an appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born in 1995 and is  a  national  of  Afghanistan.   He
   left Afghanistan around February 2009 and claimed asylum  in  the  UK  in
   August 2009 after entering clandestinely.  His claim was refused  but  he
   was given discretionary leave until December 2012.  In the same month  he
   made an application for further  leave  to  remain.   This  was  refused,
   giving rise to the present appeal.

3) The appellant claimed that his father  was  involved  with  Hizb-i-Islami
   and was executed by the Taliban as  a  suspected  spy.   The  appellant's
   family was in a  violent  dispute  with  his  father's  cousins  over  an
   inheritance.  The cousins were associated with the Taliban.  The  Taliban
   wanted to take the appellant as a child soldier or suicide bomber and  it
   was because of this that the appellant's family arranged for him to leave
   Afghanistan.

4) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  believe  the  appellant's
   evidence and because of this the appeal was dismissed.  The decision  was
   challenged in the application for permission to appeal  on  a  number  of
   grounds.  It was alleged that the judge misdirected  herself,  failed  to
   consider  relevant  evidence  and  failed  to  give   adequate   reasons.
   Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  the  grounds  were
   arguable.

5) A Rule 24 notice dated 11 February  2015  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
   submitted that the judge had properly assessed  the  credibility  of  the
   appellant's account and had given adequate reasons.  Taking the claim  at
   its highest the judge found the alternative available to the appellant of
   relocation to Kabul.

6) At the hearing Ms Hulse addressed me in relation to the  grounds  of  the
   application.  She referred, in particular, to a  medical  report  on  the
   appellant by Dr Juliet Cohen.  This medical report pointed out  that  the
   appellant had problems with his memory.  The judge  did  not  take  issue
   with this diagnosis but nevertheless found that significant points in the
   evidence given by the appellant were not satisfactorily  explained.   The
   judge in so doing did not take account of the medical evidence about  the
   difficulty the appellant had in remembering events.   The  judge  further
   found that  the  appellant  had  acquired  skills  and  had  received  an
   education which he would be able to use in  Afghanistan  but  again  this
   contradicted the medical evidence.  Ms  Hulse  referred  as  well  to  an
   expert report on behalf of the  appellant  by  Dr  Giustozzi.   Ms  Hulse
   suggested that the family dispute with the appellant's  father's  cousins
   had been wrongly categorised as a blood feud when in fact it was a family
   quarrel over land.  The judge commented that Dr  Giustozzi  had  accepted
   the appellant's  evidence  as  proven  but  this  was  not  correct.   Dr
   Giustozzi had been asked in his report to address certain points  and  he
   had done so.  Ms Hulse commented in particular on a finding by the  judge
   that the appellant had raised the issue that his father might  have  been
   considered by the Taliban to be a spy only after this was suggested in Dr
   Giustozzi's  report.   However  the  statement  in  which  the  appellant
   referred to his father having been suspected of being a spy pre-dated  Mr
   Giustozzi's report.  The judge's conclusion that the appellant  had  made
   this claim only after Dr Giustozzi had written his report was  completely
   wrong.

7) Ms Hulse pointed out that the judge had discounted the  evidence  of  the
   appellant's mother on the basis that  the  appellant's  mother  would  be
   bound to support him.  Ms Hulse submitted there was no authority  to  say
   that the evidence of the family member could be disregarded without more.
    The judge might bear in mind that a mother would want to support her son
   but it did not follow that her evidence should be disregarded.

8) For the respondent, Mr Clarke submitted that the judge  was  entitled  to
   come to the conclusions she did  in  relation  to  the  evidence  of  the
   appellant's mother.  Her evidence was not  rejected  because  she  was  a
   relative but because the judge had already made  an  adverse  credibility
   finding in respect of the appellant.

9)  Mr  Clarke  acknowledged  that  Dr  Giustozzi's  report  post-dated  the
   appellant's claim that his father had been treated as a spy but Mr Clarke
   submitted that this was not  material.   The  death  of  the  appellant's
   father was raised four years after the appellant  came  to  the  UK.   Mr
   Clarke acknowledged that at the time the appellant arrived in the  UK  he
   thought his father was still alive but the point about whether his father
   was regarded as a spy  was  not  material.   The  issue  of  whether  the
   appellant's father was regarded as a spy was  not  determinative  of  the
   appeal.

10) Mr Clarke further pointed out that a witness on whom the  appellant  had
   relied to speak to his father's involvement in his Hizb-i-Islami had  not
   appeared at the hearing.

11) Among the various points raised on behalf of the appellant as  amounting
   to errors of law, there are two in particular which concern me.   One  of
   these relates to the suggestion  that  the  appellant  claimed  that  his
   father was  regarded  as  being  a  spy  as  a  result  of  receiving  Dr
   Giustozzi's report.  The second issue concerns the judge's  treatment  of
   the medical evidence in the form of the report by Dr Cohen.

12) The judge's reasoning, at paragraph 57, includes the following:

    "The appellant states that his father has since been killed  in  Kabul.
    There is very little detail with regard to the reasons for his father's
    death.  The appellant's mother gives some information in  a  report  to
    the authorities but this is undated and it is entirely  unclear  to  me
    why the report was made or why.  Given that the appellant's mother must
    have known that the appellant had claimed asylum and had  been  refused
    then it is not surprising that any document from her would support  the
    appellant's claim.  I find the document from the appellant's mother  is
    a self-serving document and does not provide  independent  verification
    of the appellant's claim.  I note also that  the  suggestion  that  the
    appellant's father might be considered to be a spy by the  Taliban  and
    this is why he was killed was only raised by the appellant after it was
    raised as a possibility in the expert report which is dated 15  October
    2013.  The appellant's witness who claimed to have attended the funeral
    has withdrawn his support from the appeal and so I can take no  account
    of that witness statement.  Mr RR simply states that  he  was  informed
    that the appellant's father had  died  in  2011  and  gave  no  further
    details as to how the appellant's father was allegedly killed.  I note,
    too, that although there is other documentary  evidence,  there  is  no
    death certificate for the appellant's father.  I  find  that  there  is
    insufficient evidence to show that the appellant's father was killed or
    that he was killed as a result of a targeted assassination."


13) In this excerpt from the determination the judge clearly  misapprehended
   the evidence in relation to  the  appellant's  account  of  his  father's
   death.  The appellant's statement indicating that  his  father  had  been
   killed as a spy by the Taliban was  dated  11  October  2013  whereas  Dr
   Giustozzi's report was dated 15 October 2013.  The appellant's  statement
   thus pre-dated the report and the claim that the appellant's  father  was
   executed as a spy was raised  by  the  appellant  before  Dr  Giustozzi's
   report was completed.

14) Mr Clarke submitted that this  misapprehension  by  the  judge  was  not
   material, in part because the death of the appellant's father took  place
   in 2011 after the appellant had left Afghanistan.  I disagree  with  this
   submission.  The issue was  used  by  the  judge  as  a  reason  for  not
   accepting the appellant's evidence as credible.  The judge's reasoning on
   this point related to the appellant's overall credibility and not to  his
   stated reasons for leaving Afghanistan or his fear of return.  It may  be
   pointed out that this was only  one  issue  amongst  several  credibility
   issues considered by the judge but it does seem  that  the  judge  relied
   upon these credibility issues cumulatively.  If  one  is  taken  away  as
   based on a misapprehension, it is difficult  to  know  what  the  judge's
   conclusions might have been without this factor.

15)  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's  misapprehension  on  this   point
   constitutes an error  of  law.   The  judge's  credibility  findings  are
   rendered unsafe by this error and the decision should  therefore  be  set
   aside.

16) I turn next to the judge's treatment of the medical report by Dr  Cohen.
    At paragraph 48 of the determination the judge quoted from  the  reports
   to the effect that the appellant's memory  and  concentration  are  poor.
   The report stated that the appellant often did not answer  questions  but
   responded at a tangent.  He struggled to recall details and was evidently
   distressed  when  pressed.   When  he  was  asked  to  recall  events  in
   Afghanistan he felt increasingly stressed  and  experienced  pain  and  a
   pressure sensation in his head.  He said that this was likely  to  happen
   again if he was questioned in court.  Dr Cohen concluded,  as  the  judge
   quoted at paragraph 49, that the appellant had very low  mood,  outbursts
   of anger and irritability, sleep disorder with nightmares  and  difficult
   falling asleep as well as waking through the  night.   Symptoms  of  PTSD
   were not particularly pronounced.  He did not  describe  an  incident  of
   overwhelming threat to life but there was so little disclosure about  his
   journey to the UK that Dr Cohen could not rule  out  that  there  was  an
   event during his journey that he had yet to disclose.  The causes for his
   mental health problems appeared to lie in his difficult  journey  to  the
   UK, his separation from his family and grief for the death of his father.



17) Because of his medical difficulties the appellant did not give  evidence
   at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  judge  recorded  at
   paragraph 53 that the medical evidence suggested that the appellant would
   find it extremely difficult to give evidence and the judge would not take
   any adverse  view  of  the  appellant  choosing  not  to  give  evidence.
   Nevertheless, at paragraph  56,  when  the  judge  came  to  examine  the
   evidence given by the appellant in his witness statement  and  previously
   as to the family land dispute and the attempt by the Taliban  to  recruit
   him, the judge rejected portions of the evidence seemingly on the grounds
   that it was not plausible, although the judge used  the  word  "credible"
   rather than plausible.  Indeed, it may be observed as an aside  that  had
   the judge approached the report  by  Dr  Giustozzi  as  related  more  to
   plausibility than credibility the judge's reasoning might have been  more
   soundly based.

18) So far as these particular  findings  of  the  judge  are  concerned  in
   relation to the  appellant's  claims,  I  do  not  consider  the  judge's
   reasoning is adequate, having regard to the medical evidence and also  to
   the report by Dr Giustozzi.  Given the appellant's memory  problems,  and
   taking into account his age and the expert's report, more  reasoning  was
   required by the judge before the appellant's account  could  be  rejected
   because crucial points were said to lack credibility.   I  consider  that
   this lack of adequate reasoning amounts to a further error of law by  the
   judge.

19) The appeal was listed before the Upper Tribunal  subject  to  directions
   stating that that the parties should prepare for the hearing on the basis
   that it would be confined to whether the determination of the  First-tier
   Tribunal should be set aside for legal error  and,  if  so,  whether  the
   decision could be re-made  without  having  to  hear  oral  evidence.   I
   consider that the nature of fact finding required in order to re-make the
   decision is such that it should be remitted for a full hearing  before  a
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge  Beach.   None  of  the
   findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal are to be preserved.

20) Ms Hulse stated that there was new evidence  now  available.   This  new
   evidence should be served on  the  other  party  and  submitted  for  the
   purpose of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal with, of course, an
   appropriate explanation as to why this evidence was not  produced  at  an
   earlier stage.  Regard should also be had to relevant  country  guideline
   cases.

Conclusions

21) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

22) I set aside the decision.

23) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  before
   a judge other than Judge Beach.


Anonymity

24) The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  This  will  remain
   in force pending the further hearing before First-tier Tribunal.




Signed                                             Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

