
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08009/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Date Sent                    |
|on 25 March 2014                              |On 7 April 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 MATTHEW OSEI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K H Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
Brown,
      Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 7 July 1973.  He arrived  in
   the UK on 7 March 2013 on a medical treatment visa,  accompanied  by  his
   wife and son (dependants in these proceedings)  on  visit  visas.   On  8
   April 2013, he sought asylum.

2) The respondent refused the claim for reasons explained in a letter of  20
   May 2013.  At paragraph 14 the respondent says that the appellant's claim
   has been:

             ... wholly  considered  at  the  highest  (meaning  as  if  all
       material aspects were accepted as being  true).   No  findings  have
       been made as to whether  the  material  aspects  of  your  case  are
       accepted as being true or not, rather an assessment has been made as
       to whether, even if your account were accepted as  true,  you  could
       still return to Ghana.

   At paragraphs 15-29, the  letter  holds  that  there  is  sufficiency  of
   protection available to the appellant, under reference to Horvath  [2000]
   UKHL 37 and to background evidence.   At  paragraphs  30-46,  the  letter
   analyses the availability of  internal  relocation  in  relation  to  the
   claimed facts, the geography  of  Ghana,  and  case  law.   It  is  found
   reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to major urban centres  in
   Ghana,  where  he  has  not  allegedly  experienced  any  problems.   The
   respondent certifies the claim as clearly unfounded,  with  no  right  of
   appeal from within the UK.

3) The appellant made further representations, asserting that since he  left
   Ghana unknown assailants threatened his family members,  enquiring  about
   his whereabouts; as a perceived supporter of the National Patriotic Party
   (NPP) his life would be in danger; there was a risk of  persecution  from
   the opposing party, the National Democratic Party (NDC); and as a  public
   figure with family living in different parts of Ghana, he  was  not  safe
   anywhere in the country.  He submitted a further newspaper  article,  and
   an extract from a police station diary.

4) In a further refusal letter dated 20 August 2013  the  respondent  refers
   again to background information about the public  authorities  in  Ghana,
   and in  particular  police  corruption.   At  paragraph  15  the  further
   newspaper report is considered to be "self-serving, in no  way  objective
   and ... provided by your family to help bolster your  claim."   Paragraph
   16 comments that the appellant has not explained why he  would  have  the
   original of an extract which the police would need for their records, and
   on the lack of detail which might be expected.  Paragraph 17 declines  to
   place reliance on the  documents  produced.   The  letter  maintains  the
   refusal of the claim, but does not certify it as clearly unfounded.

5) First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
   determination dated 2 November 2013.  At paragraph 36,  the  Judge  makes
   some observations on the most recent of the newspaper reports produced by
   the appellant,  and  clearly  has  doubts  about  its  authenticity,  but
   concludes by saying that  she  "simply  makes  these  observations".   At
   paragraph 40, the judge refers to evidence about recent elections,  which
   despite  some  problems  were  deemed  generally   free   and   fair   by
   international observers, with few reports of isolated violence.  There is
   a reference to one of nine judges who were hearing a  petition  regarding
   the Presidential election being threatened, as  a  result  of  which  the
   police ordered increased security at the residences of all  nine  judges.
   The judge goes on:

    41. Accordingly it would seem that the police do protect those who need
    assistance.  They could not offer assistance to the appellant as he  is
    not in the country.  The persons  who  were  threatened  and  who  made
    subsequent reports to the police were persons who had been targeted  by
    persons unknown looking for  the  appellant  specifically.   After  the
    appellant left the country, the police could do nothing.


    42. The appellant does have a political profile in Ghana.  However,  it
    cannot be said that his profile is  so  well  known  that  the  general
    public would know he had left the country.  The extract from the police
    diary suggests that the appellant's brother-in-law  should  inform  the
    police if the appellant returns ... there is an inference ... that  the
    police would give him protection.   It  is  still  not  clear  ...  who
    exactly is interested in him and why, given that he has not been in the
    country promoting peace for some months.


    43. I do not consider that the appellant engages either Articles 2 or 3
    of ECHR.  I do not accept that the appellant has been persecuted ... he
    has not made it known that he is a member of the NPP, so  there  is  no
    reason for him to be singled out on that basis.  At  the  time  of  the
    elections he had no problems.  There were a couple of threats  ...  the
    month before the elections ... and  then  the  appellant's  family  was
    targeted after he left the country, although there was  one  letter  to
    his wife in March 2013, just before  they  left  Ghana.   This  is  not
    indicative of a  problem  relating  to  the  elections.   There  is  no
    credible evidence of where the threats emanate from.   The  police  had
    noted the incidents and have said  in  the  extract  report  that  they
    should be informed if the appellant returns ... that implies they  will
    look out for him if he is returned.  There would in  the  circumstances
    appear to be no need for internal flight, although  that  would  be  an
    option, if the appellant felt it to be necessary.

6) Mr Forrest expanded on the appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal in a skeleton argument as follows:

                 1. Introduction: Two questions arise: first  was  there  an
                    error of law; and second, if so, what  can  be  done  to
                    correct it.


                 2. Was there an error in law;

                    1. The FTT summarises its conclusions between paragraphs
                       34 to 43.  In particular at paragraph 43, it is  said
                       that there is no evidence of past persecution.  There
                       are two problems with this: first, it  is  not  clear
                       what facts the FTT accepted and what it has rejected;
                       and second its focus has been on the past and not the
                       future:-


                       2.2.1 Findings in Fact; the difficulty which the  FTT
                       faced  was  that  the  Home  Office  appear  to  have
                       accepted that the newspaper extracts in which much of
                       the allegations on  which  the  appellant  founds  is
                       genuine.  The FTT plainly think it is not although do
                       not go as far as finding this, confining its  remarks
                       to "... simply (making) observations ..."  (paragraph
                       36).  The FTT do not make  any  findings  on  matters
                       which might be in  dispute  (and  from  the  [refusal
                       letter] and  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's
                       submission appear to be) such as whether  threatening
                       letters received and were members of his family/staff
                       threatened.  Such findings - one way or the  other  -
                       would  have  made  the  task  easier  of  identifying
                       whether the appellant had made out to the appropriate
                       standard whether  he  had  a  well  founded  fear  of
                       persecution if returned to Ghana.


                        2.1.2   Possible   future   persecution:   and   the
                       distinction between past  and  future  events  is  an
                       issue that follows on  from  the  above.   If  it  is
                       evaluation of future  risk  which  is  crucial,  then
                       findings in relation to what would happen  on  return
                       have to be made.  Admittedly some guidance as to this
                       can be  made  on  the  basis  of  findings  following
                       evidence about past events, but if there are none (or
                       they are inadequate as averred ... above), then there
                       is no basis on which future risk  can  be  evaluated.
                       There are "hints" of this in paragraph 43 where there
                       is discussion around the elections, but - crucially -
                       there is  no  discussion  of  what  might  happen  on
                       return.  Given (a) the inadequacy of findings in fact
                       and (b) such as have been  made  were  positive  (for
                       example that the appellant  is  a  public  figure  in
                       Ghana), this is an important omission.


                       2.2  Other:  points raised are:

                    1. Even if his account of persecution is  accepted,  the
                       findings about whether the police would  protect  him
                       seem  flawed  because  there  is  no  indication   on
                       evidence that he would  fall  into  the  same/similar
                       category of persons offered protection (paragraph 40,
                       41);


                    2. The option of internal relocation is not explored  in
                       any detail.

            3.   If so, what is the UT  to  do?  The  deficiencies  in  fact
                 finding discussed above are too excessive and important for
                 the UT to be able simply to re-make  the  decision  itself.
                 The appeal should be allowed,  and  the  case  remitted  to
                 another Immigration Judge of the FTT who should be directed
                 to make  specific  findings  particularly  in  relation  to
                 whether the appellant would be harmed if returned to  Ghana
                 and if so why.


7) The above was expanded upon  in  a  supplementary  skeleton  argument  as
   follows.

                 1. The appellant ... seeks to expand on his submissions  on
                    the issue of sufficiency of  protection  (see  paragraph
                    2.2.1 (page 3) in the Skeleton):-


                 2. Sufficiency of Protection:

                    2.1 Esto case: Even if the approach of the FTT (eg  like
                    the  Respondent  -  see  her  first   [refusal   letter]
                    (23.5.13) ... is to take the  appellant's  case  at  its
                    highest and accept that the appellant's  allegations  of
                    threatening behaviour occurred, but he is  not  entitled
                    to  international  protection   because   there   is   a
                    sufficiency of protection  in  Ghana,  the  decision  is
                    still unsafe because:


                    2.2 Future Fear: the conclusion in the first sentence at
                    paragraph 41 is based not on the  appellant  (or  others
                    who  might  be  similarly  exposed  to  persecution   on
                    political/perceived  political  grounds)  but  on  other
                    categories  of  prominent   person   (members   of   the
                    judiciary).  Nor can the second  sentence  in  the  same
                    paragraph stand because the issue is what  might  happen
                    in the future, based on what may have  happened  on  the
                    past.


                    2.3 Objective evidence: see  R/19-38  (including  R27  -
                    referred to by FTT at paragraph 40 in its decision), and
                    A/22/17-20 and A/22/31 -36).  For such an  approach  and
                    such  conclusions  to  be  justified,  the  evidence  of
                    sufficiency of protection in Ghana to  persons  such  as
                    the appellant would require to be significantly clearer.
                     On the contrary, this evidence indicates that  although
                    there appears to be a functioning police force  as  part
                    of a state apparatus that seeks to uphold  the  rule  of
                    law, the incidence of corruption is widespread and there
                    has been a recent history of political violence.


                    2.4  Conclusion: in such circumstances, it is not enough
                    to infer that  the  appellant  would  obtain  sufficient
                    protection if returned.  Perhaps he would, but  only  if
                    his allegations of threatening behaviour  are  so  fully
                    examined  that  clear  findings  of  fact  are  made  in
                    relation to each of them.  Only then - and  if  all/some
                    of them were found to be correct/truthful, would  it  be
                    safe  to  conclude,  having  regard  to  the   objective
                    evidence about the police in Ghana, that there would  be
                    sufficient protection in Ghana.

           3     Final: the appeal should be allowed and the case  remitted
                 to a differently constituted FTT to reach clear findings on
                 whether the appellant was threatened as he  complains,  and
                 if so whether, having regard to  objective  evidence  about
                 the police in Ghana, he would on  return  receive  adequate
                 protection.


8) Mr Forrest further submitted that the determination  was  flawed  by  the
   lack of clear findings of fact on the threats made to the  appellant  and
   to his wife and family.  The determination left the reader in  the  dark.
   There could be no evaluation of future risk without findings on the  past
   history.   The  determination  could  not  be  saved  by   treating   the
   appellant's claim "at its highest".  Although the  respondent  took  that
   line in the first refusal letter, material was produced which  post-dated
   that, although admittedly of a similar nature. Even if the claim had been
   taken at highest,  and  sufficiency  of  protection  was  the  crux,  the
   determination was unsafe.  The conclusion at paragraph 41  was  based  on
   the situation of one member of the judiciary, and was  not  a  basis  for
   making findings in relation to this appellant.  For the appeal to fail on
   this basis, given the accepted  evidence  of  police  corruption  and  of
   recent political violence, the determination would have to  be  based  on
   significantly clearer evidence.  Without making findings on the substance
   of the actual threats, there was not enough to  support  the  finding  of
   sufficiency of protection.

9) Mr Mullen in reply submitted that the judge made it clear that  she  also
   treated the claim "at  highest".   Although  she  expressed  doubts,  for
   sensible reasons, about the new evidence  produced,  she  explicitly  put
   that to one side and the rest of her determination proceeded as  if  both
   newspaper articles were genuine.  It was for her  to  assess  the  actual
   level of threat, measuring the individual circumstances at their  highest
   against the background evidence,  and  she  was  entitled  to  reach  the
   conclusion she did on sufficiency of protection.  That was sufficient  to
   dispose of the case.  The judge was correct to say that  internal  flight
   issues did not arise, but also that in the  alternative  that  the  claim
   would have been defeated on that basis.  Where the police had a record of
   the incident directed  against  the  appellant,  and  encouraged  him  to
   contact them on return, the judge could not reasonably  have  found  that
   they would fail to investigate and  prosecute.   There  was  evidence  of
   police  corruption,  but  that  did  not  negate  legal  sufficiency   of
   protection either generally or in this case.

10) Mr Forrest in response said that the appellant's case,  particularly  as
   shown by the newspaper extracts, was of risk  throughout  Ghana,  against
   which internal flight would not be  available.    As  to  sufficiency  of
   protection, the Horvath test  of  reasonable  willingness  to  operate  a
   system of protection was not satisfied.

11) I reserved my determination.

12) The argument for the appellant was pinned on the  proposition  that  his
   case  could  not  be  resolved  without  deciding  whether  his  specific
   allegations were established.  I do not agree.  If  a  claim  fails  when
   taken essentially at face value, there is no  point  in  an  analysis  of
   which specific allegations  are  reasonably  likely  to  be  true.   That
   approach is the essence of the first refusal letter.  Although the  point
   was not particularly focused either in the First-tier Tribunal or in  the
   Upper Tribunal, the second refusal letter to some  extent  departed  from
   that approach, because it declined  to  place  reliance  on  the  further
   documents produced.  However, I do not think  that  is  significant.   Mr
   Forrest accepted that the further evidence  produced  was  of  a  similar
   nature to that previously relied upon.  The judge expressed doubts  about
   the newspaper report, but she put them to one side and took the case as a
   whole.  The police station diary extract, although there were also doubts
   about that, was also treated at face value in making the  decision.   The
   appellant could have  asked  for  no  more  favourable  findings  on  his
   allegations.  It is perhaps unfortunate the judge expressed  her  finding
   as  one  of  no  past  persecution,  but  that  is  one  sentence  in   a
   determination of 10 pages, and requires to be put in context.  Read as  a
   whole, the judge was plainly finding at paragraph 43 that  there  was  no
   evidence of a real risk to the appellant on return to Ghana.  She reached
   an equally plain conclusion that there is legal sufficiency of protection
   in Ghana from such risk as alleged herein.

13) The refusal letter cites Horvath:

    The sufficiency of state protection is not measured by the existence of
    a real risk of an abuse of rights, but by the availability of a  system
    for the protection of the citizen and a reasonable willingness  by  the
    state to operate it.

14)  Horvath  also  approved   the   proposition   that   inefficiency   and
   incompetence is  not  the  same  as  unwillingness,  unless  extreme  and
   widespread.

15) In this case the judge had evidence not only of the  general  nature  of
   the legal system of protection, but of specific willingness to  act  upon
   complaints in relation to this  appellant.   The  conclusion  that  legal
   sufficiency of protection applied to this case was properly open to  her.
   On all the evidence, the  contrary  conclusion  would  have  been  rather
   surprising.

16) The alternative conclusion based on internal flight is  briefly  stated,
   but it followed naturally from the judge's other conclusions.

17)  The  determination  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal,   dismissing   the
   appellant's appeal, shall stand.


                               [pic]
                                31 March 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
