
IAC-FH-aR
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08529/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 31 March 2015                     |On 4 June 2015                       |
|Prepared 1 April 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                   M S M J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Rees, Counsel, instructed by Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  Appellant,  a  national  of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed  against   the
    Respondent's decision, dated 3 October 2014, to make removal directions
    following the refusal  an  asylum/human  rights  based  claim  and  the
    service of a form IS151A on 12 August 2014.

2.   The Appellant, of Sinhala ethnicity and of the  Muslim  faith,  entered
    the United Kingdom in September 2009 with a visit  visa  as  a  student
    valid until December 2012. The Appellant married and made an in-country
    application for settlement as a spouse which was refused  on  10  April
    2013. On 30 April 2014 he made a claim  to  remain  outside  the  Rules
    which was refused and after that refusal on 12 August 2014  he  claimed
    asylum.

3.   The centrepiece of the  Appellant's  claim  was  his  fear  of  adverse
    attention because of the treatment by the Sri Lankan authorities of his
    brother, S, who was of Sinhala ethnicity and a Muslim by faith but  who
    had been actively involved in assisting the LTTE.  In the determination
    relied upon First-tier Tribunal Judge  Foulkes-Jones  concluded,  in  a
    decision published on 20 March 2014,  that  SMJ,  supported  by  expert
    evidence form Dr Chris Smith, had been an activist in  support  of  the
    LTTE who had  been  detained,  interrogated  and  had  ultimately  been
    pursued by the Sri Lankan authorities.

4.   The Appellant also relied upon the arrest of  is  younger  brother,  R,
    whom it was said had been arrested in April  2014  and  not  been  seen
    again. The Appellant's statement of 6 January 2015 produced  to  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mace for the appeal of MSMJ on 7  January  and  his
    whereabouts are no longer known although complaints have been  made  to
    the Human Rights Commission.  The Appellant was at the material time in
    the United Kingdom and it is clear he has never fought for or  actively
    supported the LTTE or the Tamil cause in Sri Lanka.

5.   The Appellant's witness statement of 6 January  2015  referred  to  the
    Appellant as "I am a Sri Lankan national. I am a Tamil and I believe in
    Eelam Cause."

6.   The Appellant's statement gave no  insight  to  or  particular  of  any
    activities of his supporting the  LTTE.  He  heavily  relied  upon  the
    subsequent, in his absence, treatment of his brother S and to a  degree
    R, although he gave no particulars of any activities by R in support of
    the Sri Lankan cause.

7.   On a fair reading of the evidence provided it is clear to me  that  the
    judge took into account the claim in relation to S's activities.  I  do
    not accept  there  was  any  arguable  error  of  law  that  the  judge
    misapplied the case of A (Somalia) for it is not  the  case  that  they
    share the same factual matrix both in relation to the activities of the
    Appellant and the timing of those activities by S or possibly R.

8.   Other than a family connection as a fact, it was clear that the  actual
    circumstances of S's activities are substantially different. I  do  not
    find the judge made any arguable error of law in assessing the risks to
    the Appellant by reference to the evidence which the judge  heard  from
    the Appellant's brother S and generally in the claim. Pertinent to  the
    Appellant's claim was the fact that his brother, S, after the Appellant
    had left Sri Lanka, fell subject to adverse attention by the Sri Lankan
    forces, as  was  accepted  by  Judge  Foulkes-Jones.   Essentially  the
    grounds, paragraphs 4-15, seek to reargue the merits of the case.

9.   The second ground of challenge is that the  judge  misdirected  herself
    as to the evidence.  Paragraphs 4 and 5 of the grounds do not  disclose
    any arguable error of  law.  Paragraph  6  is  essentially  seeking  to
    reassert the case of risk, bearing in mind it  was  not  accepted  that
    there would be any interest in  the  Appellant  on  return.  There  was
    nothing to show that he would be on any wanted form or  watch  list  or
    otherwise because of the family relationship.  In any event,  there  is
    nothing apparently especial about the surname of the Appellant  or  his
    brother that distinguishes them, nor was there  any  suspicion  of  the
    Appellant having any LTTE involvement at any material  time.   Further,
    it was not said that the Appellant has done anything  whilst  being  in
    the United Kingdom to draw himself to the attention of the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities were he to be returned.  Essentially paragraphs 7, 8, 9 and
    10 of the grounds disagree  with  the  judge's  findings  of  fact  and
    conclusions there from on risk on return.

10.  Therefore, whilst it said, assuming in  the  Appellant's  favour,  that
    the Appellant might be  interviewed  by  police  on  return,  there  is
    nothing to indicate that the Appellant is wanted for any particular  of
    criminality or the timeframe in which such activities were said to have
    occurred; that simply because the Appellant is a family member as  much
    as it consists of in the statement dated 5 January 2015, the Sri Lankan
    authorities  concern was that the Appellant might be  involved  in  the
    Tamil diaspora activities against the Sri Lankan  government  and  from
    his connection to his brother S.

11.  The attorney's brief  summary  of  discussion  is  solely  to  ask  the
    question whether the Appellant was wanted  by  the  state  authorities.
    Whilst he says the Appellant is wanted it is completely unclear on what
    basis there is any interest or any outstanding charges  or  matters  or
    allegations which are to be made against the Appellant. It  appears  to
    me to simply self-serving to conclude that because the Appellant  would
    be arrested his life would be in danger.

12.  The judge referred to these matters at paragraphs  19  and  20  of  the
    decision. It is plain that thereafter the judge took into  account  the
    claimed involvement of the  Appellant's  brother  S  and  the  lack  of
    evidence of any involvement by the Appellant, who had never before been
    a supporter of the LTTE  in  the  diaspora  of  Tamils  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

13.  In the circumstances the judge was entitled  to  conclude  on  all  the
    evidence which he identified in paragraph 31 of the decision that there
    was not the reasonable likelihood of risk of harm to the  Appellant  on
    return.

14.  I conclude the grounds do not disclose an error of law.

15.  It is also asserted that the judge did not properly take  into  account
    the background evidence but it seems to me this is  really  seeking  to
    argue that a  different  decision  should  have  been  reached  and  in
    particular the Appellant should have been in a particular  category  of
    those at risk on return.

16.  On a fair reading of the decision in the round I do not accept  it  can
    be seriously argued that the judge has failed to take into account  the
    background evidence or the credibility findings  and  the  findings  of
    fact made by the judge.

17.  Finally, it is said that he has failed to consider  the  mental  health
    of the Appellant and, I think, the extent to which that might  put  him
    at risk on  return  were  he  to  be  interviewed  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  As the judge indicated at paragraph  13  and  14  of  the
    decision, the report of Dr  Dhumad,  as  a  whole  rather  than  making
    adverse findings in relation to the claim in  the  assessment  of  that
    evidence at paragraphs 35 and 36.  It is unfortunate, that there  is  a
    repeated typographical error concerning the return of the Appellant  to
    Pakistan which plainly was a mistake which should have been picked  up.
    However, it is not said that there are any material factual errors  nor
    does the reference to Pakistan as a fact make  any  difference  to  the
    overall conclusions: Not least when in paragraph 36  the  judge  having
    referred to Pakistan goes on to  consider  the  provisions  for  mental
    illness, the availability of drugs and facilities in Sri Lanka. As  the
    judge was also entitled to conclude the process  of  removal  obviously
    did not give rise to a risk of a breach of Article 3 or  Article  8  of
    the ECHR after return to Sri Lanka.

18.  In these circumstances I  do  not  accept  there  was  any  failure  to
    properly consider that evidence or the extent to which there is a  risk
    to the Appellant on return.

19.  It does not appear from the medical evidence  that  particular  concern
    was raised as to the Appellant's mental health giving rise to the  risk
    of suicide or self-harming through removal on return to Sri  Lanka.   I
    note that the Appellant's concentration was poor when interviewed.

20.   Such  views  as  Mr  Duhmad  has  in  terms  of  the  Appellant  being
    interviewed in the UK would presumably similarly apply  in  Sri  Lanka.
    Ultimately the case was not advanced on  the  basis  of  real  risk  of
    suicide on return  due  to  deterioration  in  the  Appellant's  mental
    health.

21.  The grounds do not  raise  the  issue  of  the  judge's  conclusion  in
    relation to Article 8 of the ECHR whether in terms of the  relationship
    with his brother in the UK or indeed his mental health  in  respect  of
    his moral and physical integrity.

22.  Be that as it may, the Secretary of State  did  have  regard  to  those
    matters in the Reasons for Refusal Letter at paragraphs 93 to 110.  The
    same report appears to be the  one  referred  to  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter as was relied upon in front of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Mace.

23.  Mr Rees sought  to  raise  Article  8  ECHR  as  a  further  ground  of
    challenge to the judge's decision. It is fair to  say  the  judge  made
    findings but in paragraph 7 does not really set out reasons.   Mr  Rees
    did not identify in  any  particular  way  in  which  there  was  self-
    evidently an error in the judge's assessment of the Article 8 claim nor
    in relation to the judge failing to make  findings  with  reference  to
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

24.  In the  circumstances,  even  allowing  consideration  of  that  as  an
    additional ground, it does not seem to me that the judge had  made  any
    arguable error of law.

25.  I further note that the  judge  dismissed  the  claim  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds but the determination does not contain any  analysis
    of it.  It seems to me having identified the issue it  ultimately  fell
    to be refused quite simply because there was  not the level of risk  of
    serious harm as contemplated by the relevant provisions  of  paragraphs
    339C of the Immigration Rules if returned.

26.  The Original Tribunal decision stands. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity Order

27.  An anonymity order was made it is appropriate that it is continued.



Signed   Date 27 May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

