
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08800/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 16 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                       NABIL MOHAMMED MOHAMMED SNIDAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The respondent notified the appellant of her decision to remove him
         (10 October 2014) following the refusal of his claim for asylum  or
         ancillary  protection.  His  appeal  against  that   decision   was
         dismissed by First Tier Tribunal Judge Kempton following a  hearing
         on 2 December 2014. This is an appeal against that decision.

      2. No one had attended for the appellant by  the  time  the  case  was
         called on to be heard at 3.10. There was no request for the  matter
         to be adjourned. I was satisfied  I  should  proceed  to  hear  the
         appeal in the absence  of  the  appellant  or  anyone  for  him  in
         accordance with The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008
         Rule 38. That is because the appellant and his  representative  had
         been given notice of the date time and place of the hearing,  there
         was no good reason not to proceed, and the appeal could  be  justly
         determined given the issue.

      3. First-Tier Tribunal Judge Kamara granted permission  to  appeal  (6
         February 2015). She stated that

             "It is arguable that the failure of the judge to  adjourn  the
             appeal when it is said that the appellant lacked  capacity  to
             represent  himself  owing  to  mental  illness   amounted   to
             procedural unfairness."

      4. The grounds in the application are that the judge  failed  to  give
         sufficient regard to the appellant's mental health and capacity  to
         deal with the proceedings.  In  particular  he  was  unrepresented,
         could not remember the screening interview, had  bizarre  reasoning
         for his detention, had been detained due to his  mental  health  in
         France and Barnsley (that being in June 2014), had self  harmed  in
         Saudi Arabia, and since the adverse determination has attempted  to
         commit suicide.

      5. The respondent asserted (19 February  2015)  in  essence  that  the
         Judge

               1) carefully reviewed the evidence,

               2) was aware of the medical evidence and hospitalisations,

               3) gave adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant
                  understood the hearing  procedure  and  was  competent  to
                  appear unrepresented, and

               4) gave good reasons for disbelieving the account.

Discussion

      6. I bear in mind Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
         (IAC) which guides me to the view that where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the  First-
         tier Tribunal acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied  is
         that of fairness:   was  there  any  deprivation  of  the  affected
         party's right to a fair hearing.

      7. The Judge considered  adjourning  the  hearing  [paragraph  30]  on
         another ground. She declined to do so and gave reasons. She did not
         indicate that she considered adjourning due to  any  concern  about
         his mental health.

      8. It is plain the Judge was aware of his past problems as she  refers
         to  them  repeatedly  [paragraph  5,  17,  29,  33,  and  37].  She
         accurately summarised the medical  evidence  [paragraph  38]  which
         indicates he suffered from depression (7 November 2014) there being
         no suggestion in that letter or any other document that he may have
         problems in fully participating  in  the  proceedings.  Indeed  the
         Judges own observations of his manner at the hearing bore that  out
         [paragraph 39]. In those circumstances  I  am  not  satisfied  that
         there was any deprivation  of  the  appellant's  right  to  a  fair
         hearing.

      9. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         manner in which the Judge dealt with the hearing.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.



Signed:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
16 July 2015

