
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08339/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons                |
|On 18 April 2016                          |On 29 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MOHAMED RIFFKHAN AZOOK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by   S Satha &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Sri Lanka, date of  birth  20  April  1979,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decisions dated 13  May  2015
    to refuse to grant him leave to remain and to refuse  him  asylum  with
    reference to paragraph 336 of the Immigration Rules HC 395  as  amended
    (the Rules).

3.   That appeal came before Designated Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  J
    M Lewis (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on 1 December  2015,
    allowed the appeal under the Refugee Convention and with  reference  to
    Article 3 ECHR.

4.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision  which
    was refused by Miss C M Martin, Upper Tribunal Judge sitting as a Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal on 5 February  2016.   The  application  was
    renewed on 19 February 2016 and permission was given by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Freeman on 29 February 2016.

5.   The issues can be divided into two.   First,  did  the  judge  make  an
    error of law in refusing an adjournment application for the purposes of
    the Secretary of State adducing, whenever it became available,  a  copy
    of a document verification report (DVR) which related to there being  a
    warrant for arrest of the Claimant, dated 2 October 2009,  and  whether
    or not there was still an outstanding warrant.

6.   The judge considered the application  and  decided  for  reasons  given
    that there had been a significant period of  time  between  the  asylum
    interview and the Secretary of  State's  belated  application,  shortly
    before the hearing before  the  judge  on  23  November  2015,  for  an
    adjournment in order to enable the Secretary of State  to  obtain  that
    DVR.  The judge's analysis of that issue is to be found at  paragraphs,
    4, 5 and 6 of the s decision.   Essentially  the  criticism  the  judge
    made, in the light of the submissions on behalf of the Claimant, by  Mr
    Paramjorthy, was that the matter that needed to be  looked  at  in  the
    round. The judge took into account the  claimant's  mental  health,  of
    which there was medical evidence, the lengthy listing  period  and  the
    absence of effort to obtain the DVR at an  earlier  stage.   Not  least
    when it had been open to the Secretary of State to obtain the  DVR  for
    about six or more months, yet had only recently  done  so.   The  judge
    concluded that justice would not be served by an  adjournment  and  the
    case proceeded to the outcome identified.

7.   Thus the issue is whether  or  not  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective under the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 the case  was  fairly
    and justly considered. I conclude that the judge, although he does  not
    say so plainly, had in mind the issue of the justice of proceeding  and
    inevitably the fairness of doing so.

8.   In considering this matter I fully take into account  the  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Nwaige [2014] UKUT  478  and  I  also  take  into
    account in the overriding objective paragraph 2(4) that the parties are
    expected to help the Tribunal to further the overriding  objective  and
    to cooperate with the Tribunal generally. There was ultimately, despite
    Mr Tufan's best efforts, a significant period  when  the  Secretary  of
    State was in the possession of the relevant documents, now said not  to
    be genuine as a result of a DVR, dated 18 January 2016.

9.   In the circumstances therefore I conclude that the public does  have  a
    significant interest in the effective performance of  both  the  appeal
    system and to that extent there is nothing raised by the  cases  of  YD
    (Turkey) [2006] EWCA Civ 52 or even in the  light  of  SS  (Congo)  and
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 which affects the procedural fairness issue.
    I therefore conclude that under the overriding objective,  particularly
    2(1) and (2) of the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules that the  judge
    was entitled to reach his decision. I  find  there  was  no  procedural
    error of law in him concluding that it was appropriate for  the  appeal
    hearing to continue.


10.  I have  some  sympathy  for  the  Secretary  of  State's  position  but
    ultimately, even if there are complications in checking  documents,  as
    Mr Tufan rightly submits, the fact is there was ample  opportunity  for
    such enquiries to be put in place between May 2015 and the  hearing  in
    November 2015.  Furthermore there would have been  nothing  to  prevent
    the Secretary of State in advance of the hearing seeking an adjournment
    by reference to enquiries in train but as yet unanswered,  particularly
    if the DVR request had been made promptly after the documents had  been
    provided.  Ultimately it may well be the  Secretary  of  State  has  at
    least one other route to address the circumstances  of  the  Appellant,
    which no doubt is a matter solely for the Secretary of  State  at  this
    stage.  If there is recourse elsewhere that  is  likely  to  be  before
    another court.

11.  If DVR is established as correct tbat may affect whether the  appellant
    is entitled to protection. The Secretary of State can still act reliant
    on misrepresentations or a claim of fraud  to  obtain  refugee  status.
    Given there was no procedural error of law in refusing the  adjournment
    and the DVR  did not exist at the date of hearing nor were its contents
     the Secretary of State  does not establisgh the judge made any mistake
    of fact. The decision of the Original Tribunal  discloses  no  material
    error on this issue and the decision stands.

Notice of Decision

12.  The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

13.  No anonymity order was previously made nor is one appropriate now.

Signed                                  Date 27 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation which  is  due  to  the  file  being
    misplaced.

