
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08170/2013
     aa/08202/2013
     aa/08201/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th April 2014                               |On 16th May 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                   ms OCOC
                                  miss maoa
                                 master akao
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Harrison instructed by Haliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Saffer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 14th November 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 24th April 1974.  She has
    two children who are dependent  on  her  appeal.   She  has  a  complex
    immigration history.

 3. In 2006 she made an application for leave to remain on the  basis  that
    she had been in the UK since 1992.  She was refused on  13th  September
    2008, as those who represented her had submitted false documents in her
    case and in other cases, and she had failed to establish the length  of
    time that she had been here.  Her former representative has since  been
    imprisoned.

 4. She submitted a further application on 2nd July 2012 on  the  basis  of
    having siblings and a nephew here and because she had  given  birth  to
    two children  who  had  now  spent  all  of  their  lives  here.   That
    application was refused on 21st March  2013  as  neither  she  nor  her
    children had been here for seven years and it was considered  that  she
    could return to Nigeria with them.

 5. The Appellant then claimed asylum, saying that she had been  trafficked
    to the UK, was refused on 12th August 2013, and  it  is  this  decision
    which was the subject of the appeal before Judge Saffer.

 6. The judge found that there was no truth in the claim that the Appellant
    was trafficked and there is no challenge to his decision on the  asylum
    claim.

 7. The judge also considered the Appellant's  claim  that  she  should  be
    allowed to remaining the UK on the  basis  of  her  Article  8  rights,
    albeit that she does not meet the requirement of the Rules relating  to
    private life, nor can she qualify under paragraph  EX.1.   He  accepted
    that she had established a private life here, as she has been in the UK
    for seven years but she had failed to establish that she  was  involved
    in her church in any meaningful way or that she had integrated  herself
    into the British way of life and has practised a level of mendacity for
    many years.

 8. He also considered the position of the children who had  established  a
    private life here of both six years and three years' duration.  Neither
    were British citizens, their parents both being Nigerian, and the judge
    was satisfied that it was reasonably likely that  they  had  family  in
    Nigeria on both sides of their family.  Their cultural  roots  were  in
    Nigeria and any roots here  were  not  significant.   They  could  both
    continue their education in Nigeria because their mother could work and
    they could rely on extended family support.  The judge  said  that  the
    children's best interests were to be with their mother.  They would not
    be at real risk of not going to school as she could work as a nurse  or
    a carer and pay for them nor was there a risk of destitution or  abuse.



The Grounds of Application

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to consider the case of EB (Kosovo) v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  41
    and in particular the delay in removal following  the  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's claim in 2006 which contributed to a significant period  of
    residence.  As  a  consequence  the  Appellant  had  developed  closer,
    personal and social ties and established deeper roots in the  community
    than  she  could  have  shown  earlier.   Furthermore,  the  sense   of
    impermanence arising  from  the  Appellant's  precarious  position  had
    faded.

10. Permission to appeal was granted in relation to Home Office delay  only
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman on 23rd January 2014.

Submissions

11. Ms Harrison relied on her grounds but  it  is  fair  to  say  that  she
    recognised the difficulty which she faced in establishing an  error  of
    law in this decision given the immigration history of the Appellant.

12. Mr Diwnycz submitted that the decision should stand. He said that there
    was no mention of the delay in the representative's  submissions on the
    day, according to the Presenting Officer's note, and if it had not been
    considered a high priority at the hearing it was not an  error  of  law
    for the judge not to deal with it.

Findings and Conclusions

13. The Record of Proceedings confirms the Presenting Officer's  note  that
    no mention was made of the delay point in submissions.  It is therefore
    not surprising that the  judge  did  not  deal  with  it,  particularly
    because the immigration history of this Appellant is such that it makes
    it difficult for her to rely on any apparent failures by the  Secretary
    of State.  She has made  a  number  of  applications  in  a  number  of
    different identities and, on the unchallenged findings of fact  by  the
    Immigration Judge, she knew that she was  acting  dishonestly.   Whilst
    there was some delay between 2006 and 2008 by the Secretary  of  State,
    any failure by the Secretary  of  State  to  act  promptly  is  heavily
    outweighed by the Appellant's own conduct.

14. In any event the grounds do not establish that the judge failed to deal
    with the consequences of that delay and the subsequent lack of removal.
     He considered the Appellant's private life and that  of  her  children
    and reached the sustainable conclusion that the private life of all  of
    them was tenuous and of limited  value.   The  best  interests  of  the
    children were properly considered, namely that they should be  returned
    with their mother to the country of their nationality.

15. The grounds establish no error of law.

Decision

16. The original decision stands.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
