
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08033/2013
                                                               AA/08034/2013
                                                               AA/08035/2013
                                                               AA/08036/2013
                                                               AA/08037/2013
                                                               AA/08040/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 3 July 2014                                |On 7 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                          FERIALE NAZAR ZAAROUR + 5
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:      Mr B Criggie, of Hamilton Burns & Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1) The appellants, a mother and her 5 children  (2  now  adults)  are  all
    citizens of Lebanon.  Their appeals to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    dismissed  following  a  combined  hearing  by  Judge   Clough   in   2
    determinations both dated 11 November 2013 (one dealing with the  first
    5 appellants, and another with the 6th).  Mr Criggie advanced the cases
    on the basis that they all stand or fall  together  with  that  of  the
    first appellant, who has  been  referred  to  by  both  sides  as  "the
    appellant".

 2) The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are as follows:

    The appellant entered the UK with her  dependent  children  on  3  July
    2013, with leave to enter as a family visitor group.  The appellant and
    her children are Lebanese nationals.  The appellant intimated  a  claim
    for international protection under the 1951  Refugee  Convention  on  4
    July 2013.  This claim was refused by the respondent on 7 August  2013.
    The appellant lodged an appeal against this decision  with  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, and this was heard by  FTTJ  Clough  at  Glasgow  on  23
    October 2013.  The grounds  of  appeal  were  limited  to  humanitarian
    protection under paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules  and  Articles
    2, 3 and 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The  FtT
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds ...


    1. At paragraph 31 of the FTTJ states:


       "All those giving statements said they had no enemies and no reasons
       to believe why the threats were made.  To report such threats  while
       knowing why they were made wholly negated the aim of  reporting  the
       incident to the police.   I  place  no  reliance  on  the  documents
       relating  to  the  police  reports  for  this   reason."   (writer's
       emphasis).


       ... the FTTJ has given insufficient  and  confusing  reasoning  into
       relation to the assessment of this document.  It  may  be  the  FTTJ
       meant that to report such incidents while NOT knowing why they  were
       made wholly negated the purpose  of  reporting  the  matter  to  the
       police.  Either way, this reasoning makes no sense  whatsoever.   If
       an individual is threatened by a stranger, whether the victim  knows
       the  reasons  for  the  threat  or  not,  a  law  abiding  citizen's
       reasonable and proper response  is  to  report  the  threat  to  the
       appropriate authorities.  For the FTTJ to place no reliance  on  the
       police witness statements  for  this  reason  is  irrational.   This
       evidence goes to the very heart of the appellant  and  her  family's
       claim ... for the FTTJ to give no weight to this piece  of  evidence
       for this perverse reason, leaves the reader in real doubt as to  the
       FTT's findings  on the matter and as  such  constitutes  a  material
       error of law.  (GM Burundi v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 18.)

    2. At paragraph 32 in relation to  written  evidence  from  the  family
       Priest, the FTTJ states:


       "I have no doubt a family priest who claimed to know the family well
       would have been aware the appellant's husband had  left  the  family
       and the appellant and her children had  left  the  matrimonial  home
       some weeks before the date of the letter and would  have  noted  it.
       The letters also state the family had left  for  Scotland  when,  in
       fact, they did not leave until 3 July.  I place no reliance on these
       documents  for  this  reason."...  the  FTTJ's  reasoning   is   for
       dismissing  these  documents  is  insufficient  and  demonstrates  a
       failure to apply anxious scrutiny to the appellant's case.  The  FTT
       arguably failed to consider the  possibility  that  the  family  had
       approached their Priest before the marital relationship came  to  an
       end.  The FTT arguably failed to take into account that  the  family
       had been planning to visit Scotland for a lengthy  period  of  time,
       organising visas for the children etc.  It is  not  unreasonable  to
       assume that the family had discussed their intentions  to  flee  the
       country for some time.  It is certainly  quite  possible  that  this
       dramatic course of action is one which  they  would  have  discussed
       with their family priest ... the FTT have materially  erred  in  the
       weight which has been attached to  this  evidence,  particularly  in
       relation to plausibility issues, which  go  to  the  very  heart  of
       credibility and as such are material to the  outcome.   (Choudhry  v
       Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2001] EWHC 613.)








 3) On 10 January 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler granted  permission
    to appeal, observing:

    It is arguable that the judge failed to give adequate reasons  at  [31]
    for placing no weight on police reports.  It is less  likely  that  the
    reasons at [32] in relation to supporting letters disclose  a  material
    error of law; but since permission is to be granted all grounds may  be
    argued.


 4) The respondent filed a Rule 24 response:

    ... the respondent will submit inter alia that the judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal directed herself appropriately.  Although it is  accepted
    that the  reasoning  in  paragraph  is  not  completely  clear,  it  is
    contended that this is not material, as the  judge  clearly  had  other
    concerns regarding the police report, and this is highlighted as  being
    the fact that the appellant mentions in evidence that her  husband  got
    out of the car,  despite  this  salient  fact  being  absent  from  the
    reports.  The judge was also entitled  to  make  the  point  about  the
    letter from the Parish report, and that it  was  strange  that  it  was
    written at the behest of the appellant's husband, and also before  they
    came to Scotland, concluding that she could place little weight on  it.
    It is clear she did not accept that the appellant's daughter  had  been
    threatened as claimed.  The appellant has failed therefore to establish
    on the facts as accepted, that there is a risk to her or  her  children
    on return to Lebanon, and the judge was entitled  to  conclude  as  she
    did.


 5) Mr Criggie said that the  question  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  the
    seriousness of the error.  At best the determination was unclear and at
    worst it was perverse.  Even if the  error  did  not  reach  that  high
    standard, it was a material flaw.  The item of evidence dealt  with  at
    paragraph 31 was very important to the case for  the  appellants.   The
    police reports described near physical  violence  to  the  husband  and
    father of the family group, over a matter related to his  work.   Those
    threats were offered in front of family members, and extended the  risk
    to the children.  If the police reports were  factored  back  into  the
    case, then viewed as a whole it had at least a chance of  success.   Mr
    Criggie acknowledged that there are other credibility issues,  such  as
    the fact that the description of events in the police reports  did  not
    necessarily coincide with the witness  statements  and  oral  evidence.
    However, the case for the appellants was  that  the  police  statements
    were taken in a hurried and cursory fashion,  because  the  police  had
    little real interest in the complaint.  Errors and contradictions might
    therefore exist in the reports even although they  were  genuine.   The
    error was of enough significance to justify an entire rehearing of  the
    case.

 6) Mr Matthews agreed that if the challenge for the appellants  succeeded,
    the consequence should be a rehearing.   However,  he  said  that  such
    error as was to be found did not require the determination  to  be  set
    aside.  It was plain enough that paragraph  31  had  been  intended  to
    read, "To report such threats while not  knowing  why  they  were  made
    wholly negated the aim of reporting the incident to  the  police."   He
    accepted that  even  with  that  insertion,  there  was  force  in  the
    observation that a complaint to  the  police  might  sensibly  be  made
    whether the perpetrator of the threat was known or not.  He  maintained
    that the reports did not carry the potential significance  claimed  for
    the appellants.  These were not  reports  verifying  that  an  incident
    actually took place.  They were not reports from an independent witness
    or a scene of crime observation.   They were at best only evidence that
    a report had been made, which added very little.  Read fairly and as  a
    whole the determination contained several good  reasons  for  rejecting
    the account given by the appellants.  The headings in the determination
    were slightly misleading,  because  although  the  judge  inserted  the
    heading "Conclusions as  to  the  evidence"  above  paragraph  26,  she
    reached certain clear and well justified conclusions in discussing  the
    evidence at earlier points in the determination.  At paragraph 19,  she
    rightly held that even assuming the police statements  to  be  genuine,
    they established very little, at most an isolated incident  of  threats
    by persons unknown to the appellant, her husband and her daughter.  The
    alleged incident did not  support  the  claim  of  a  concerted  effort
    against her husband.  Having already attached  little  significance  to
    the police reports, any error in the further conclusion at paragraph 31
    was of lesser importance.  The appellant's second ground of appeal  (on
    which Mr Criggie had made no further submissions) was  dealt  with  not
    only at paragraph 32 but also at paragraph 20-23 where the  judge  gave
    good reasons for finding the letters not only to be unreliable  but  to
    cast significant doubt on the claims by the appellants.  There  was  no
    error at paragraph 32 in declining to  place  reliance  on  the  church
    letters.  According to the appellants, the husband abandoned the family
    on 5 June and the appellants left Lebanon on 3 July, yet  letters  from
    the priest and bishop dated 17 and 19 June reflected a different  basis
    of claim and a family which had not been  split  up.   In  summary,  Mr
    Matthews submitted, the error at paragraph 31 was not  one  to  require
    this determination to be set aside.

 7) Mr Criggie in response accepted that the more significant point for the
    appellants was in Ground 1.  However, as to Ground 2, he submitted that
    the evidence did not disclose what was known  to  the  authors  of  the
    letters, which might have been  genuinely  written  even  although  the
    family had by then split up.   As to the police reports reflecting only
    an "isolated incident", he said that had to be viewed  in  the  broader
    context of the case to reflect a wider problem to the family.

 8)  I  mentioned  that  the  refusal  letter  raises  issues  of  internal
    relocation and legal sufficiency of protection,  which  are  not  dealt
    with in the alternative by the judge.  Mr Criggie and Mr Matthews  both
    acknowledged that the judge should have dealt with these  issues,  even
    if they were thought to be only alternatives. Mr Criggie accepted  that
    no case was made on general difficulties and insecurity in Lebanon.

 9) There is no point in recycling  disputes  about  credibility  in  cases
    which do not succeed even "taken at highest".  However, Mr Matthews did
    not seek to put this case on that basis.  He said that  the  respondent
    sought to resolve it by looking firstly at credibility.

10) I reserved my determination.

11) Neither side referred to any authority (Scottish or  English)  on  when
    error of law may be found through  deficiencies  in  factual  findings,
    some of which are based on good reasons but others not.

12) The Court of Appeal in HK v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1037, 2006 WL 1994707 said:
      45. In the light of these views as to the reasons  the  Tribunal  gave
      for rejecting  HK's  story,  I  now  turn  to  consider  whether  that
      rejection can nonetheless stand. Where  a  fact-finding  tribunal  has
      decided to reject evidence for a number of reasons, the mere fact that
      some of those reasons do not bear analysis is not, of  itself,  enough
      to justify an appellate court setting the decision aside.  In  such  a
      case, the appellate court has to decide whether it would  be  just  to
      let the tribunal's decision stand.  That  question  will  normally  be
      answered by considering whether one can be  tolerably  confident  that
      the tribunal's decision would have been the same on the basis  of  the
      reasons which have survived its scrutiny. In the present  case,  as  I
      understood it, both counsel accepted that that was the right test, and
      that seems to me to be correct.
13) Going on to apply that test to the case before it, the Court said:
          46. In this case, I am satisfied that one cannot be confident that
      the Tribunal would have rejected HK's  case  on  the  basis  of  their
      reasons which have survived scrutiny in this court. On the face of it,
      that would seem to be  pretty  self-evident  from  the  discussion  in
      paragraphs 33 to 43 above. Of the eight reasons, not much survives. Of
      course, as Jacob LJ said in argument, the  issue  cannot  be  resolved
      simply by asking how many of the Tribunal's reasons survive. The issue
      has to be determined partly by reference to  the  probative  value  of
      those reasons, both in absolute  terms  and  by  comparison  with  the
      rejected reasons, and objectively, but also subjectively, in the sense
      of seeing what weight the tribunal gave  to  the  various  reasons  it
      gave. The issue also has to be determined bearing in mind the  overall
      picture including reasons which a tribunal would have had,  but  which
      were not expressed. An example would  be  the  impression  made  by  a
      witness (a factor which is not, in my view, high in the  hierarchy  of
      cogency, especially in an asylum case which will normally  involve  an
      appellant from a very different cultural background from that  of  the
      Tribunal).
14) HK was one of the cases cited to the Court of Session in HA v  Secretary
   of State for the   Home Department [2007] CSIH 65, 2008 S.C. 58, where it
   was said:
      17. In the light of the cases cited to us it  is  convenient  at  this
        stage to formulate some propositions  about  the  circumstances  in
        which an immigration judge's decision on a matter of credibility or
        plausibility  may  be  held  to  disclose  an  error  of  law.  The
        credibility of an asylum-seeker's account is primarily  a  question
        of fact, and the determination of that question of  fact  has  been
        entrusted by Parliament to the immigration judge (Esen,  para  21).
        This court may not interfere with the immigration judge's  decision
        on a matter of credibility simply because on the evidence it would,
        if it had been the fact-finder, have come to a different conclusion
        (Reid, per Lord Clyde, p  41H).  But  if  the  immigration  judge's
        decision on credibility discloses an error of  law  falling  within
        the range identified by Lord Clyde in the passage quoted above from
        Reid, that error is open to correction by this court. If a decision
        on credibility is  one  which  depends  for  its  validity  on  the
        acceptance of other contradictory  facts  or  inference  from  such
        facts, it will be erroneous in point of law  if  the  contradictory
        position is not supported by any, or sufficient,  evidence,  or  is
        based on conjecture or speculation (Wani v Secretary of  State  for
        the Home Department, para 24, quoted with approval in HK, para 30).
        A bare assertion of incredibility or  implausibility  may  disclose
        error of law; an  immigration  judge  must  give  reasons  for  his
        decisions on credibility  and  plausibility  (Esen,  para  21).  In
        reaching conclusions on credibility and plausibility an immigration
        judge may draw on his common sense and his ability, as a  practical
        and informed  person,  to  identify  what  is,  and  what  is  not,
        plausible (Wani, p 883L, quoted with approval in HK, para  30,  and
        in Esen, para 21). Credibility, however, is an issue to be  handled
        with great care and sensitivity to cultural differences (Esen, para
        21), and reliance on inherent improbability  may  be  dangerous  or
        inappropriate where the conduct in question has taken  place  in  a
        society whose culture and customs are very different from those  in
        the United Kingdom (HK, para 29). There will be cases where actions
        which may appear implausible if judged by  domestic  standards  may
        not merit rejection on  that  ground  when  considered  within  the
        context of  the  asylum-seeker's  social  and  cultural  background
        (Wani, p 883I, quoted with approval in HK, para 30). An immigration
        judge's decision on credibility or implausibility may, we conclude,
        disclose an error of law if, on examination of  the  reasons  given
        for his decision, it appears either that he has failed to take into
        account the relevant consideration  that  the  probability  of  the
        asylum-seeker's narrative may be affected by its cultural  context,
        or has failed to  explain  the  part  played  in  his  decision  by
        consideration of that context,  or  has  based  his  conclusion  on
        speculation or conjecture.
15) As to the case before it, the Court concluded:
      45. We have been persuaded that the  submission  of  counsel  for  the
        appellant that the immigration judge fell into error of law  is  in
        parts well  founded,  but  in  other  parts  ill-founded.  We  have
        rejected the attack on  the  immigration  judge's  testing  of  the
        credibility  of  the  appellant's  evidence  by  reference  to  the
        objective evidence. We have also rejected the submission  that  the
        immigration judge's treatment of the arrest  warrant  discloses  an
        error of law. We are,  however,  for  the  reasons  which  we  have
        explained, satisfied that the immigration judge fell into error  of
        law in his treatment of the credibility  and  plausibility  of  the
        detail of the appellant's account of his relationship  with  M,  in
        his treatment of the evidence of the persecution of the appellant's
        brother-in-law, and on the related issue of internal relocation. It
        seems to us that those aspects of the immigration judge's reasoning
        played  a  material  part  in  his  overall  conclusion  that   the
        appellant's claim must be rejected.
 16) The significance of an error is ultimately to be resolved on the facts
    of each case.  Rather more could survive of this determination than  in
    HK.  However, the defective part of the judge's reasoning  did  play  a
    material part  in  her  overall  conclusion  that  the  claim  for  the
    appellants was to be rejected.  I do not think the Upper Tribunal could
    be "tolerably confident" that the judge's decision must have  been  the
    same on the basis of reasons which withstand scrutiny.  The judge  says
    plainly at paragraph 31 that this is her reason for placing no reliance
    on the documents.  Even when the typography is corrected, it is  not  a
    good reason.  There is nothing unusual about a victim  reporting  crime
    without being able to identify a suspect.   The  reports  were  at  the
    centre of the case.  Even if Mr Matthews is right to  argue  that  they
    could not take the case very far on  their  own,  a  finding  that  the
    appellants produced unreliable  documents  of  this  nature  must  have
    counted very significantly against them.  It could not safely  be  said
    that there could be only one outcome, or that the  probative  value  of
    the other reasons is sufficient.

 18) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   None  of
    its findings are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  2007  Act
    and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and  extent  of  judicial  fact
    finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case  are
    not to include Judge Clough. (The judge next hearing the case, whatever
    other findings are reached, should not overlook the issues of  internal
    relocation and sufficiency of protection.)





                               [pic]
                                4 July 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
