
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08632/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 3 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    A M I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Pottle, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The appellant is a citizen of the DRC and  her  date  of  birth  is  10
    October 1979. On 21 January 2013 she made  an  application  for  asylum
    that was refused by the Secretary of State on State  on  20  May  2015.
    The appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  and  her  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pears  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 24 November 2015 following  a  hearing  on  12  November
    2015.  Permission was granted to the appellant by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grant- Hutchison on 18 December 2015 and  thus  the  matter  came
    before me.

2.   The appellant's case, in  a  nutshell,  is  that  she  studied  law  at
    Kinshasa University, starting a  course  there  in  2002.   She  became
    interested in politics and became an active supporter of the Union  for
    Democracy and Social Progress ("the UDPS"). She was a  student  advisor
    for the UDPS. On completion of her studies she became  a  human  rights
    activist.  In 2009 she  became  an  administrative  assistant  for  Pro
    Justice and in 2011 she was appointed public relations officer for  the
    UDPS in Kinshasa. As a result the activities  mentioned  the  appellant
    was arrested on 14 December 2012.  She was detained  for  a  period  of
    three days and seriously assaulted.

3.   The appellant was released (unofficially) and fled to the  UK  arriving
    here on 17 January 2013.  It was accepted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and indeed it does not appear to have been challenged by the respondent
    that the appellant was a member of UDPS but the issue was the extent of
    her involvement with the organisation and it was not  accepted  by  the
    respondent that she had been detained or  assaulted.  The  judge  found
    against the appellant, finding that her not to be credible

4.   The judge made a number of findings at paragraphs 41 to 56 relating  to
    the appellant's asylum claim.

5.   At paragraph (d) of the grounds seeking permission it is asserted  that
    the judge speculated that the appellant did not inform a nurse that she
    had been seriously assaulted.  Reference  is  made  to  a  letter  from
    Freedom from Torture at page 6 of the  appellant's  bundle  and  it  is
    asserted that the judge was wrong to find against the appellant in this
    respect. The ground is not well drafted but it  is  asserted  that  the
    judge did not properly engage  with  the  evidence  from  Freedom  from
    Torture which led him to wrongly conclude that she had not  informed  a
    medical professional about the assault.

6.   In this respect I refer specifically to paragraph 25  of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal which reads as follows:

         "At page 6 of the appellant's bundle is a report from Freedom  from
         Torture dated 6 November 2015 and I enquired as to  its  evidential
         status because, as it itself accepts, it is 'not an expert  medico-
         legal report'.  First paragraph - and it specifically refers  to  a
         medico-legal report service which seems to have been  used  by  the
         appellant. According to the report the  appellant  was  seen  by  a
         systemic family life  psychotherapist/psychological  therapist  who
         has prepared the report.  In  emotional  terms  it  is  a  powerful
         report and, in general outline, repeats her  account  of  what  she
         says happened to her but it is not a medical report so  that  there
         is no diagnosis and it is a report on therapy so that there  is  no
         need to be report that recognises the obligations of an  expert  in
         legal proceedings. It notes that she has been  unable  to  disclose
         many details of her rape which may be understandable and  which  it
         says is not uncommon. Of course that could further assessment would
         be required if there was to be  a  negative  determination  of  her
         appeal."

7.   The judge went on to conclude thie following at paragraph 43:

         "I find if she had been raped there would be  evidence  of  an  HIV
         test and she would have told the Kings' College maternity unit  and
         they would have recorded something about her detention, assault and
         rape."

8.   The judge at paragraph 54 stated:

         "I have borne in mind the report  from  Freedom  from  Torture  but
         bearing in mind that it is not a medical legal report it  does  not
         persuade me that the appellant is credible or that she was raped."

9.   The letter from Freedom from Torture as indicated  by  the  judge  does
    not claim to be an expert medico legal report. However,  the  following
    is stated by the author of the letter, Miss Berdasco.

         "I can confirm  the  following  information:  (the  appellant)  was
         referred to Freedom from Torture London Centre on 23/01/2013 for  a
         full psychological assessment to consider  her  suitability  for  a
         specialised  clinical  trauma  based  intervention  as  part  of  a
         rehabilitation process.   She  was  referred  by  Nancy  Darree,  a
         community specialist nurse in Barry House Health Inclusion Team  as
         she was experiencing difficult feelings regarding her experience of
         trauma and torture, including of a sexual nature."

10.  The letter is dated 6 November 2015 and is, as concluded by the  judge,
    highly consistent with the appellant's claim. The letter also indicates
    that the appellant has had psychological therapy and a  continued  need
    for therapy and that there is no planned ending in sight and therapy is
    intended for the foreseeable future.

Error of Law

11.  Whilst the letter was not an expert report and as such  has  evidential
    shortcomings in relation to the appellant's account  of  her  condition
    and history, it is not clear to  me  whether  the  judge  rejected  the
    assertion in the letter (that a referral had been made) and if this  is
    the case why it was not accepted, or whether the judge simply failed to
    engage with the issue clearly raised in the letter. Having  taken  into
    account the above cited paragraphs of the judge's decision, I  conclude
    that the judge did not adequately reason the finding at [43] and/or  he
    did not properly engage with the evidence and this amounts to an  error
    of law. The judge attached weight to the appellant  having  not  raised
    the issue with a medical professional when assessing credibility  (this
    is the point he makes at [43]), but the evidence  suggested  otherwise.



12.  There is an error of law  raised  at  paragraph  (b)  of  the  grounds.
    Having considered [12] of the decision of the judge, it is implicit  in
    that paragraph that the judge concluded that the  appellant's  evidence
    was  inconsistent  in  relation  to  membership  of  the   UDPS.    The
    appellant's evidence was that she had been a supporter of the  UDPS  up
    until 2009 when she then became a member.  There does not appear to  me
    to be any inconsistency in respect of this aspect  of  the  appellant's
    evidence. Although [12] of the decision is under the heading "Evidence"
    and the findings are under a separate heading  it  is  clear  that  the
    judge made a number of comments and observations under the  heading  of
    "Evidence" which are findings and impacted on  the overall  credibility
    assessment.

13.  Having heard oral submissions from Miss Pottle  relating  to  ground  1
    paragraph (a), I am persuaded that the judge erred in failing to engage
    with the appellant's evidence relating to her main occupation  and  the
    duties that she performed for the UDPS in  concluding  that  there  was
    inconsistency between the information given by the appellant in the VAF
    application.

14.  Miss Pottle raised an issue at the hearing which was not raised in  the
    grounds. In her view the judge's conclusion at  [43]  relating  to  the
    evidence of an HIV test was "astounding".  In  addition,  she  informed
    the Tribunal that having spoken to the  appellant's  representative  at
    the  hearing  this  issue  had  been  raised  by  the  judge  and   the
    representative had asked for a  short  adjournment  in  order  to  take
    instructions which had been granted. The appellant's evidence was  that
    a test had been conducted.  In any event, the issue was not  raised  in
    the grounds  of  appeal  and  is  not  material  to  this  application.
    Notwithstanding this, I conclude that the judge  materially  erred  for
    the reasons that I have given.  Whilst I agree with Mr Kotas that there
    are a number of findings that have been made  by  the  judge  which  in
    isolation would be lawful and sustainable, the  errors  are  such  that
    considered cumulatively it is inevitable, in my  view,  that  they  are
    material and therefore the credibility findings generally are infected.

Notice of Decision

15.  There is a material error of law. I  set  aside  the  decision  in  its
    entirety and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 26 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

