


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/08851/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at North Shields
Determination Promulgated
On 6 July 2015
On 14 July 2015
Prepared on 7 July 2015


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    V. N.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rasoul, Counsel instructed by Morgan Dias
                    Immigration Consultants Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally  and  claimed
           asylum on 15 April 2014. That  application  was  refused  on  15
           October 2014, and in consequence a removal decision was made  in
           relation to her.
        2. The Appellant appealed  to  the  Tribunal  against  the  removal
           decision and her appeal  was  heard  on  9  December  2014,  and
           dismissed by decision of  Judge  Mark-Bell,  promulgated  on  23
           December  2014.  Whilst  the   Respondent   had   accepted   the
           Appellant's  account  of  being  trafficked   into   Italy   for
           prostitution for over  two  years,  he  was  not  satisfied  the
           Appellant had told the truth about (a) what had  occurred  after
           she had returned to Albania from Italy, and, (b) whether she was
           in contact with her mother.
        3. The Appellant's application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal, as drafted, raised a number of complaints,
           although the specific errors of  law  that  they  were  said  to
           comprise were not identified. That application  was  granted  by
           Judge De Haney on 26 January 2015 without any  analysis  of  the
           grounds, on the simple basis that the grounds were arguable.
        4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice  of  6  February  2015  in
           which she asserted that the Judge had given adequate reasons for
           his adverse credibility findings and that the grounds failed  to
           engage properly with the  decision  and  wrongly  asserted  that
           matters had been overlooked when they had  not,  and  that  they
           were no more than a series  of  disagreements  and  attempts  to
           reargue the appeal.
        5. Thus the matter comes before me.


      Error of Law?
        6. The Appellant relied in evidence upon a report from an  outreach
           support worker with the Ashiana organisation of Sheffield  dated
           13 November 2014. Contrary to the assertions that  are  made  in
           paragraphs 7 and 11 of the grounds (which she had  drafted)  and
           to Ms Rasoul's submissions to me, it is plain from the  decision
           that the Judge had the content of  this  report  well  in  mind,
           because he made express reference to it. The Judge  referred  to
           this report in the course of his decision twice [3 & 20], and he
           made specific reference to the Appellant's  claimed  mental  and
           physical state in his assessment of both her  evidence  and  the
           risk of  harm  she  faced  upon  return.  Thus  the  Appellant's
           vulnerable  situation  was  at  the  centre   of   the   Judge's
           consideration. There  is  no  basis  in  the  decision  for  the
           assertion that he either overlooked this report, or,  failed  to
           engage with its content.
        7. Paragraphs 2-6 of the grounds, as drafted, identify no  arguable
           error of law in the decision. When asked to  identify  what  the
           error of law they referred to was said to be, Ms  Rasoul  argued
           that the Judge  had  failed  to  appreciate  that  part  of  the
           Appellant's evidence had been  accepted  by  the  Respondent  as
           true, and  thus  he  should  have  "been  more  lenient  in  his
           consideration  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  on  the  disputed
           issues". She  accepted  however  that  it  was  plain  from  the
           decision that the  Judge  was  well  aware  that  parts  of  the
           Appellant's account were disputed, and parts accepted. She  also
           accepted that the Judge had given himself an  entirely  accurate
           and  adequate  self  direction  on  the  applicable  burden  and
           standard of proof.
        8.  As  Ms  Rasoul  sought  to  develop  her  argument  it  plainly
           unravelled, so that it became abundantly clear that this part of
           the complaint was no more than a disagreement with  the  Judge's
           findings. Those findings were adequately reasoned and well  open
           to him on the evidence. Although Ms Rasoul was unable to concede
           the point I am satisfied that the Judge was right to identify  a
           significant difference between evidence that described attending
           a police station in response to a specific threat of harm  in  a
           telephone call from a specific individual and in order to report
           that threat to the police,  and  evidence  that  described  only
           receiving a threat of harm from that individual after  attending
           a police station and making no report of it. In my judgement  it
           was open to the Judge  who  had  the  advantage  of  seeing  the
           Appellant give her evidence, to take that point against her, and
           find that if she had been giving  him  a  truthful  account  she
           would have been consistent about key features of it.
        9. I accept as Ouseley J did in CJ (on  the  application  of  R)  v
           Cardiff County Council [2011] EWHC 23,  the  importance  of  the
           approach in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm  AR  318.  Evidence,
           whether  oral  or  documentary,  does  not  carry  with   it   a
           presumption  of  authenticity,  which  specific  evidence   must
           disprove, failing which its content must be  accepted.  What  is
           required is its appraisal in the light of the evidence about its
           nature, provenance, timing and background evidence  and  in  the
           light of all the other evidence in  the  case,  especially  that
           given by the claimant. That is precisely the exercise the  Judge
           undertook. The mere fact that a story is changed, or  corrected,
           in re-examination does not  oblige  any  court  or  tribunal  to
           ignore what is said under cross-examination, yet ultimately that
           was Ms Rasoul's argument, and as such there was no merit in it.
       10. It is accepted that paragraphs 8,  9,  and  10  of  the  grounds
           identify no arguable error of law.
       11. Paragraphs 12 and 13 of the grounds are an  assertion  that  the
           Judge failed to  consider  the  country  guidance  of  AB  &  BM
           (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT  80  when  considering
           the risk of harm faced by a trafficking victim (as the Appellant
           is accepted to be) upon her return to Albania. This assertion is
           made notwithstanding  the  Judge's  express  reference  to  that
           decision, and his consideration of it  in  the  context  of  the
           other more recent evidence upon  the  situation  within  Albania
           that was placed before him [20-23]. Put simply there is no merit
           in the assertion.
       12. Ms Rasoul then sought to develop an argument to the effect  that
           there had been  no  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  individual
           circumstances upon return, but this argument was bound  to  fail
           in the face of the decision, which  shows  that  the  Judge  did
           precisely that. The findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
           contact with her mother, her mother's ability to access funds to
           finance the Appellant's flight to Belgium, and  the  Appellant's
           ability to  access  finance  through  the  dedicated  assistance
           package for victims of trafficking were all open to the Judge on
           the evidence. (The IOM scheme for such victims  is  one  run  on
           behalf of the Respondent [22].)
       13. The Judge also took into account  the  Appellant's  unchallenged
           claim that her home area was in the rural  north,  and  accepted
           that there was strong societal discrimination against victims of
           trafficking in that area, and thus  considered  whether  it  was
           reasonable to expect her to  relocate  to  an  urban  area  upon
           return. His conclusions on that issue were also well open to him
           on the evidence, and they too were adequately reasoned.
       14. There is in my judgement simply no merit in paragraphs 14 and 15
           of the grounds which assert that it was not open to the Judge to
           consider the evidence of  the  financial  support  available  to
           victims of trafficking, as part of his consideration of what her
           circumstances were likely to be in the event of  return.  Indeed
           when the proposition was put in those terms Ms  Rasoul  appeared
           to accept the point, and changed  tack  to  suggest  that  since
           there was no reference to such a financial support package in AM
           & BM the Upper Tribunal had not considered such evidence in  the
           context of Albania, and thus it was not open  to  the  Judge  to
           conclude  that  such  a  support  package  would  have  made  an
           appreciable difference to  the  Appellant's  circumstances  upon
           return.
       15. The availability of financial support to  returnees  from  third
           parties is plainly material evidence, whether its source is  the
           family in the country of origin, the  family  elsewhere  in  the
           world, or the Respondent. In AN & SS (Tamils - Colombo  -  risk)
           Sri Lanka CG [2008] UKAIT 00063 the Tribunal held  that  it  was
           appropriate to take into account the availability  of  financial
           support  from  the  Respondent  to  any  returnee,  through  the
           Voluntary Returns Programme;
        1. Much has been made of the undue harshness which AN will face  as
           a single mother without accommodation or employment and  without
           friends or family to turn to in Colombo, but this  is  to  leave
           out of account what even Dr Smith acknowledges to  be  the  very
           generous  support  package  offered  by  the  IOM  to  voluntary
           returnees.  After  "smoothing  the  re-entry  process"  the  IOM
           provides "a comprehensive package  of  support  for  five  years
           after arrival", which includes "five years shelter  guaranteed."
           We do not think it is open to the appellant to say that, if  she
           loses her appeal, she will not take advantage of  this  package,
           and to argue from that refusal that she will face destitution in
           Colombo which, accordingly, is not a  place  to  which  she  can
           reasonably be expected to relocate.


      Conclusion
       16. I am satisfied that the criticisms that have  been  advanced  of
           the decision are revealed to be either ill founded, or, at  best
           no more than a disagreement with the  Judge's  conclusions.  The
           approach taken by the Judge to the evidence in his decision does
           not disclose any error of law that requires that decision to  be
           set aside and remade.



   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      23 December 2014 contains no error of law in the decision  to  dismiss
      the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside
      and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 7 July 2015


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 7 July 2015



