
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08664/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 April 2016                      |On 12 May 2016                       |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                FATOUMATA BAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge De Haney promulgated on 11 February 2015 which dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to remove
    the Appellant  from  the  UK  following  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's claim for asylum.

Background

 4. The Appellant was born on 5 September 1995 and is a national of Guinea.

 5. On 25 September 2013 the Appellant who was at that time  18  years  old
    applied for asylum.

 6. On 7 October 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) It was not accepted that the Appellants parents had  been  arrested
         by the authorities as her account of how she found this out and why
         it happened was inconsistent.

      b) The Appellants late claim for asylum undermined her credibility.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  De  Haney  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

      a) The Appellant was not a credible witness as  to  the  core  of  her
         account as there were a number of discrepancies and inconsistencies
         in that account.

      b) The Appellants account had changed since her Screening Interview.

      c) The photographic evidence produced by the Appellant must  pre  date
         her father's imprisonment and therefore it was  not  credible  that
         she did not know of her parents involvement with the UFDG.

      d) The Appellants explanation that she was panicked and nervous in her
         asylum interview did not explain why she had  forgotten  the  whole
         basis of her claim given her life experience and her  demeanour  in
         the hearing.

      e) He found other aspects of her account to be incredible:  her  claim
         to be coming to the UK in August 2013 for a 3 month holiday yet she
         claimed to be starting University in Guinea in October or  November
         2013; the fact that her father took her passport when returning  to
         Guinea; the fact that her father's friend who she was left with had
         not attended court to support her claim; the letter from  the  UFDG
         in the UK did not provide information about  the  circumstances  of
         her parents  ;  that  the  authorities  arrested  her  parents  and
         informed their neighbours of the reason was not credible.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge had failed to take
    into account that the Appellant that the Appellant was just 18  at  the
    time of her asylum interview or to make  findings  as  to  whether  her
    parents were members or supporters of the UFDG.

 9. Permission was refused on 10 March 2015 and the application was renewed
    and on 8 June 2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  gave  permission  to
    appeal.

10. There is a Rule 24 Response dated 15 July 2015 which  argued  that  the
    Appellant gave discrepant answers in the asylum interview  in  relation
    to the core of her claim. The Judge made adverse  credibility  findings
    that were open to him.

11. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Nicholson on behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) The issue was whether the Judge considered all of the  evidence  in
         reaching his adverse credibility findings.

      b) The determination was very brief.

      c) The Judge did not take  into  account  her  age  in  assessing  the
         account she gave.

      d) The Judge's approach to the photographic evidence was flawed  given
         that she did not know about the photographs until after  her  claim
         was made.

      e) Hers was an inherently plausible account.

12. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison submitted that :

      a) He relied on the Rule 24 response.

      b) The Judge set out a number of reasons  why  he  did  not  find  the
         Appellant was credible.

      c) The Judge gave reasons why he found her mature for her age and  why
         therefore her account of feeling panicked in the interview was  not
         credible.

      d) The Appellant was trying to suggest that she was less able than she
         is.

      e) The findings were sustainable.

13. In reply Mr Nicholson on behalf of the Appellant submitted :

      a) The Appellants case was that she was not interested in politics and
         her claim must be assessed against that background.

The Law

14.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration.

16. In relation to credibility findings I  note  that  in  Mibanga  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging such
    findings:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

Finding on Material Error

17. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

18. I have considered the argument that the Judge did not take into account
    the Appellants age when assessing the  credibility  of  her  claim  for
    asylum. I am satisfied that the Judge did take it  into  account  quite
    explicitly in that his decision opens with the statement  that  at  the
    time of hearing the Appellant was 19. There  is  no  question  that  he
    misunderstands the chronology of her account as this is set out in  his
    summary of her evidence at paragraph 11 (i)-(xiv). He  also  opens  his
    findings by noting that one of her explanations for  her  inability  to
    answer probing questions was her age at the time the  events  in  issue
    occurred. The Judge I am satisfied also went on to make  an  assessment
    of her maturity in the light of her claim that her age had impacted  on
    her evidence at paragraph 20 of the decision: I am  satisfied  that  in
    assessing her maturity it was open to him to take into account that the
    Appellant by her own evidence had travelled on her own abroad including
    to the USA 'on her own' in 2007 and again in  2008  and  stayed  for  3
    months with an aunt.  Therefore  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  in
    assessing her account was fully  aware  of  her  claims  that  her  age
    impacted on her claim and the weight he gave to this  assertion  was  a
    matter for him. Against this clear acknowledgement  of  the  Appellants
    claim that her account was affected by her age the Judge went on to set
    out a number of credibility findings  detailed  at  paragraph  7(a)-(e)
    above and he gave sustainable reasons for the conclusions he reached.

19. Mr Nicholson specifically  challenges  the  Judges  finding  about  the
    photographs she produced but I am satisfied that it was open to him  to
    conclude that the late production of such evidence, a  year  after  her
    interview, was a factor that was relevant to the weight he attached  to
    them.

20. I find that the argument that the Judge made  no  findings  as  to  the
    claimed involvement of the parents in the UFDG has no merit. The  Judge
    was clear and explicit that he did not find that the  Appellant  was  a
    credible witness and he rejected her account. Given  that  her  account
    was underpinned by the claim that her parents were  involved  with  the
    UFDG I am satisfied that he clearly did not accept  that  part  of  her
    claim.

21. Mr Nicholson also suggested that the decision was short but I take into
    account MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC),
    where it was held that  (i)  It  was  axiomatic  that  a  determination
    disclosed clearly the reasons for a  tribunal's  decision.  (ii)  If  a
    tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to  be  implausible,   incredible   or
    unreliable or a document to be  worth  no  weight  whatsoever,  it  was
    necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to  be
    supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not  believed
    or that a document was afforded no weight was unlikely to  satisfy  the
    requirement to give reasons. The Judge in this case also  set  out  the
    caselaw relevant to his determination of the evidence at paragraph  26.
    I am satisfied that he addressed all of the issues raised in  what  was
    in fact a fairly narrow claim and gave sustainable  and  clear  reasons
    why he rejected the claim.

CONCLUSION

22. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

23. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 9.5.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

