
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/08169/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th April 2016                        |On 27th July 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          mr Ali Hosseinpoor Malati
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Makeda Christopher (LR)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hetherington,  promulgated  on  5th  October  2015,  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 23rd September  2015.   In  the
    determination, the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon
    the Respondent  Secretary  of  State  applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a  citizen  of  Iran,  who  was  born  on  2nd
    February 1982.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 12th May 2015, refusing his  application  for  asylum  under  the
    Refugee Convention, and his  application  for  humanitarian  protection
    under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  has  been  involved  in  Iran  in
    activities  with  Erfan  Halgheh,  and  has  a  well-founded  fear   of
    persecution.  He has converted to Erfan Halgheh.  His sister  had  been
    hanged by the authorities on 13th May 2009 because  she  had  converted
    from Islam to Christianity.  Shortly after this his wife had left  him.
    He was left with a 2 year old  daughter.   He  was  broken  hearted  so
    started attended Erfan Halgheh classes by  his  friend.   These  lasted
    eight terms.  Each lasting for one to two months for which he was given
    a card to confirm his completion of a course.  The basis,  he  claimed,
    of Erfan Halgheh is that everything in his universe is created  by  one
    God and every living being is entitled to live.   This  is  a  personal
    viewpoint, according to the Respondent Secretary of State, who rejected
    the claim.  This was because the practical aspect of Erfan  (mysticism)
    is based on establishing a link to the several circles (Halgheh) of the
    "cosmic consciousness" to which an entire pathway  of  exploration  and
    transformation is open, and would be applicable in daily life.

 4. The Appellant's case was that whereas Islam requires you  to  fear  God
    Erfan Halgheh teaches that God loves  you  and  it  is  an  alternative
    medication and it does not claim to be a religion (see paragraph 10).

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge held that the Appellant had  demonstrated  the  knowledge  of
    Erfan Halgheh.  He was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  simply
    learned details about Erfan Halgheh rather than to have experienced it.
     The judge said "he provided a plausible account of his  activities  in
    Iran in his interview" (paragraph 17).  One of the things taken against
    the Appellant by the Secretary of State  was  that  the  Appellant  had
    consumed alcohol but the judge observed that, "the  Appellant  concedes
    that he briefly (and illegally within Iran) turned to  alcohol  in  the
    depths of  despair  following  his  sister's  execution  and  his  wife
    leaving" (paragraph 18).  The judge also  observed  how  the  HOPO  had
    stated that there  was  no  evidence  of  the  Appellant  preaching  or
    evangelising Erfan Halgheh, but the judge held,

         "I questioned why a lack of evidence of preaching  or  evangelising
         is relevant.  Religions  (for  example  Judaism,  Christianity  and
         Islam) usually have a system of beliefs,  doctrines  and  practices
         and their own body of scripture.  I  have  seen  no  evidence  that
         Erfan Halgheh has.  There is no universally accepted definition  of
         religion" (paragraph 19).

 6. The judge went on to conclude that given the reasons that  he  had  set
    out it was much more likely than not that the Appellant was  a  student
    of Erfan Halgheh.

 7. The appeal was allowed.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law by failing
    to make any findings on the risk on return to the Appellant arising out
    of his conclusion that the Appellant was a student  of  Erfan  Halgheh.
    He also failed to make any findings on the identity of the persecutors.
     There was also  no  finding  as  to  how  people  would  identify  the
    Appellant as a student of Erfan Halgheh.

 9.  On  22nd  October  2015,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted.    The
    determination was extremely brief and it was arguable  that  the  judge
    had failed to identify and resolve any key conflicts in the evidence.

10. An undated Rule 24 was entered by  the  Appellant's  Counsel,  and  the
    Rules 24 response makes no detailed submission but to say that this was
    nothing more than  just  a  disagreement  with  the  Tribunal's  cogent
    finding.

Submissions

11. At the hearing  before  me  on  20th  April  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Mrs  Makeda  Christopher,  and  the   Respondent   was
    represented by Ms R Petterson.  Ms Petterson submitted that  the  judge
    made no findings as to what happened to the Appellant in  Iran.   Given
    that so much of the case put forward by the Appellant was  disputed  in
    the refusal letter, the judge gave an  extremely  brief  determination,
    and should have dealt with issues of disputed fact.   Given  that  this
    had not been done, there was an error of law.

12. For her  part,  Mrs  Christopher  submitted  that  this  was  simply  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings.  The judge had  (at  paragraphs
    21 to 26) stated his conclusions as to the credibility and the  refugee
    issues before him.  He had found the Appellant  to  be  credible.   The
    judge had not one but two bundles  of  documentation  before  him.   At
    paragraphs 5 to 6 the judge summed what he was  required  to  determine
    and this was the correct approach to the law.  The judge accepted  that
    the Appellant was an illegal disciple of the  Erfan  Halgheh  movement.
    Whilst this was accepted, it was only to be  expected  that  the  judge
    would then allow the appeal.

13. In reply, Mrs Petterson submitted that the judge did not make  findings
    on a great deal of the Appellant's case.  To refer to paragraphs 21  to
    26 was insufficient.  She asked that I make a finding on  an  error  of
    law and I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, such that I should set  aside
    the decision (see paragraph 21(1) of TCEA  2007.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

15. First, whereas the case of Budhathoki (reasons  for  decisions)  [2014]
    UKUT 00341 makes it quite clear that, "it is generally unnecessary  and
    unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  to  rehearse  every  detail
    raised in a case", that case also makes it quite clear  that,  "it  is,
    however, necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in
    the evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
    that the parties can understand why they have won or lost" (see  Hadden
    - Cave J).

16. For  example,  paragraph  24  of  the  refusal  letter  criticises  the
    Appellant for being vague about when the  movement  was  founded.   The
    Appellant only said "about 30 years ago".  He was asked to name the two
    healing approaches of Erfan Halgheh to which the Appellant provided  an
    example of someone having an illness and would announce it to the class
    who would then ask for energy from God for you.

17.  When  asked  about  the  specific  names  given  to  the  two  healing
    approaches, the  Appellant  was  not  able  to  identify  both  healing
    approaches and distinguish the two, and instead gave a generalised view
    on how the individual could possible be cured from an illness.  He  was
    asked what Irfan Halgheh states about the universe  and  he  said  that
    everything in this universe has been  created  by  one  God  and  every
    living being is entitled to live.  This, was  a  "more  of  a  personal
    viewpoint which is not supported objectively".

18.  The  Appellant's  description  regarding  Evangelism  was  vague  (see
    paragraph 27).  The  refusal  letter  also  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant evangelised.  Since arriving in the UK he stated that he  did
    not require a specific place to make a connection with God because this
    can be achieved anywhere and the refusal letter observes that this  was
    considered evasive (paragraph 29).

19. The Appellant also failed to provide  a  compelling  and  comprehensive
    account of his  reasons  for  becoming  a  follower  of  Erfan  Halgheh
    (paragraph 31).  These are matters that the judge should have expressly
    considered and resolved as disputed issues of fact.

20. Second, the suggestion that the judge did so from paragraphs 21  to  26
    is not persuasive because all that these paragraphs do is simply  state
    that, "the Appellant has made a  genuine  effort  to  substantiate  his
    asylum claim" (paragraph  22)  or  that  "the  Appellant  has  given  a
    coherent and plausible  account  that  does  not  run  counter  to  the
    available  general  or  specific  information  relevant  to  his  case"
    (paragraph 24).  The fact is that the evidence does  not  properly  set
    out in relation to the disputed issues of fact.

Remaking the Decision

21. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  Under Practice Statement 7.2, the Upper Tribunal may remit  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal where  the  nature  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for the  decision  in
    the appeal to be remade is such that I having regard to the  overriding
    objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (see Practice Statement 7.2(b)).



Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by  a  judge
    other than Judge Hetherington, under Practice Statement 7.2(b) so  that
    it can be heard by a judge other than Judge Hetherington.

23. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd July 2016




