
[pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/08612/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House              |        Decision and Reasons          |
|On 7th August  2015                |Promulgated                           |
|                                   |On 14th August 2015                   |
|                                   |                                      |
|                                   |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between


                                   MR K. T
                                             (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


              THE  SECRETRARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by A&P Solicitors.
For the Respondent:   Mr. Kadola, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The proceedings before the First -tier Tribunal were anonimised. No
   application has been made to change this and so this should be
   maintained.

2. The appellant had claimed asylum on 3 August 2013. His application was
   refused on 2 September 2013 on the basis the claim was not credible. His
   appeal was initially heard by First-tier Judge Khawar on 11 October 2013
   and was dismissed. Credibility was a significant feature in the appeal.
   The decision was critical of the appellant's oral evidence.

3. The appellant was then granted permission to appeal to the Upper
   Tribunal and this was heard on 26 June 2014. The decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal was set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington .
   Over four months had elapsed between the hearing and the promulgation of
   the First-tier Tribunal decision. This delay was a significant feature as
   to whether the decision could stand. There was argument over whether
   there had been a material error of fact on the part of the judge, with a
   discrepancy noted between findings in the decision from the record of
   proceedings. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington set aside the
   determination, preserving none of the facts and directed the matter be
   heard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

4. The de novo hearing took place on 16 December 2014 before First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Boyd. Again, in a decision dated 29 April 2015 the appeal
   was dismissed. As before, credibility was central to the appeal. The
   judge concluded that his account had been entirely fabricated. The
   decision was challenged on the basis of delay. Permission to appeal was
   granted as it was arguable a delay of 4 1/2 months between hearing and
   promulgation rendered the credibility findings unsafe.

5. At today's hearing Mr Kandora acknowledged that the delay undermined the
   reliability of the findings. I was referred to the decision of the Court
   of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department -v-
   RK(Algeria)[2007].

6. It is my conclusion that the delay between hearing and promulgation of
   the decision renders it unsafe. Credibility was central to the appeal and
   there is the risk and the perception of possible errors occurring through
   the passage of time. Consequently, as suggested by both representatives
   the decision cannot stand. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier
   Tribunal for a de novo hearing. The appeal should not be listed before
   Judge Kondora or Judge Boyd.

Decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and remitted to the
first-tier tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly










