
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08210/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 November 2015                      |On 31 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                 Ling Zhang
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Price, Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   Morrison dismissing an appeal of asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born in 1989 and is a national of  China.   She  claims
   that her parents were killed at the end of 2003 when a housing  developer
   demolished the family home  with  the  family  inside.   The  appellant's
   parents had refused to  move  and  one  night  the  developers  came  and
   demolished the house while she and her parents were sleeping in it.   The
   appellant survived and was taken in by a neighbour.  She tried to make  a
   complaint in the petitions office in the nearest city but  the  developer
   had a relationship  with  the  government  and  claimed  that  the  house
   collapsed on its own.  When the appellant went to make her complaint  she
   was detained for about a week.  In detention she was threatened and given
   only bread and water.  After she was  released  she  was  followed.   The
   appellant returned to live with a neighbour but one day she was  cornered
   by two men who beat her up and threatened her. They told her that if  she
   complained again she would be killed.  After this the neighbours did  not
   want her to stay with them anymore.  The appellant used the family's life
   savings to employ a "snakehead" to arrange her travel to the UK.

3) After her arrival in the UK the appellant met some Chinese  people.   She
   lived and worked with them for about a year and a half doing  washing  up
   in a take-away restaurant.  After about three years in London  she  moved
   to Manchester where she stayed for  3  or  4  years  working  at  another
   restaurant.  She then went to Edinburgh to work  in  a  take-away.   From
   there she went to a restaurant in Livingston where she  was  detected  by
   immigration officials and she claimed asylum.

4) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal observed  that  if  the  appellant's
   account was true then she would have left China when  she  was  only  14.
   There was, however, no evidence apart from the appellant's own account to
   support her claim that was when she left China.  She had no contact  with
   the authorities in the UK until she  was  detained  in  July  2013.   She
   produced a witness statement from a friend who said  she  had  known  her
   only since 2012.

5) The judge acknowledged that the appellant had given a consistent  account
   of the events in which she claimed to have been  involved  in  China  and
   these were plausible when considered against the background  information.
   There was a factual discrepancy over whether  she  had  used  the  family
   savings to pay the snakehead to leave China or whether she  had  borrowed
   the money from the snakeheads.  There was also an  inconsistency  arising
   from differing accounts she had given of how she had travelled from China
   to  the  UK.   The  judge  found  these  discrepancies  damaging  to  the
   appellant's credibility.

6) The judge considered the appellant's response  after  the  demolition  of
   the house.  The judge did not consider it credible that a  girl  who  had
   just turned 14 would have reported the developers to the local  petitions
   office.  He did not find it credible that a recently bereaved 14 year old
   girl would have taken such action, nor did he find it credible  that  the
   response of the officials in the department would have been to detain her
   for a week.  In his view it was much more  likely  that  the  authorities
   would have ignored the appellant knowing that her parents were  dead  and
   there were no adult family members who might cause trouble.  Even if  the
   appellant had been detained for a week, it  was  not  credible  that  she
   would subsequently be approached out of the blue a  few  weeks  later  by
   people whom she said represented the developer and  who  threatened  her.
   If she had been detained and released the developers  had  no  reason  to
   think that she would be any further trouble to  them.   In  addition  the
   judge did not consider it plausible that the appellant would  have  found
   the family's savings of 10,000 RMB among the ruins of their family  home;
   that she would have hidden this from the neighbours while she was  living
   with them; and then arranged herself to find and pay snakeheads  to  fund
   her journey.

7) The judge concluded that the appellant's account was  a  fabrication  and
   she did not face a real risk of persecution on return to China.

8) The judge then considered the appellant's private life, first of  all  in
   relation to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The judge was not
   satisfied  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   her
   integration into China.  The judge  did  not  consider  it  necessary  to
   consider Article 8 outside the Rules.

Application for permission to appeal

9) The application for permission to appeal  started  with  the  appellant's
   claim that she had come to the UK in 2004.  The judge was not prepared to
   make a finding that the appellant arrived in  the  UK  in  2004  and  was
   prepared to accept only that she had been in  the  UK  since  2012.   The
   judge could not therefore take as  an  adverse  credibility  point  under
   section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act
   2004 that the appellant had delayed making an asylum claim for  a  period
   of almost 10 years, since 2004.  In addition, the judge  considered  that
   the appellant had had a lengthy period in which to fabricate the  details
   of her asylum claim.  This was on the assumption that she had had  almost
   10 years to do this whereas the judge's finding was that she had not been
   in the UK since 2004 but only since 2012.   It  was  not  clear  to  what
   extent the judge had  accepted  the  Home  Office  submissions  on  these
   matters.  The judge's reasoning on these matters was not  based  upon  by
   his findings in fact.  This was an arguable error of law that went to the
   core of the claim and infected the other negative credibility findings.

10) The grounds  then  refer  to  certain  factors  which  the  judge  found
   adversely affected the appellant's credibility.  These were,  first,  the
   issue of whether or not the appellant owed any money to  snakeheads  and,
   second, the implausibility of the appellant's alleged actions in China at
   the age of 14.  According to the grounds these issues were not put to the
   appellant by the respondent in the reasons for refusal letter, nor at the
   hearing by the respondent's representative.  The judge did not  put  them
   to the appellant.  They were not  obvious  points  that  required  to  be
   responded to by the appellant without notice.  The appellant did not have
   a fair opportunity  to  answer  them.   Reliance  was  placed  upon  Oke,
   Petitioner [2012] CSOH 50.

11) The grounds refer to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.   It  is
   submitted that the judge applied the  wrong  test  by  finding  that  the
   appellant did not have a lack of ties to  China.   The  proper  test  was
   whether there were significant obstacles  to  reintegration.   The  judge
   also said that any ties which the appellant had lost were a matter of her
   own choice for which she was to  blame.   The  question  of  choice  was,
   however, not relevant to the application of paragraph 276ADE(vi).

12) Continuing with the right to private life, the judge found there was  no
   good arguable case that would entitle him to make an Article 8 assessment
   outside the terms of the Rules.  The judge had treated the concept  of  a
   good arguable case as a sifting or intermediary test.  This was now known
   to be wrong, as pointed out in Oludoyi IJR [2014] UKUT 00539.  The  judge
   had applied the wrong legal test.

13) Finally the grounds criticise the judge's application  of  section  117B
   of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge erred  in
   finding that s117B(3)  required  some  certification  of  achievement  or
   attendance at English language courses.  The issue was only  whether  the
   person could speak English.  In addition, given the judge had found  that
   the appellant was an economic migrant and had worked  until  she  claimed
   asylum, the finding that she was not financially independent prior to her
   asylum claim was unreasonable.

14) Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal in  relation
   to the credibility issues arising from the asylum grounds.  The points in
   relation to the judge's finding as to when the appellant arrived  in  the
   UK in conjunction with the supposed delay  in  claiming  asylum  and  the
   opportunity to fabricate a claim  were  arguable.   In  relation  to  the
   discrepancies that were not put to the appellant it was difficult to  see
   why they needed to be but this issue was still arguable.

15) In granting permission the  judge  considered  there  was  no  merit  in
   relation to the Article 8 grounds.   The  judge  ultimately  applied  the
   correct test under paragraph 276ADE.  The point the judge was making  was
   that there were no factors to be considered when  considering  Article  8
   which had not been taken into account when considering paragraph  276ADE.
   In these circumstances it was not  arguable  that  the  judge  needed  to
   consider Article 8 outside the Rules as  the  appellant  could  not  have
   succeeded.  Even if the judge were  wrong  in  relation  to  the  English
   language and financial independence factors, these factors did not weaken
   the public interest in the maintenance of immigration control.

16) A rule 24 notice was lodged on behalf of the  respondent.   This  stated
   that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal directed himself  appropriately
   and made findings that were open to him.  The judge found  there  was  no
   basis for making a finding on the length of time the appellant  had  been
   in the country.  Any error in taking into account the submission that the
   appellant had had plenty of time to fabricate the details of  her  asylum
   claim was not material in the light of  the  strong  adverse  credibility
   finding.  The grounds were nothing more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
   Tribunal's findings.

17) A rule 25 response was lodged on behalf of the  appellant,  intended  to
   serve also as a skeleton argument.  This contended that  in  relation  to
   when the appellant arrived in the UK either a finding had  been  made  of
   the wrong period  of  time  or  contradictory  findings  had  been  made.
   Reliance in this regard was placed on the grant of permission to  appeal.
   Reference was made to the case of Murray Group Holdings [2015] CSIH 77.

18) It was further submitted in the rule 25 response that the appellant  had
   not had a fair opportunity  to  answer  points  taken  against  her.   It
   appeared to be accepted in the grant of permission to appeal  that  these
   matters were not put to the appellant, even though it  was  said  it  was
   difficult to see why they needed to be.  Again this constituted an  error
   in terms of Murray Group Holdings.

19) Taking issue with rule 24 notice, the rule 25 response stated  that  the
   grounds were not just a disagreement with the findings of the  First-tier
   Tribunal.  It was not accepted that the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   made findings which were open  to  him.   If  errors  were  made  in  the
   assessment of credibility then these were material.

20) It was further submitted in the rule 25 response that there were  errors
   going to the core of the claim and that a new  decision  required  to  be
   made.  The appeal should be remitted for hearing again before the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

21) At this point it may be observed, having regard  to  the  terms  of  the
   rule 25 response, that any observations made by the Judge of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal who granted permission to appeal are  not  binding  on  the
   Upper Tribunal in respect of  the  question  of  whether  the  First-tier
   Tribunal made an error of law.  They are  intended  to  explain  why  the
   judge who grants permission  to  appeal  considers  that  the  points  in
   question are arguable.  They do no more than this - they are  not  to  be
   regarded as expressing any conclusions on those points.   They  therefore
   cannot be founded upon by either side.

Submissions

22) At the hearing before me Mr Price submitted  that  there  were  arguable
   errors in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, as  indicated  in  the
   grant of permission to appeal.  At paragraph 31 the judge referred to the
   appellant having come to the attention of the UK authorities  nine  years
   after she claimed to have arrived in the UK.  The judge  did  not  accept
   the appellant had arrived in 2004.  A delay of 9 or 10 years in  claiming
   asylum was very different from a delay of one  year.   Having  found  the
   appellant had arrived only in 2012 it was wrong of the judge to accept  a
   submission on behalf of the respondent that the appellant had delayed for
   nine years in claiming asylum.

23) Mr Price continued that the judge found at paragraphs  28  and  29  that
   the appellant's account was consistent and credible.  The issues on which
   the judge found discrepancies were  not  put  to  the  appellant  at  the
   hearing.  They were not obvious issues to which the appellant should have
   provided a response.  There was  procedural  unfairness.   The  appellant
   should have had notice of the points against her.    Reliance  was  again
   placed on Oke.

24) For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien relied on the rule 24  notice.   On  the
   question of delay in claiming asylum, the judge said that if he  accepted
   what the appellant said then there was a long delay in  making  a  claim.
   This was the position of the Secretary of State and it was  open  to  the
   judge to accept this.  It was clear that the judge had had difficulty  in
   making a finding as to  when  the  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK.   The
   position was that if it was accepted what the appellant  said  about  her
   date of arrival then  the  negative  credibility  point  could  be  taken
   against her.

25) Mrs O'Brien submitted that in the case of  Oke,  which  was  a  judicial
   review, there was a complete failure to have a fair hearing and follow  a
   fair process.  In the present appeal it was not known  what  answers  the
   appellant would have given to  the  questions  at  issue  but  there  was
   nothing before the Tribunal to indicate that these points should not have
   been taken.  It was pointed out that the discrepancies in the appellant's
   account of her travel to the UK were  referred  to  in  the  reasons  for
   refusal letter.  Mrs O'Brien submitted that the credibility factors might
   be looked at cumulatively.  At paragraph 33 of the decision it  was  made
   clear why the judge found against the appellant in terms of  credibility.



26) Mrs O'Brien pointed out that permission to appeal had not  been  granted
   in respect of Article 8.  Mr Price confirmed  that  this  aspect  of  the
   decision was not challenged.

27) Mrs O'Brien concluded that in relation to credibility  criticisms  might
   be made but the appellant had not shown a continued risk to her in  China
   and the decision should stand.

28) Mr Price responded that this was  a  case  where  there  was  unfairness
   because the appellant had not been allowed to explain  points  that  were
   taken before her.  There was an  ongoing  risk  to  her  in  China.   The
   appellant had been detained and feared she was on a blacklist because she
   had made a complaint.  This was a fear of the state.

Discussion

29) The principal issues argued on behalf of the  appellant  were  that  the
   judge had  made  adverse  credibility  findings  based  on  contradictory
   findings and that the judge had acted unfairly in taking  adverse  points
   against the appellant on which she had not been given the opportunity  to
   comment.  I will address first the judge's findings on  the  question  of
   when the appellant arrived in the UK.

30) At paragraph 23 of the decision the judge pointed out that according  to
   the appellant she was only 14 when she left China but she had no  contact
   with the authorities in the UK until July  2013.   At  paragraph  24  the
   judge then recorded an acknowledgement by Mr Price that  the  appellant's
   failure to claim between her supposed arrival in the UK in 2004  and  her
   detention in 2013 went against the appellant's credibility.  Mr Price was
   recorded as having said, however, that this was not determinative of  her
   credibility.  The judge accepted this but then said it was  a  matter  on
   which he must place some weight.  The  judge  further  stated  that  what
   concerned him particularly was that the  appellant  acknowledged  in  her
   oral evidence that she had been aware of the asylum process  since  2008,
   when she claimed to have been living in Manchester.   The  appellant  was
   asked why she did not claim asylum in 2008 and replied that she had  work
   and a job so did not apply earlier.  When she was questioned again  about
   this she said that at that time her life was quite  stable  and  she  was
   satisfied with it.  The judge recorded at paragraph 9 that the  appellant
   had previously informed the respondent that she had been told  by  people
   that if she claimed asylum she would be sent back  to  China.   This  was
   not, however, the explanation the appellant gave in her evidence  at  the
   hearing for her delay in claiming asylum.  The  judge  concluded  on  the
   basis of the appellant's evidence at the  hearing  that  the  appellant's
   main interest in being in the UK was economic rather than keeping herself
   safe.

31) The decision of the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shows  that  he
   accepted the submission on behalf of  the  appellant  that  any  supposed
   delay by the appellant in claiming asylum was not  determinative  of  her
   credibility.  The judge said that nevertheless he had to have  regard  to
   this, which is correct in terms of section 8 of the 2004 Act.  The  judge
   found a damaging inconsistency in the reasons given by the appellant  for
   not claiming asylum earlier and the judge's reasoning in relation to this
   was not challenged.

32) Subsequently, at paragraph 33, the judge said he  was  not  prepared  to
   make a finding that the appellant arrived in the UK in  2004.   The  only
   finding he was prepared to make was that the appellant  had  known  since
   2012 the friend in the UK who gave a statement on her behalf.  The  judge
   then said, in effect, that he was unable to make a finding as to the date
   when the appellant arrived.

33) There is no contradictory finding by the judge as to when the  appellant
   arrived in the UK.  It was accepted at the hearing that if the  appellant
   arrived in 2004 then a delay in claiming asylum would count  against  her
   but would not be determinative.  More significantly,  however,  she  gave
   inconsistent explanations for not claiming asylum earlier and  the  judge
   was entitled to find that this was damaging to her credibility.

34) The other aspect  arising  from  the  question  of  when  the  appellant
   arrived in the UK is the submission on behalf of the respondent that  the
   appellant had a more than adequate opportunity to  prepare  a  fabricated
   account.  On reading paragraph 26 of the judge's  decision,  however,  it
   seems that the terms of the submission were  ambiguous.   The  submission
   may have been based on the suggestion that the appellant had had  between
   2004 and 2013 to  fabricate  her  account  or,  alternatively,  that  the
   appellant had had time to do so between claiming asylum in July 2013  and
   being asked for the first time for a detailed account of her claim at  an
   interview in December 2014.  The judge concluded, at paragraph  26,  that
   there was some weight to be given to the submission that because  of  the
   appellant's lack of contact with the  authorities  she  had  had  a  very
   lengthy period in which to make up the details of her claim.

35) In stating this  the  judge  has  not  resolved  the  ambiguity  in  the
   submission.  The judge referred to "a very lengthy period"  during  which
   the appellant had a lack of contact with the authorities in the  UK.   It
   is not clear what the judge means by the appellant  having  had  "a  very
   lengthy period in which to make up the details of her claim."  The  judge
   may have been referring to the appellant's alleged arrival  in  2004,  or
   her claimed knowledge since 2008 of the possibility  of  claiming  asylum
   or, possibly, the gap between the screening interview in August 2013,  to
   which the judge refers, and the full interview in  December  2014.   This
   issue, however, is a minor aspect of the judge's reasoning and  I  accept
   the respondent's submission that by itself it is not material.  The  more
   important question is whether the other reasons given by  the  judge  for
   making an adverse credibility finding were matters on which the judge was
   entitled to base his decision.

36) Two of these reasons in particular  are  challenged  by  the  appellant.
   The first was the apparent discrepancy over whether  the  appellant  owed
   any money to the snakehead.  The second reason  which  is  challenged  is
   that the judge said it was implausible that a  14  year  old  would  have
   acted in the way that the appellant did by  making  a  complaint  to  the
   petitions office and by making arrangements to leave the country.

37) In relation to the payment of the snakehead,  the  reasons  for  refusal
   letter at paragraph 3.g states that according to the appellant's  account
   at her asylum interview, she paid 10,000 RMB to the snakehead  using  the
   life savings of her family.  At paragraph 15 the letter states  that  the
   appellant claimed to have left China with the help of a  snakehead  using
   her family's life's savings but it was unclear how the appellant obtained
   this money given that she claimed that her parents' house was  demolished
   and her parents were killed.

38) The judge records at paragraph 28 of his decision that  in  her  witness
   statement at paragraph 25 the  appellant  confirmed  that  she  paid  the
   snakehead 10,000 RMB.  The judge then refers to the appellant's screening
   interview and records that when asked to explain briefly  why  she  could
   not return to China she said: "The government tried to take  my  property
   and I owe  money  to  the  snakeheads."   The  judge  regarded  it  as  a
   discrepancy in the appellant's evidence whether she  paid  the  snakehead
   from her family's life savings or borrowed the money to do so.   (I  note
   in fact that the precise terms of what is recorded in the record  of  the
   screening interview at 4.2 are: "The government tried to take my property
   and I owe money to the mafia" but  I  do  not  consider  that  the  judge
   referring to "snakehead" rather than "mafia" is material.)

39) Mr Price took issue with the judge's  characterisation  of  this  as  an
   obvious point.  Although it does not seem to have been picked up  by  the
   writer of the refusal letter I agree with the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal that it was nevertheless apparent on the face of the documentary
   evidence.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  take  this  point  against  the
   appellant, particularly when the appellant had  provided  two  completely
   different accounts of her journey to the UK, as found  by  the  judge  at
   paragraph 30 of the decision.  This finding was not challenged.

40)  The  judge's  findings  about  the  plausibility  of  the   appellant's
   behaviour at the age of 14 are, as Mrs O'Brien acknowledged,  not  beyond
   criticism.  Nevertheless, the appellant's age at the time of the  alleged
   events was a significant point to which the judge was  entitled  to  have
   regard.  While no plausibility points in relation to the appellant's  age
   appear to have been raised at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,
   there was no uncertainty in the appellant's account about  her  age  when
   the alleged events took place.  The judge's main conclusion  in  relation
   to this, as set out at paragraph 29, was that  it  was  more  likely  the
   authorities would simply have ignored  the  appellant  knowing  that  her
   parents were dead and there were no adult family members who might  cause
   trouble.  I do not  perceive  anything  unfair  or  unreasonable  in  the
   judge's finding on this point.  It was a  finding  which  the  judge  was
   entitled to make.

41) Furthermore, the judge found that it was implausible that the  appellant
   found the family savings of 10,000 RMB in the rubble of the  house.   The
   reasons for refusal letter records at paragraph 15 that it is unclear how
   the appellant obtained this money given her  claim  that  her  house  was
   demolished and her parents were killed.  The appellant does not appear to
   have explained at her  asylum  interview  how  she  obtained  the  family
   savings and indeed, in  her  witness  statement,  at  paragraph  33,  the
   appellant states she was not asked by the Home Office where she  obtained
   the money.  She then states at paragraph 34 that she knew her parents had
   kept important documents and some savings in a chest of  drawers  in  the
   house.  After the house was demolished she went to the ruins.  She  found
   the chest of drawers and opened it.  Prior to this she did not  know  how
   much was in there but when she opened it she discovered over 10,000  RMB,
   which she used to pay the snakehead.  Then in her oral evidence,  as  the
   judge recorded at paragraph 29, the appellant said  that  she  kept  this
   money hidden at the neighbour's house until she decided to leave.

42) The question of how the appellant obtained  her  family's  life  savings
   was not considered until the appellant gave her witness statement for the
   purpose of the hearing.  It might have been preferable if at the  hearing
   the Secretary of State's  representative  had  challenged  the  appellant
   directly about how she obtained this money from the ruins of  her  family
   home.  It does not appear that  he  did  so.   It  does  not  necessarily
   follow, however, from the lack of any direct challenge that the judge was
   not entitled himself to consider  the  plausibility  of  the  appellant's
   account of this matter, along with the plausibility of the other  actions
   the appellant claimed to have taken at that time.  At paragraph 31 of the
   decision the judge took all the plausibility  issues  he  had  identified
   into account and reached the following conclusion:

    "As I already indicated this is an unusual case due to the age  of  the
    appellant when she claims to have left China and the fact that she  did
    not come to the attention of the authorities for some 9 years after she
    claimed to have arrived in the UK.  I have considered all the  evidence
    before me carefully and while I accept that the appellant's account  is
    plausible considered against the background information  my  conclusion
    is that her account is not plausible  when  I  take  into  account  the
    appellant's age when she claims her parents' home  was  demolished  and
    the way in which she said she reacted by going to the  local  petitions
    office to make a complaint and  thereafter  being  sufficiently  strong
    willed to be able to go back to  the  demolished  family  home,  search
    amongst the ruins and fortuitously find 10,000 RMB which she  was  able
    to recover, hide from her neighbours during the period that  she  lived
    with them and then arrange herself to find and pay snakeheads  to  fund
    her journey.  My conclusion is that the appellant's  account  stretches
    credibility too far and I do not  regard  it  as  being  credible  even
    taking into account the low standard of proof in these cases."


43)  I  consider  that  the  judge's  conclusions  in  paragraph  31  as  to
   plausibility need to be taken as a whole.  When they  are  considered  in
   this way, there is nothing unfair  about  the  way  in  which  the  judge
   reached these conclusions.  He heard the  appellant's  evidence  and  was
   required to make an assessment of the credibility and plausibility of her
   account, which he did.  He did not make any error of law in so doing.

44) There is a further  point  arising  from  the  grant  of  permission  to
   appeal, to which reference was made in the appellant's rule 25  response.
   This is concerned  with  a  finding  apparently  made  by  the  judge  at
   paragraph 33 of the  decision,  where  he  referred  to  a  question  the
   appellant  was  asked  about  whether  she  knew  if  the  developer  who
   demolished her family home was still operating.  According to  the  judge
   the appellant paused for some time before answering and said that it  was
   such a long time since she came to the UK she did not  know.   The  judge
   then recorded the appellant's claim that if she was returned to China she
   would continue  with  her  complaints  against  the  developer.   It  was
   nevertheless clear that she did not  know  if  the  developer  was  still
   operating and she appeared to have taken no steps to find out whether  it
   was.

45) It is not entirely clear what  purpose  these  comments  played  in  the
   judge's reasoning.  What the judge seems to have been suggesting was that
   the appellant could  have  taken  some  steps  to  discover  whether  the
   developer was still in existence but had not done so.  The judge  appears
   therefore to have been commenting on an omission  in  the  evidence.   It
   does not appear to be a significant part of the judge's reasoning.  It is
   not clear why the judge who granted permission to appeal  drew  attention
   to this in  her  decision.   In  my  view,  the  point  neither  detracts
   significantly  from  nor  contributes  significantly   to   the   overall
   credibility findings made by the judge.

46) In conclusion, I agree with the submission made by Mrs  O'Brien  to  the
   effect that although criticisms may be made of some of the points made by
   the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  overall  the  judge  has  given
   adequate and valid reasons for  making  an  adverse  credibility  finding
   against the appellant.  For the reasons given above, I do not agree  with
   the appellant's  arguments  that  the  making  of  this  adverse  finding
   discloses any error of law.

Conclusions

47) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

48) I do not set aside the decision.



Anonymity

49) The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.   In  view  of  the
   findings made by the judge, however, to the effect that the appellant was
   not at risk on return to China, I do not see a  continuing  justification
   for such an order.  No application was  made  for  it  to  be  continued.
   Accordingly I lift the  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.)





Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
