
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC/DH-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08520/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 8 April 2015                               |On 18 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Htike, Mount Azure Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Burma and her date of birth is 15  March
    1989.  I shall refer to the respondent as  the  appellant  as  she  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant made an application for asylum and  her  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 7 October 2014.  The
    basis of the appellant's claim is that she is of Rohingya ethnicity and
    a Muslim and her activities in Burma and  Malaysia.   Her  evidence  is
    that her brother was killed by Buddhist monks.  The appellant collected
    money for Muslims in Burma whilst she was in Malaysia and  these  funds
    were sent to her  mother  who  distributed  them.   The  appellant  was
    reprimanded by the police  in  June  2013  for  taking  photographs  of
    damaged houses and mosques. Her mother has been  asked  to  attend  the
    police station to answer  questions  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    whereabouts and demonstrations outside the Burmese Embassy in  the  UK.
    She joined the Burmese Muslim Association (BMA) on 3 May 2014.

3.   The Secretary of State refused the application.  It  was  not  accepted
    that she is of Rohingya ethnicity.  It was not accepted  that  she  was
    politically active in Malaysia or Burma.  It is not accepted  that  the
    appellant's mother was summoned by the police in April  2014.   It  was
    not accepted  that  the  appellant  has  been  engaged  with  political
    activities in the UK before she made an application for asylum.

4.   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Metzer allowed the appellant's  appeal
    on asylum grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted to  the  Secretary
    of State by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever in a decision  of  6
    December 2015.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the First-Tier Tribunal

5.   The matter was listed for a CMHR on 5 November 2014 when it was  listed
    for a substantive hearing on 10 December 2014.  On  this  occasion  the
    Presenting Officer who was expected to attend the  hearing  was  unwell
    and the Presenting Officer who was standing in had insufficient time to
    prepare the case. The matter was adjourned until 23 December  2014  and
    Judge C J E Nichols indicated that the matter  was  to  be  treated  as
    'part-heard' and listed before  him.   The  matter  came  before  Judge
    Metzer on 23 December 2014 who decided to hear the  appeal  as  it  was
    clear that Judge Nichols had not heard evidence.

6.   Judge Metzer recorded in the decision at [2] that  the  appellant  gave
    evidence with the assistance of a Burmese interpreter.  In addition  he
    heard evidence of Kyaw Soe Win, an official representative of the  BMA.
    The judge found that the appellant was "wholly credible" at [28].   And
    he went on to allow the appeal for the reasons that he gave at  [28]  -
    [35].

The Grounds Seeking Permission to Appeal and Oral Submissions

7.   The grounds seeking leave to appeal maintain that the judge  was  wrong
    in recording that the appellant gave evidence with the assistance of  a
    Burmese interpreter.  The interpreter had been released and  the  judge
    confirmed at the start of the hearing that the  appellant  could  speak
    English and proceeded.  The appellant  gave  evidence  in  English  not
    Burmese.  The judge stated  that  he  wanted  cross-examination  to  be
    limited to specific matters particularly since the appellant's  English
    was not good.  It is submitted that if the judge took the view that the
    appellant's English was not good enough for her to be cross-examined in
    full then her evidence should not have been taken in  English.   It  is
    submitted that the Secretary of State did not have the  opportunity  to
    effectively cross-examine the appellant.  To this extent  there  was  a
    procedural irregularity leading to unfairness.

8.   Ms Holmes referred to the Presenting Officer's note which was  attached
    to the grounds seeking permission.  The note is dated 23 December  2014
    and was prepared by Ms Butt who  represented  the  Secretary  of  State
    before Judge Metzer.   It  is  noted  that  the  interpreter  had  been
    released and the judge confirmed that the  appellant  could  understand
    some English and proceeded to hear the case.   The  following  is  also
    noted:-

         "He wanted to limit the cross to only specific matters particularly
         since her English was not that good.  I told the Judge even  if  he
         found her credible this was a two stage test in that he had to find
         that she was at risk of persecution.  It was evident that the Judge
         found the app credible.  The Judge did not seem so concerned  about
         the lack of evidence on the part of the app or  her  witness.   The
         app brought a witness Kyaw Soe Win and the Judge asked  me  what  I
         need to ask him.  I replied that I need to put to  him  if  he  had
         supplied any evidence to corroborate his assertions in his  witness
         statement, the Judge said  that  obviously  he  could  not  provide
         anything.  As this was evident I declined to cross-examine him.   I
         have placed my final submissions below as I  think  the  Judge  may
         allow this appeal based on her credibility and his poor handling of
         the hearing so it can be appealed."

9.   Mr Htike relied on his handwritten note that he  made  at  the  hearing
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Rule  24  response.    His
    handwritten note comprised one page and  recorded  that  the  appellant
    adopted her written statement as evidence-in-chief.  Reference is  then
    made to the HOPO and a number of issues  are  listed  representing  the
    cross-examination of the appellant (not in a question and answer form).



10.  The Rule 24 response states as follows in relation to the issue  raised
    in the grounds seeking permission.

         "12. Taking everything into consideration, the good Judge M  Metzer
             asked CH if she could speak English to a  reasonable  standard
             for the hearing to proceed.   She  explained  that  she  could
             understand and speak English quite well,  but  she  originally
             asked for an interpreter because she lacked self-confidence to
             express herself in English solely.   She  confirmed  that  she
             believed that she could perform  reasonably  well  without  an
             interpreter.

         13.  CH attended part of her master degree course in Malaysia which
             was taught in English, and she studied the  remainder  of  her
             master degree course in the UK, and achieved the master degree
             awarded by the UK university.  Even  by  the  usual  standards
             applied by the Home Office, she could easily be regarded as  a
             person with good English."

11.  At [14] of the Rule 24 response it is asserted that the Judge  and  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer asked the appellant a  large  number  of
    questions regarding issues listed at [1] - [15].

12.  It is asserted at [16]  of  the  Rule  24  response  that  the  parties
    decided to go ahead without an interpreter and that the  appellant  did
    not "feel an iota of distress or difficulty during  the  hearing.   She
    did not feel at all that she was forced to  proceed  with  the  hearing
    without an interpreter.  During the hearing there was no  complaint  or
    objection by the Home Office Presenting  Officer  against  the  hearing
    going ahead without an interpreter." It is asserted at [18] of the Rule
    24 response that the Secretary of  State's  allegation  that  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer was prevented at the hearing from effectively
    examining the appellant was "either wrong or exaggerated or both".   At
    the conclusion of evidence the  Judge  advised  both  parties  to  make
    focused submissions but he did not prevent  either  party  from  making
    submissions.

13.  In oral submissions Ms Holmes argued that the cross-examination of  the
    appellant recorded in the determination is not very detailed  and  this
    supports the assertion that it was limited.  The Rule 24 response  does
    not respond directly to the issue raised in  the  grounds.   Ms  Holmes
    referred to [14] and argued that it did not reflect  cross-examination.



14.  Mr Htike made oral submissions in the context of the Rule 24  response.
     He submitted that the interpreter was not released by the judge.   She
    left the hearing in error.  The interpreter  had  been  booked  at  the
    request of the appellant, but the appellant did not want an adjournment
    considering the history of the appeal.  The Presenting Officer did  not
    raise an objection to the hearing proceeding.  The judge did not  limit
    cross-examination he asked both parties to focus on the issues.

Error of Law

15.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  limited  cross-examination  by  the
    Presenting Officer on  account  of  the  appellant's  lack  of  English
    language skills and this amounts to a procedural  irregularity.   There
    was originally a Burmese interpreter at the hearing and whether she was
    released by the judge or left on her own  accord  is  not  in  my  view
    material.  There is a material irregularity which amounts to a material
    error of law and the decision of Judge Metzer is set aside pursuant  to
    Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

16.  Unfortunately the Record of Proceedings is not helpful.   There  is  no
    witness statement from the Presenting Officer or indeed Mr Htike who in
    fact represented the appellant at the hearing before me as well as  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is accepted by both parties
    that there was no Burmese interpreter  at  the  hearing  and  that  the
    appellant gave evidence in English which is  at  odds  with  the  judge
    recording that the appellant gave evidence with  the  assistance  of  a
    Burmese interpreter. This is a clear factual error.

17.   The  judge  limited  cross-examination  because  of  the   appellant's
    language difficulties (which became apparent as she gave evidence).  It
    may be that the judge asked the parties to focus on relevant issues  in
    relation to submissions but in my view he went  further  than  this  in
    relation to cross-examination.  I accept that the appellant was  cross-
    examined and there is indeed a record of cross-examination  at  [17]  -
    [24].  However I do not accept that cross-examination was as  extensive
    as asserted by the appellant in the Rule 24 response at [14] (which  in
    any event fails to distinguish between questions asked by the Judge and
    cross-examination.) I have taken into account the note of  the  hearing
    produced by Mr Htike which supports the assertion  that  the  appellant
    was indeed cross-examined but it does not deal with the  issues  raised
    in the grounds of appeal namely whether or not this was limited by  the
    judge.

18.  It is regrettable that there was  no  application  for  an  adjournment
    made by the appellant  who  had  originally  requested  an  interpreter
    (notwithstanding the unfortunate history of the  case  and  the  likely
    length of an adjournment).  It is also regrettable that the  Presenting
    Officer did not object to the judge's intervention in relation to cross-
    examination.  However, there is a  clear  material  irregularity  which
    amount to a material error of law.

19.  Both parties agreed that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) having taken into account
    paragraph 7 of the Practice Statement of the IAC of the FtT and  UT  of
    the Senior President of Tribunals 25 September 2012.

20.  The appellant submitted a supplementary bundle at  the  hearing  before
    me.  This was not material to the error of law  decision.   Whether  or
    not it is admissible in relation to the substantive hearing is a matter
    for the First-tier Tribunal.

21.  I have made an anonymity direction in the light of the  nature  of  the
    appellant's evidence. I did not hear representations from either  party
    on the issue which may be  reviewed  by  the  FtT  at  the  substantive
    hearing.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 15 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

