
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08423/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 December 2016                      |On 30 January 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              Soheib Yaroliahi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Patel, instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Soheib Yaroliahi, was born on 17 August 1986  and  is  a
    male citizen of Iran.  By a  decision  dated  3  October  2014  he  was
    refused asylum when a decision also was made to  remove  the  appellant
    from the United Kingdom.  The appellant  appealed  against  the  latter
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Heynes) which, in a decision
    promulgated on 14 July 2016 dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claimed to fear persecution in  Iran  because  he  was  a
    follower of Erfan-e-Halgeh (hereafter Erfan) a form of  faith  healing.
    Both parties accepted that, if the appellant were a genuine follower of
    Erfan, he would be at risk in Iran.  The judge's findings of  fact  are
    contained at [20-42].   The  judge  considered  the  various  items  of
    evidence produced by the  appellant  indicating  the  weight  which  he
    attached to each item.  At [41] he then wrote this:

         Taking all the above into account, I make the following findings of
         fact.  The appellant was qualified  and  employed  as  he  claimed.
         Because I do not find the circumstances  of  his  release  and  the
         appellant's ignorance of any conditions of bail  credible,  I  find
         the appellant has not proved to the requisite low standard that  he
         was arrested in 2013 in consequence of his involvement with  Erfan.
         Whilst he may well have broken his wrist, this had not occurred  as
         a result of torture by the Iranian authorities.  The length of time
         between his alleged release on bail and his departure  and  absence
         of any other evidence on the  matter  does  not  suggest  that  the
         Iranian authorities or  his  employers  were  seeking  or  had  any
         further interest in the appellant.  I found no basis for concluding
         that the appellant's evidence of his  arrest  in  2009  is  anymore
         reliable but, in any event, even if it did occur it did  not  cause
         him any further difficulties.  I do not accept the  appellant  left
         Iran illegally because he has had no need to do so.  Given  that  I
         have not found the appellant to be credible as to the core  of  his
         claim, I reject his evidence that his mother and any other relative
         was an adherent of  Erfan.   I  have  taken  full  account  of  the
         documents  described  above  but  I  find  their   reliability   is
         undermined by these credibility issues.

 3. It is not clear to me what exactly Judge Heynes considered  to  be  the
    "core" of this appellant's claim. The judge has considered the evidence
    concerning the appellant's account of having been arrested in 2009  and
    2013 and has given reasons for finding that he had not been arrested as
    he claimed.  However, it is apparent that at least part of  the  "core"
    of this appellant's claim is that he is a genuine  follower  of  Erfan.
    The judge has made no clear  and  unequivocal  finding  regarding  that
    crucial and central aspect of the claim.  Instead, the judge has  moved
    from a rejection  of  the  appellant's  account  of  past  events  (his
    arrests) to a rejection of the evidence that the appellant's mother was
    a follower of Erfan "given that I have not found the  appellant  to  be
    credible as to the core of his claim ..."  It could perhaps  be  argued
    that, because the judge had found the  appellant  was  not  a  reliable
    witness regarding past events, his claim to  be  a  follower  of  Erfan
    could not be accepted in consequence.  The problem is  the  judge  does
    not actually say that.  He has not addressed the possibility  that  the
    appellant may not have been arrested but is yet a genuine  follower  of
    Erfan.  It is not enough to infer from the  findings  that  that  would
    inevitably be the judge's belief; the judge needed to make a clear  and
    unequivocal finding on the issue.

 4. Further, I understand that a Mr Lucas  Bridge  gave  evidence  for  the
    appellant at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  I can find no
    Record of Proceedings in the  court  file  but  Mr  Harrison,  for  the
    respondent, confirmed from his colleague's  note  that  Mr  Bridge  did
    attend.  The judge did not refer to Mr Bridge in his decision.  If  the
    judge did not attach any weight to Mr Bridge's evidence then he  should
    have so indicated and given reasons.  I  understand  that  Mr  Bridge's
    evidence may have been relevant to the appellant's  claimed  sur  place
    activities.  Those activities are dismissed by Judge Heynes in a single
    sentence  at  [42]:  "Whilst  the  appellant   has   attended   various
    demonstrations, there is no evidence to suggest that he has put himself
    at risk by so doing".  I am generally reluctant  to  interfere  with  a
    robust fact-finding exercise by a First-tier Tribunal Judge but,  given
    that the appellant had given evidence that his activities "suggest that
    he had put himself at risk" (and it seems possible that Mr  Bridge  had
    done likewise) the judge's analysis is plainly incomplete.

 5. It is unfortunate that this matter will once again need to be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to carry out a proper fact-
    finding exercise.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 14 July 2016  is  set
aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The  appeal  is  remitted
to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  Heynes,  Judge  McClure,   Judge
Mulvenna) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


