
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/08498/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 February 2017                |On 13 June 2017                    |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                     W E
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Johnrose for Broudie Jackson and Cantor
For the Respondent: Mr Whitwell Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction. I am satisfied that such an order should be made.
2. The Appellant is a national of Libya born in [ ] 1972. His wife (date  of
   birth [ ] 1982) and four children (dates of birth [ ] 2006; [ ] 2008; [ ]
   2012; [ ] 2014) are dependents in his appeal.
3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant  entered  the  United
   Kingdom on 11 March 2009 as a student. He returned  to  Libya  after  and
   extension to his visa was refused  but  returned  as  a  student  and  an
   extension was granted until 27 November 2014 to finish his PhD.
4. On 27 November 2014 he claimed asylum on the basis that he  was  at  risk
   on return for his political opinions in that he would  be  viewed  as  an
   extremist because he was from Derna  and  Islamist  extremist  controlled
   town and would be viewed as a supporter of Gaddafi.
5. The Respondent refused the application because it was not  accepted  that
   he would be viewed as someone with close links to the Gaddafi regime  and
   it was not accepted that originating from Derna would put  him  at  risk.
   The general security situation was considered in the light of the country
   guidance in AT and Others and the levels of violence were found not to be
   at Article 15(c) levels. There was no basis for  leave  under  Article  8
   inside out outwith the Rules.
6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant.
   The Judge concluded that there was nothing about his work  or  activities
   in Libya that would suggest he was closely linked to the  Gaddafi  regime
   and the fact that he had recently visited Libya  did  not  suggest  being
   from Derna made him a target. He dismissed the appeal on all grounds.
7. At a hearing dated 22 November 2016 I set aside Judge Nicols decision  on
   the basis that his assessment of risk as to whether there was such a high
   level of indiscriminate violence in Libya, within the meaning of  Article
   15(c) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC ("the Qualification Directive")  so
   as to mean  that  substantial  grounds  existed  for  believing  that  an
   individual would, solely by being present there, face a real  risk  which
   threatens his or her life or person was inadequate.  All  other  findings
   were preserved. The matter was adjourned to enable the parties to  gather
   more up to date material.
8. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

The Law
9. The Appellant bears the burden of proving that Article 15(c)  is  engaged
   by the decision. Article 15(c)  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the
   Qualification Directive") defines serious harm within the Directive as:


             "serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or  person
             by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in   situations   of
             international or internal armed conflict."

10. The Court of Justice of the European Union  ("CJEU")  gave  judgment  in
   Diakit� (Case C-285/12) in which it was held that:


             "on a  proper  construction  of  Article  15(c)  of  Directive
             2004/83, it  must  be  acknowledged  that  an  internal  armed
             conflict exists, for the purposes of applying that  provision,
             if a State's armed forces confront one or more armed groups or
             if two or more armed groups confront each  other.  It  is  not
             necessary for  that  conflict  to  be  categorised  as  'armed
             conflict   not   of   an   international   character'    under
             international humanitarian law; nor is it necessary  to  carry
             out, in addition to an appraisal  of  the  level  of  violence
             present in the territory concerned, a separate  assessment  of
             the intensity  of  the  armed  confrontations,  the  level  of
             organisation of the armed forces involved or the  duration  of
             the conflict."
11. The CJEU has highlighted the 'exceptional situation' needed for  Article
   15(c) to apply to civilians generally. In  Elgafaji  v.  Staatssecretaris
   van Justitie, C-465/07 at paragraph 37, the Court made clear  that,  for
   this to be the case-
             '[...] the degree of  indiscriminate  violence  characterising
             the armed conflict taking place ... [must reach] such  a  high
             level that substantial grounds are shown for believing that  a
             civilian, returned to the relevant country or, as the case may
             be, to the relevant region, would, solely on  account  of  his
             presence on the territory of that country or  region,  face  a
             real risk of being subject to the serious threat  referred  in
             Article 15(c) of the Directive.'
12. The level of violence has to be assessed by its quantity as well  as  by
   its quality. There can  be  no  doubt  that  a  substantial  quantity  of
   violence is a necessity without which subsidiary protection shall not  be
   granted. However, defining the threshold of Article 15(c) is not a simple
   matter of analysing  quantitative  data.  Three  principles  govern  this
   assessment:
     a. First, the approach must be  holistic  and  inclusive.  Courts  and
        Tribunals  must  take  into  account  a  wide  range  of   relevant
        variables.
     b. Second, Courts and Tribunals  should  not  limit  themselves  to  a
        purely quantitative analysis  of  figures  of  civilian  death  and
        injuries  etc.  The  approach  must  be  qualitative  as  well   as
        quantitative. When  assessing  quantity  and  quality,  courts  and
        tribunals  should  bear  in  mind  the  likelihood  of   unreported
        incidents and other uncertainties.
     c. Third, building on the case law, Courts and Tribunals  should  look
        in  particular  to  see  what  the  evidence  tells  us  about  the
        indicators of situations of violence and conflict (the following is
        intended as a non-exhaustive list):
           i. The ECHR 'Sufi and Elmi  criteria':  -  the  parties  to  the
              conflict and their relative  military  strengths  and  regard
              should be had to methods and tactics of warfare applied (risk
              of  civilian  casualties);  type   of   weapons   used;   the
              geographical scope of the fighting (localised or  widespread)
              and the number of civilians killed, injured and displaced  as
              a result of the fighting.
          ii. The ability or lack  of  it  by  the  State  to  protect  its
              citizens against violence (where practicable, it will  assist
              to set out the various potential actors of protection and  to
              address their actual role/the degree of State failure).
         iii. Socio-economic conditions (which should include assessment of
              economic and  other  forms  of  assistance  by  international
              organisations and NGOs).
          iv. Cumulative effects of long lasting armed conflicts.

13. In relation to Article 15(c) circumstances in Libya had moved  on  since
   the Respondents June 2016 CIG-Libya :Security and Humanitarian  Situation
   and this was conceded in FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016]  UKUT  413
   (IAC) where at paragraph 11 it states:


   "In fact, as it seems to us, there have been numerous  changes  in  Libya
   since November 2013, and that they are sufficient  to  render  unreliable
   the guidance on art 15(c) given in AT.  Amongst  those  changes  are  the
   cessation of direct flights from the United Kingdom, the ebb and flow  of
   fighting in Libya, the rise of Daesh, and the issue of  numerous  reports
   and advice, not least by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.  It may  be
   that some of this evidence, the last in particular, would not  by  itself
   throw any real doubt on the accuracy of the assessments in  AT,  but  the
   evidence taken as a whole leads us to say  that  the  Tribunal  needs  to
   undertake a new analysis of the art 15(c) risk"
14. I heard oral evidence from WE and his wife who adopted the  contents  of
   their witness statements and were cross examined by Mr Whitwell and there
   is a full note of their evidence in the record of proceedings.

15. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Whitwell  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a) He relied on the refusal letter dated 13 May  2015  which  dealt  with
      Article 15(c) at paragraphs 31-34 although he conceded that AT was  no
      longer good law in so far as it related to the security situation.

   b) Each case was fact specific but the  Respondents  case  was  that  the
      Appellant and his family could reasonably relocate to Tripoli.

   c) He suggested that I was required to examine what difference there  was
      between the situation set out in the CIG for June 2016 and that  dated
      January 2017. He suggested, for example, that the figures suggested an
      improvement in the figure for IDP's

16. On behalf of the Respondent Ms Johnrose submitted that :

   a) She relied on the skeleton argument that  was  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and argued that the situation had deteriorated since both  AT
      and FA.

   b) It was not disputed that the Appellant and his family were from  Derna
      and that he had been on the Revolutionary Committee all of which added
      to his risk factors.

   c) She disagreed with Mr Whitwells reading of the CIGs and suggested that
      in fact they showed a deteriorating situation and that rather than the
      airport being open as he suggested it  appeared  still  to  be  closed
      according to the latest CIG.

   d) The situation in Tripoli  was  referred  to  in  the  bundle  she  had
      produced : there were now two governments and the UN backed Government
      was struggling to hold on to Tripoli.

   e) Civilians were shelled and the situation was not improving but  rather
      more devastation was predicted with no end in sight.

   f) It was also relevant that the Appellant was from Derna and because  of
      the link to ISIS it was a risk factor to be affiliated to that city.

   g) Also in relation to the 'sliding scale' the Appellant had a  wife  and
      four young children and the material produced suggested they were  the
      most vulnerable groups with examples of the kidnapping of children and
      militia forcing Islamic rule on women and children.

   h) At the current time internal relocation was not viable.

Background Material
17. In the CIG dated January 2017 at 2.3.8 and 2.3.21 it is acknowledged
   that the individual characteristics of the Appellant must be examined in
   order to determine if there are additional risk factors.I note that in
   the UKBA Document headed Humanitarian Protection dated 2013 at Section 4
   in relation to Article 15(c) it states:


   "The sliding scale/enhanced risk categories If applicants do not meet the
   above tests, they may also be applied on a sliding scale. That is to say,
   the more the applicant is able to show that he  or  she  is  specifically
   affected by factors particular to  his  personal  circumstances  (e.g.  a
   child  or  someone  of  advanced  age,  disability,  gender,  ill-health,
   ethnicity or, for example, by virtue of being a  perceived  collaborator,
   medical professional, teacher or  government  official),  the  lower  the
   level of indiscriminate violence required for him to be eligible. "

18. The Appellants bundle relied on by  Ms  Johnrose  included  the  Country
   Policy and Information Note dated January  2017;  a  Human  Rights  Watch
   Report dated 12 January 2017 (page 55) and a report from  the  Washington
   Institute for Near East Policy dated 11 January 2017 entitled 'After  the
   Islamic State in Libya: All Out War?.' I have read these and  taken  them
   into account.

Findings

19. I have looked at the evidence in the round taking into  account  all  of
   the evidence both oral and written whether I refer to it specifically  or
   not.  In the light of my analysis of the evidence I  make  the  following
   findings. I took into account the material  provided  in  the  Appellants
   bundle but I am satisfied that his case is in fact largely  made  out  on
   the basis of the Respondents own material set out in the most recent CIG.


20.  The  difficulty  in  making  the  assessment  in  this  case   is   the
   acknowledged volatility of the situation in Libya.  The  decision  in  FA
   makes plain that AT is no longer good law in so far as it relates to  the
   security situation and I must consider each case based on the  background
   material produced and the  individual  circumstances  of  the  Appellant.
   Humanitarian conditions  in  Libya  it  is  accepted  have  continued  to
   deteriorate since the fall of former President Gaddafi in 2011. There has
   been extensive  damage  to  civilian  homes  and  public  infrastructure,
   including  health,  education,  roads  and   administrative   facilities,
   severely disrupting  basic  services  including  the  provision  of  safe
   drinking water, gas and electricity. The Respondent acknowledges that the
   Appellant and his family could not safely return to Derna their  hometown
   but could reasonably relocate to Tripoli.


21. The latest policy summary by the Respondent therefore puts the  case  in
   relation to Article 15(c) in this way:

   "3.1.4 However, in general, the humanitarian conditions are not at such a
   level as to make return a breach  of  Article  15  of  the  Qualification
   Directive but may  do  so  in  relation  to  some  persons,  particularly
   vulnerable people, e.g. displaced,  female-headed  households,  children,
   persons with disabilities and the chronically ill.

   3.1.5 In general the security situation across Libya is not such  that  a
   person would, solely by being present  there,  face  a  real  risk  which
   threatens his or her life by reason of  indiscriminate  violence.   There
   may be particular factors relating to the individual's circumstances that
   nevertheless place them at risk.  Each case must  be  considered  on  its
   individual facts and merits."

22. I must therefore consider on the basis of all  the  material  before  me
   including any factors that may be personal to the Appellant is there such
   a high level of indiscriminate violence in Libya, within the  meaning  of
   Article  15(c)  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the   Qualification
   Directive") so as to mean that substantial grounds  exist  for  believing
   that an individual would, solely by being present there, face a real risk
   which threatens his or her life or person.

23. The material in the Respondents latest CIG argues that at 0.025% of  the
   overall populations the deaths in Libya do  not  disclose  a  generalised
   risk of violence and indeed the figure quoted is in accordance  with  the
   figure given in November 2015 to the  UN  Security  Council  (9.2.1)  and
   would therefore not suggest an escalation of the levels  of  violence  as
   argued by Ms  Johnrose  either  generally  or  specifically  in  Tripoli.
   Indeed, the CIG argues that Tripoli is less  violent  (2.3.19)  and  that
   while the number of civilian deaths remains unacceptably  high  they  are
   focused in other areas of the country particularly  Benghazi,  Sirte  and
   Derna (9.2.2) However I note that it concludes  that  the  trend  of  the
   figures paints a different picture in that at 9.3.8 it states:

   "The levels of violence documented by ACLED in 2016 are similar  to  2015
   for Benghazi, Darnah, and Surt. However Tripoli is on course,  if  levels
   of violence remain constant for the remainder  of  the  year,  to  almost
   double its number of fatalities compared to  2015,  albeit  from  a  much
   lower base line compared to the other cities."

24. While Mr Whitewell argues that the reduction in the number of IDPs  does
   not suggest a deteriorating situation again the  Respondents  own  policy
   document accepts that this was due to  an  improvement  in  the  security
   situation around Benghazi  and  Sirte  (2.3.7)  and  does  not  therefore
   suggest an improvement in the  situation  generally  or  specifically  in
   Tripoli.

25. I take into account that again the Respondents own CIG acknowledges  the
   use imprecise weaponry in densely-populated  residential  areas  in  what
   often amounted to indiscriminate attacks, leading to civilian  fatalities
   and damage to civilian infrastructure ( 9.1.2)

26. In making that assessment in relation to this Appellant  as  to  whether
   it would be reasonable for him to relocate to Tripoli I take into account
   that he has never lived or worked there and with the general breakdown of
   the Libyan infrastructure that must limit the ability, particularly of an
   outsider in a largely tribal society, to gain  employment.  While  it  is
   suggested that the Appellants  brother  in  law  lives  there  and  could
   provide a level of social support I found the Appellant  and  his  wife's
   account of how he has no long term fixed address and had moved from  area
   to area limits in my view the amount of practical support that  he  would
   be able to provide.

27. I am also required to take into account the fact that he has  four  very
   young children and a wife and indeed this factor is referred  to  in  the
   Respondents own policy documents as justifying a 'sliding scale'  to  the
   assessment of risk ('Humanitarian Protection 2013'). The material  before
   me makes plain that both the humanitarian  situation  generally  and  the
   violence puts women and children at a high risk (10.5.6) I  am  satisfied
   that I should also take into account the fact that the Appellant and  his
   family would be expected to relocate from their home area Derna  which  I
   accept on the basis of the material before me  and  as  accepted  by  the
   Respondent in the CIG (7.8.1) was an area seen as being characterised  by
   the strength of extremist groups and ISIS. A link  to  such  a  place  of
   origin would, I accept, make the family more vulnerable.

28. I finally  take  into  account  that  there  is  no  single  universally
   recognised stable government in a position to  protect  the  citizens  of
   Libya from the impact of this internal armed conflict either in  relation
   to the violence or the humanitarian needs that have arisen.

29. I am therefore satisfied that taking into account all  of  the  findings
   set out  above  and  applying  the  sliding  scale  referred  to  by  the
   Respondent to the Appellants own circumstances that it would be a  breach
   of Article 15(c)  to require the Appellant and his family to relocate  to
   Tripoli.

CONCLUSION

30. On the basis of the facts  found  in  this  appeal,  the  Appellant  has
   discharged the burden of proof on him to show that on his return he would
   face a real risk of suffering "serious harm" by  reference  to  paragraph
   339C of the Immigration Rules (as amended).





Decision


31. The appeal is allowed on humanitarian grounds.


32. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.





Signed                                                              Date
20.2.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell




























