

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08495/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 8 February 2016                       |              On 12 February 2016    |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                              MERCY BAWE DOMBO
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Coleman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 14 January 2015, and her application for  an
       EEA Residence Card as confirmation of the right  to  reside  as  the
       spouse of an EEA Citizen on 19 May 2015. Her appeal against both was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman ("the Judge") following
       a hearing on 11 November 2015.

    2. I have lifted the anonymity order previously made pursuant  to  Rule
       13 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and
       Asylum Chamber)




    Rules 2014 as the Appellant's asylum and ancillary protection claim has
    been dismissed and there is no application to appeal that decision.

The grant of permission


    3. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cox  granted  permission  to  appeal  (15
       December 2015). He said it is  arguable  that  the  Judge's  factual
       error regarding the Appellant having applied for the  EEA  Residence
       Card prior to (as asserted by the Appellant) rather than  after  (as
       found by  the  Judge)  the  refusal  of  her  asylum  and  ancillary
       protection claim could have affected the outcome of whether she  had
       entered a  marriage  of  convenience  such  as  to  defeat  her  EEA
       Residence Card application. All grounds could be argued.

Appellant's position

    4. Ground 1 asserted that the Judge ignored that over 85%  of  the  850
       answers given  by  the  Appellant  and  Mr  Dey  had  been  answered
       correctly, and she ignored the evidence  of  cohabitation  prior  to
       their move to Dagenham.

    5. Ground 2 asserted that there was good  reason  for  the  Appellant's
       siblings not attending the hearing (the death of their  mother)  and
       it was not therefore open to the Judge to made adverse findings  due
       to their non attendance.

    6. Ground 3 asserted that the Judge's factual error regarding when  the
       Appellant applied for the EEA Residence Card could have affected the
       outcome of whether she had entered a marriage of convenience.

    7. Ground 4 asserted that in failing to listen to the CD  of  Mr  Dey's
       marriage interview she erred as his German accent was  of  relevance
       to the alleged discrepancies in the interviews.

Respondent's position

    8. Mr Staunton relied on  the  rule  24  notice.  Numerous  and  cogent
       reasons had been given for finding it was a marriage of convenience,
       namely a lack of documentary evidence showing them residing  at  the
       same address [109], an inconsistency in the statutory declaration of
       the  marriage  in  that  it  was  purportedly  been  signed  by  the
       Appellant's father despite him having been dead for 17 years  [110],
       the lack of production of easily available evidence [111],  and  the
       interview discrepancies [105/106].


    9. He added orally that credit was given for correct interview  answers
       [105], and that the findings were open to the Judge on the evidence.




Discussion

Ground 1

   10. Ground 1 has 2 parts. In relation to the interview  the  Judge  gave
       credit for consistent answers [105]. She noted inconsistencies [105]
       some of which were accepted by Mr Coleman [106], and some  of  which
       were explained [107, 108]. The Judge does not explain why she  finds
       the unexplained inconsistencies material given  the  extremely  high
       percentage of consistent answers or state whether  she  accepts  the
       explanations given for others. I am satisfied that this amounts to a
       material error of law as the Appellant does not  know  why  she  has
       been disbelieved in relation to  the  answers  given  in  interview.
       That is particularly so given Ground 4 below which may have  led  to
       the Judge reaching a different conclusion.


   11. In relation to the documentary evidence, the Judge noted the limited
       evidence of their current address  and  found  this  surprising  and
       unusual [109]. She appears to have ignored the documentary  evidence
       showing them living together at their previous  address  which  they
       only left 3 months prior to the hearing. That is a material error of
       law as it impacted on the assessment of the length and therefore the
       nature of their relationship and an explanation is  required  as  to
       why no weight was to be attached to that.

Ground 2

   12. The Judge said [110];


           "Whilst I understand that the siblings may indeed have been busy
           in preparing for the funeral in Ghana, neither of them  wrote  a
           letter of support to the Tribunal explaining why they could  not
           attend  and  confirming  their  support  for   the   appellant's
           application."

   13. I am satisfied that this was observation was open to the  Judge.  It
       was not their lack  of  attendance  but  their  lack  of  supporting
       evidence that undermined the Appellant's claim. This was  a  finding
       open to the Judge and was not a material error of law.

Ground 3

   14. There was a clear error of fact in  that  the  Judge  wrongly  found
       [112];


           "that the appellant did not apply for leave  to  remain  on  the
           ground of her marriage until her  asylum  application  had  been
           refused."

   15. The EEA  application  was  made  on  4  November  2014.  Her  asylum
       application was refused on 14 January 2015.


   16. This error of fact was taken into account by the  Judge  [112]  when
       she determined it was not a genuine marriage. She compounded it when
       she said [113],

           "I believe the appellant on receiving the refusal of her  asylum
           claim then decided that she would make  a  separate  application
           for leave to remain as she was determined not to return back  to
           Ghana in any event."

   17. That assertion was factually incorrect as her EEA claim preceded the
       asylum refusal. I am satisfied  that  this  error  of  fact  was  so
       significant that it amounted to an error of law.

Ground 4

   18. I have dealt with this within Ground 1 at [10] above.


Conclusion on error of law

   19. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge made the material errors  of
       law as identified above.


   20. Mr Staunton and Mr Coleman agreed that it was appropriate for me  to
       remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal. That  was  because  the
       errors of law were interlinked, extracts  of  the  CD  of  Mr  Dey's
       interview may need to be  listened  to,  and  oral  and  documentary
       evidence for example from family members and up to date  documentary
       evidence such as utility and financial documents may well assist the
       Tribunal in determining whether it was a marriage of convenience.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law in relation to the EEA appeal.

      I set aside the EEA decision.

    The matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House
    on the EEA appeal only, not before Judge Wyman, with a time estimate of
    3 hours given the potential number of witnesses and potential  need  to
    listen to extracts from Mr Dey's interview.





Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 February 2016
