


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08450/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On : 4 May 2016                            |On : 12 May 2016               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             habibollah farhadi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Patel, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Farhadi's  appeal
against the respondent's decision to refuse his asylum claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the  respondent  and  Mr  Farhadi  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 23 March 1972.  He  entered  the
United Kingdom clandestinely and was arrested as an illegal  entrant  on  22
November 2014. He claimed asylum the same day. His application  was  refused
on 13 May 2015. The appellant appealed against  that  decision.  His  appeal
was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 4 November 2015  and  allowed  in  a
decision promulgated on 13 November 2015. The Secretary of  State  has  been
granted permission to appeal that decision.

The Appellant's Claim

The appellant claims to be at risk on return to Iran as a result  of  having
converted from Islam to Christianity. He was introduced to  Christianity  by
a friend, Hamed, four to five months before he left Iran and he  attended  a
house church every week before and after converting. On 22 October 2014  the
house church was raided, subsequent to which his house was raided  and  then
the gym which he owned. When the authorities raided  his  house,  they  took
his computer and other literature about Christianity.  The  security  police
went to his work the day  after  the  raid  and  the  day  after  that.  The
appellant travelled to a friend's  house  and  subsequently  left  Iran.  He
attended church in the UK. He  feared  returning  to  Iran  because  of  his
conversion to Christianity.

The respondent did not accept the appellant's account of  the  raid  on  the
house church or his conversion to Christianity. It was not accepted that  he
was a Christian. However even if he was, the  respondent  did  not  consider
that he would be at risk on return to Iran because he would be deemed to  be
an ordinary convert and  would  not  proselytise,  in  accordance  with  the
guidance in SZ and JM (Christians -  FS  confirmed)  Iran  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
00082. It was not considered that he would be  at  risk  on  return  on  the
basis of having exited Iran illegally,  pursuant  to  SB  (risk  on  return-
illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053.

The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Foudy.  Judge
Foudy heard oral evidence from the appellant and from Reverend  Alan  Reeve,
the lead pastor at the  Branches  Christian  Fellowship  church.  The  judge
accepted the appellant's account of his conversion as genuine  and  credible
and noted that he and his wife were baptised in the UK on 17 July 2015.  The
judge considered that the appellant would be considered as  an  apostate  in
Iran and would  face  persecution  as  such.  She  accordingly  allowed  the
appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

The Secretary of State's appeal

The respondent sought permission to appeal Judge  Foudy's  decision  on  the
grounds that she had failed to make findings on the appellant's  account  of
the raid on the house church which was  relevant  to  the  question  of  the
genuineness of his conversion to Christianity; and that she  had  failed  to
consider whether the appellant was an ordinary convert or an  evangelist  in
line with the country guidance in SZ and JM.

Permission was granted on 27 November  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Andrew on the second ground, having found that any error in  regard  to  the
first ground was immaterial.

At the hearing before me Mr Harrison relied on the  grounds  of  appeal.  Ms
Patel reminded me that permission  had  only  been  granted  on  the  second
ground. She nevertheless made submissions on the  first  ground,  submitting
that the judge had set out the appellant's evidence in full and had  clearly
found his account of events in  Iran  to  be  credible.  In  any  event  her
findings in that  regard  were  immaterial  as  the  relevant  question  was
whether he had genuinely converted  to  Christianity.  With  regard  to  the
second ground, Ms Patel  submitted  that  the  judge  had  had  the  country
guidance in mind and had referred to it, but that it had been  overtaken  by
the Home Office's own Country Information  and  Guidance  of  December  2014
which was before the judge and which  made  clear  that  all  converts  from
Islam were considered to be  at  risk  of  persecution.  In  any  event  the
evidence before the  judge  suggested  that  the  appellant  would  wish  to
convert other people and proselytise in Iran as he had done in  the  UK  and
he would therefore fall within the country guidance case.


In response, Mr Harrison submitted that the first ground was  made  out,  as
the judge had failed to engage with the appellant's  account  of  events  in
Iran which was relevant to his  overall  credibility.  With  regard  to  the
second ground, however, he said that he would not take that any further.


I advised the parties that, in my view, there was no error  of  law  in  the
judge's decision  requiring  that  it  be  set  aside.  My  reasons  for  so
concluding are as follows.


Consideration and findings.

I am mindful of the fact that permission was granted on  the  second  ground
only, although I do  not  find  myself  in  agreement  with  Judge  Andrew's
reasons for finding the first point to be immaterial. It seems  to  me  that
an adverse credibility finding about past events relating to  conversion  to
Christianity is relevant and material to the  consideration  of  whether  or
not the appellant's adherence to the Christian faith in the  UK  is  genuine
and was intended to be continued in Iran should the appellant return  there.
I have therefore considered Judge Foudy's findings in regard to past  events
in Iran.

I accept that the judge did not address in any detail the reasons  given  by
the respondent for rejecting the appellant's account of events  in  Iran.  I
accept that she did not make detailed findings about the raid on the  church
and other events related to the appellant's conversion to  Christianity  and
it certainly would have assisted if she had. Nevertheless I  consider  that,
overall, there is adequate reasoning in her decision  to  justify  it  being
upheld.


It is clear that the judge was fully aware of  the  appellant's  account  of
events in Iran and she set those out at [10]. As  Ms  Patel  submitted,  the
appellant had produced a detailed statement for the appeal and  within  that
statement  he  responded  in  detail  to  the  concerns  expressed  by   the
respondent in the refusal decision. The judge considered  the  statement  at
[10]. At [18] the judge confirmed that she had considered all  the  evidence
before her. Within  her  findings  in  regard  to  the  genuineness  of  the
appellant's  conversion  to  Christianity  at   [18]   she   addressed   the
respondent's concerns about the conversion process in Iran and accepted  the
appellant's account. It seems to me, therefore, and I am prepared to  accept
Ms Patel's submissions, that the judge clearly considered and  accepted  the
appellant's account of events in Iran and did not simply  ignore  that  part
of his claim.

It is also relevant to note, as Ms Patel  submitted,  that  the  person  who
drafted the respondent's grounds indicated that they had not had  access  to
the appeal documents. Accordingly that person was unaware  of  the  evidence
the judge had before her which had led her to  make  the  positive  findings
that she did. It seems to  me  that  the  judge  made  clear  that  she  had
considered all the evidence, relating  to  the  appellant's  experiences  in
Iran as well as in the UK, and having done so was  entitled  to  accept  the
appellant's account of events  as  true.  For  the  reasons  given  she  was
entitled to conclude that he  was  a  genuine  concert  to  Christianity.  I
therefore find that the first ground has not been made out.


As regards the second ground, Mr Harrison did not take  this  further,  once
referred by Ms Patel to the Home Office Guidance.


Paragraph 1.4 of the Country Information and Guidance for December  2014  is
a Policy Summary and states at the fourth bullet point:

    "The rights of Muslims to change their religion is not recognised under
    Sharia law. The religious conversion of Muslims is illegal in Iran.
    Christians who have converted from Islam are at real risk of
    persecution in Iran, and a grant of asylum is likely to be
    appropriate."

 That guidance clearly post-dates the country guidance  in  SZ  and  JM,  in
regard to the distinction to be made between  ordinary  converts  and  those
more actively involved including proselytisers and  evangelists.  The  judge
had the Home Office Guidance before her  and  was  accordingly  entitled  to
rely upon the Home Office's own  policy  regarding  all  converts.  She  was
entitled to reach the conclusion that she did at [19],  that  the  appellant
would be seen as  an  apostate  in  Iran  and  would  thus  be  at  risk  of
persecution.

I therefore find no merit in the second ground of appeal.


For all of these reasons I find no errors of law in Judge  Foudy's  decision
such as to require that it be set aside. I uphold her decision.


DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
allow the appellant's appeal stands.






















                                Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
