
 [pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08383/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                     O H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran ( Counsel instructed by JD Spicer &
co)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Home officer presenting officer)


               DECISION AND REASONS following resumed hearing

1.   The appellant  was  born  on  30  August  1994  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.

2.   In a decision and reasons dated 13.11.2015 the Upper Tribunal  found  a
    material error of law by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  CM  Phillips)
    ("FtT") in a decision dated 30 January 2015  in  its  consideration  of
    Article 8 ECHR. A copy of that decision is annexed hereto and to  which
    I refer for the background issues.  At the resumed  hearing  Article  8
    ECHR outside of the rules was in  issue.  I  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant. Two medical  reports  (letter  dated  14.12.2015  from  high
    intensity therapist and a letter dated  24  February  2015  from  Dr  G
    Hibbert)  were  admitted  under  the  provisions   of   Rule   15(2)(a)
    Immigration (Upper Tribunal) Procedure Rules 2008.  I heard submissions
    from both representatives and in  addition  I  took  into  account  the
    skeleton argument produced by Ms Loughran.

3.   I remake the decision of the FtT under Article 8 by allowing  it  under
    private and  family  life.   I  rely  on  the  oral  evidence,  witness
    statements and the medical evidence that was before the FtT and  before
    me.  There was no challenge to the actual consideration  of  Article  8
    outside  of  the  Rules.    Ms  Loughran  submitted  that  the  medical
    evidence, which the FtT failed to take into account,  was  relevant  to
    the issue of private and family life.  I agree  with  that  submission.
    Although I found that the FtT's  failure  to  take  into  account  that
    evidence in consideration of the asylum  claim  was  not  material,  it
    nevertheless remains highly relevant to the issue of private and family
    life.  I find that the appellant  was  diagnosed  with  Post  traumatic
    stress disorder (PTSD) by a clinical psychologist and that he  received
    medical help in the form of  counselling  and  medication.  The  recent
    medical evidence confirms that this treatment is  continuing.  The  FtT
    found that the cessation of counselling was because the  appellant  had
    recovered. I am satisfied that  the  evidence  did  not  and  does  not
    support that finding. I find that the appellant suffers from  PTSD  and
    is in receipt of treatment. The FtT  also  took  into  account  in  its
    consideration of the appellant's vulnerability, that the appellant  was
    pursuing his educational studies and was employed. I am satisfied  that
    his ability to study and work does not detract from the  diagnosis  and
    need for treatment, rather it is a question of the degree to which  and
    how the diagnosis impacts on his daily life.  Further more  whilst  the
    FtT found the core issue of the appellant's asylum claim of working for
    a TV company to be lacking in credibility, there was  no  finding  that
    his account of his family members  being  killed  by  the  Taliban  was
    untrue.  This was relevant to the issue of family life and  mental  ill
    health. The FtT found that  the  appellant  had  some  family  life  in
    Afghanistan in the form of  his  aunt.  I  find  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with his aunt was poor based on  his  consistent  evidence
    that he was abused by her in the past and the reasons he was  sent  out
    of Afghanistan by her was because she perceived him to be a risk to her
    family.  There was no evidence of meaningful family life with his  aunt
    before the FtT.

6.   I find that the appellant entered the UK in 2010  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor at the age of 16 years. He was taken in by his elder brother  who
    fled from Afghanistan in 2001 and came to the  UK  and  who  is  now  a
    British citizen and working as a bus driver.  I  find  that  they  have
    established family life  as  a  real  meaningful  close  and  committed
    relationship in which the appellant's brother has played the role of  a
    parent to the appellant in the UK. They have lived together  intend  to
    remain living together for the foreseeable future.  I take into account
    the  impact  of  separation  on  other  family  members.  The  evidence
    establishes that his brother gained significant support  and  emotional
    strength from his relationship with the appellant, which in my view has
    greater significance for both of them given  the  tragic  and  horrific
    circumstances of the killings and death of other  family  members.   In
    addition the appellant's brother also suffered from mental ill  health;
    a major depression and PTSD as evidence in the medical report from Dr J
    Boatall at page 177 of the  A/B.    The  fact  that  the  appellant  is
    working and shows some level of independence in his daily life as found
    by the FtT, is of relevance but not determinative of the existence  and
    strength of his family ties or connection with his brother.   I  accept
    the submission made in the skeleton  argument  at  paragraph  13  -  14
    regarding the evidence establishing the family life that  exists  which
    is over and above  the  "normal"  level  of  dependency  between  adult
    siblings, and engages Article 8.

7.   In reaching my decision I rely on principles in Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]
    INLR 170 and Ghising (family life- adults- Ghurka policy)  [2012]  UKUT
    00160 IAC. In H (Somalia) 2004 UKIAT 00027 the  Court  considered  that
    circumstances for family  life  existed  where  siblings  had  a  quasi
    parental relationship and where living in a permanent common household.
    In Nadarajah Sentharan [2004] EWCA Civ 950 the Court took into  account
    that the appellant had arrived as a minor lived with family members  in
    the UK and had no family life in his country of origin.  Further  in  R
    (on the application of Ahmadi) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1721 family  life
    of two Afghan siblings who recently lived together  was  considered  in
    the context of the potential for family life together  and  not  having
    regard to the short time the siblings spent together in the  past.  The
    Court concluded that there was ample authority for the proposition that
    Article 8 required the State to refrain from interference with existing
    family life but also not to inhibit the development of real family life
    in future.

8.   On the particular facts in this appeal I am  satisfied  that  there  is
    established a real and committed and meaningful  family  life  for  the
    appellant with his older brother, and other family in the UK  including
    their sister who is a British citizen.  I take into account the  impact
    of removal on the appellant's brother also, as he derives strength from
    his relationship with the appellant. The fact that his brother  intends
    to get married does not lessen the strength of the family life with the
    appellant (ZB (Pakistan) v. SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 834).

9.   The appellant has also established a private life since his arrival  in
    the UK as a  minor.  He  was  granted  discretionary  leave  until  his
    adulthood and established his private life during that period.  That in
    my view is not a precarious situation  upon which I am  required  under
    section 117(4) Nationality Immigration & Asylum Act (as amended) ("2002
    Act") to place weight given that he was lawfully in the UK  with  leave
    and pursued opportunities for education and connections in the UK.   He
    has engaged positively in education and has been  offered  a  place  to
    study Pharmacy at  university  level.   He  is  still  pursuing  higher
    education.  He has established a level of vulnerability because of  his
    age on arrival in to the UK, his mental ill health and  on  going  need
    for counselling and treatment,  and  his  ties  with  surviving  family
    members in the UK, and absence of any real ties in Afghanistan.  It  is
    also of significance that he entered the UK as  a  child  and  to  that
    extent had not chosen  to  enter  the  UK.  The  medical  evidence  (in
    particular that of Dr J Boatall) is that he  suffers  from  severe  low
    mood and anxiety in relation to events before arriving in  the  UK  and
    which were life threatening and she also concluded that the life of the
    appellant's brother would be "shattered" in the event of  his  removal.
    The appellant has also established himself as financially  independent.
    I have regard to section 117 2002 Act as regards  the  public  interest
    factors (set out in paragraph 18 skeleton argument).  I find  that  the
    appellant can speak English and is able  to  pursue  his  education  in
    English and has every prospect of being able to study at University  on
    a medicine related course.  I find no reasons why the  appellant  would
    be an economic burden on the UK. The evidence establishes  that  he  is
    firmly integrated into the UK.   The factors listed in S.117  2002  Act
    are not exhaustive and I  have  concluded  that  there  are  others  of
    relevance and significance as described above.  Taking into account all
    of the above I conclude that cumulatively the decision  to  remove  the
    appellant is disproportionate and that the interests of  the  appellant
    outweigh the public interest in the  removal  of  the  appellant  as  a
    failed asylum seeker.

10.  I find that the family and private life is of sufficient gravity so  as
    to engage Article 8. The removal of the appellant would sever  his  and
    those of family members strong ties and significantly impact his mental
    well  being  emotionally  and  psychologically.   The  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law as the appellant is a failed asylum seeker  and
    his  discretionary  leave  expired.   The  removal  would  lead  to  an
    interference with his strong family and private life in  the  UK.   For
    all of the reasons given above including age, strength of  connections,
    personal  history,  domestic  and  compassionate   circumstances,   the
    interference would not be proportionate having weighed the interests of
    the appellant and his  family  members  with  the  public  interest  in
    removal of him as an adult failed asylum seeker.

11.  Decision

    I set aside and remake the FtT human rights decision by substituting  a
    decision to allow the appeal under Article 8 family  and  private  life
    outside of the Rules.


Signed   Date 31.12.2015

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.




Signed   Date 31.12.2015

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
