

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number AA/08781/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
             Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 25th September 2015
          On 16th October 2015



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                            NAJIBULLAH WALIKHEIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation;

For the Appellant: Ms G Loughran (Counsel, instructed by Bindmans LLP)
For the Respondent: Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim was heard
   by First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss at Birmingham on the 23rd of December
   2014 and dismissed in a decision promulgated on the 2nd of January 2015.
   The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
   the 9th of June 2015.

2. The Appellant's asylum claim was based on his stated fear of the Taliban
   and the government. In the decision the Judge noted the oral evidence of
   the Appellant. The reasons for dismissing the appeal were given in
   paragraphs 26 to 28. The appeal was dismissed in relation to articles 3
   and 8.

3. The grounds argue that the Judge in adopting the reasoning of the
   Refusal Letter failed to make a proper evaluation of the evidence and had
   not given proper reasons for the findings made. It is also argued that
   the Judge failed to take into account the evidence of the Appellant's
   witness in relation to family tracing and had not taken account of the
   reason given for not visiting the Appellant's village. In relation to
   Afghanistan it is also suggested that the danger to the Appellant from
   the government had not been considered properly. Finally the grounds
   assert that the article 8 assessment is fundamentally flawed and ignored
   evidence that his relationship with his cousin was essentially parental
   and the rejection of the asylum claim affected the assessment.

4. The Home Office provided a rule 24 response but neither representative
   had seen a copy until shown it at the start of the hearing. Both
   representatives made submissions in line with their respective positions.
   These are set out in the Record of Proceedings. In addition to the
   written grounds for the Appellant it was complained that the death of his
   mother had not been mentioned in relation to his family in Afghanistan
   had not been raised in the decision and the concerns the Judge had about
   the evidence had not been put to the Appellant. For the Home Office it
   was observed that those submissions were not in the grounds.

5. The decision does set out the evidence that the Judge had and a summary
   of the evidence that was presented at the hearing including examination-
   in-chief and cross-examination of the Appellant and his cousin. The
   record of the evidence includes the explanation by the Appellant's cousin
   about where he went in Afghanistan and why. The decision also includes a
   summary of the submissions made by the parties.

6. In paragraph 26 of the decision the Judge expressly adopted the reasons
   given in the Refusal Letter for the rejection of the Appellant's claim.
   That is not inherently unacceptable. There is no need for a Judge to
   repeat in his own words his reasons and if these have already been set
   out elsewhere I see no reason why reference to the other document should
   in itself be a source of criticism. Decisions are frequently shorter than
   the Refusal Letter giving rise to the appeal that has to be because it is
   acceptable for Judges to deal with matters differently from Home Office
   decision makers.

7. The question is whether the Judge considered the Appellant's case
   properly. If adopting the approach of the Refusal Letter had been all
   that the Judge had done then there could an argument for saying that the
   decision lacked independent scrutiny but that depends on the quality of
   the Refusal Letter.

8. The Judge, having already referred in summary to the evidence given,
   also referred to ways in which he found that the Appellant's account had
   changed. Whilst he observed that the appellation of the Appellant's
   cousin had changed from that of uncle it does not appear that that was
   relied on a reason to reject the evidence.

9. The evidence of the Appellant's cousin with regard to his efforts to
   trace the Appellant's family was circular in some respects. If his
   evidence was reliable on the point then he could not be expected to get
   too close to the Appellant's village, if his evidence was not reliable
   then his failure to get to the village was not explained. His claim that
   it was too dangerous was not by itself sufficient to make his evidence
   reliable without some other reason to find him reliable.

10. If the other findings were justified the Judge would have been entitled
   to find that the Appellant's claimed fear of the government had not been
   made out. In rejecting the evidence of visits to the house the Judge had
   regard to the time that had elapsed since the Appellant arrived in the UK
   in 2009. He did not say so but there was no evidence supporting a claim
   of continuing interest in the Appellant's father or the Appellant from
   his cousin.

11. There is a difficulty with both the Refusal Letter and the decision
   which is that there is no specific reference to the age of the Appellant
   either when the events took place, when he was interviewed and when
   giving his later account. The Appellant had grown up considerably in that
   time and some assessment was required on the effect that that may have
   had on the credibility assessment when considering differences in what he
   had said (such as whether his father had involvement with Hezb-i-Islami).
   Since his age and growing up is such a fundamental part of the case it is
   a topic that should have been considered, it was not considered as a
   factor in the assessment of credibility in the Refusal Letter and so
   should have featured in the findings and reasons in the decision. In the
   circumstances I am persuaded that the failure to address his age in the
   decision is sufficient to amount to a material error of law and on that
   basis the decision is set aside.

12. Given the nature of the findings made and the assessment that is to be
   undertaken I find that the appropriate course of action is to remit the
   decision to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all matters with no
   findings of the first appeal being preserved. This is not to be listed
   before First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
for re-hearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

I make no fee award which is reserved to the First-tier Tribunal on the
conclusion of the re-hearing.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Parkes (IAC)

Dated: 16th October 2015



