
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08033/2013
                                                               AA/08034/2013
                                                               AA/08035/2013
                                                               AA/08036/2013
                                                               AA/08037/2013
                                                               AA/08040/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 28 July 2015                      |On 27 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     FNZ
                                     MAZ
                                     MCZ
                                     MOZ
                                     PKZ
                                     PAZ
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr W Criggie, Hamilton Burns WS
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) The appellants are a mother and her 5 children.  They are all nationals
    of Lebanon.  They appeal against a decision by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Peter Grant-Hutchison dismissing their appeals on humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

 2) These  appeals  have  a  significant  history.   They  were  originally
    dismissed by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in November  2013.   In
    July 2014 the Upper Tribunal remitted the appeals for a hearing  before
    a different judge.  The appeals were  accordingly  heard  before  Judge
    Peter Grant-Hutchison over two days in late  2014,  with  the  decision
    issued in January 2015.  The appeals now again come  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3) The appellants arrived in the UK as visitors in July 2013 and the first
    appellant  claimed  asylum  the  following  day.   According   to   the
    appellants,  they  had  problems  in  Lebanon  as  the  result  of  the
    activities of the first appellant's husband and the father of the other
    appellants.  He worked as a loss adjuster preparing reports  for  court
    proceedings.  This work exposed him to threats from  people  attempting
    to exert  pressure  upon  him.   The  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was  that  the  first  appellant's  husband  was  prepared  to
    tolerate the danger to which he was exposed in return for his earnings,
    which  were  significant.   At  the  time  of  the  hearing  the  first
    appellant's husband employed two bodyguards in Lebanon and slept  in  a
    different place each night.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4) Before the First-tier Tribunal the first appellant gave evidence  about
    the risks to which she claimed the family had been exposed in  Lebanon.
    In one incident in June 2013 the family were returning in a car from  a
    home in the  mountains.   They  were  followed  by  another  car.   The
    occupants of the other car forced the first appellant's husband out  of
    his car and threatened him.  The family  asked  the  first  appellant's
    husband to report this incident to the police but he was not interested
    in doing so.  They nevertheless attended the police station  and  brief
    statements were taken.

 5) The evidence of the first appellant was that her oldest daughter,  PAZ,
    who was attending university in  Lebanon,  had  been  threatened.   The
    threats were made by telephone.  The daughter was told by the caller to
    tell her father to change a report or she  would  be  in  danger.   Her
    father said he would not change the report.  Around this time in  April
    2013 the daughter was being followed from the university.  As a  result
    of this she stopped attending university and the  first  appellant  and
    the children moved to live at the first  appellant's  brother's  house.
    After the incident in June 2013, when the family car was stopped,  they
    moved between the first appellant's brother's and  sister's  houses  in
    the centre of Beirut before leaving Lebanon in  July.   The  appellants
    experienced no further incidents after the one in June.

 6) The first appellant's evidence was that her husband would not  give  up
    his occupation.  He thought the family would  be  safe  in  Lebanon  in
    hiding.  Following her departure with the children she thought he would
    want custody of the children if they were in Lebanon.

 7) The first appellant further  claimed  that  the  family  would  not  be
    protected by the authorities in Lebanon.   There  had  been  a  lot  of
    kidnapping and break-ins and people had to use  their  own  bodyguards.
    The police would not investigate break-ins.  There was a police station
    near the family home but the police were short of staff.  A  friend  of
    hers who was a priest was kidnapped and killed  and  nothing  was  done
    about it.  As a woman in Lebanon she would have no power.  Even  though
    the incident when the family  car  was  stopped  was  reported  to  the
    police, her husband would not give the police any names or details.

 8) The oldest daughter, PAZ,  gave  evidence  in  which  she  referred  to
    receiving threatening  calls  towards  the  end  of  April  2013.   She
    received them every three to five days.  When she told her father about
    the calls he said to her that she should  not  pay  any  attention  and
    should not answer them.  She referred to having been followed  by  cars
    from the beginning of April.  If she was in a shop the car would  stop.
    She thought the cars were following her because  of  her  looks.   This
    affected her education and she stopped attending lessons.  She did  not
    discuss this with her father.  She gave evidence also about the  family
    car being stopped in June 2013.

 9) Two of the other children gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.
     One of these was PZ, who is not a party to this appeal  but  has  been
    studying in the UK for 4 years.  The other was PKZ.

10) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal looked at the country  information
    on Lebanon with regard to the claim by the  first  appellant  that  the
    authorities would not protect her.  The judge was  not  satisfied  that
    this was correct.  He noted that according  to  the  first  appellant's
    evidence the police did produce a report in relation to the incident in
    June 2013 when the family car was stopped even  though  they  were  not
    given full information by the first appellant's husband.  On the  first
    appellant's own evidence she was able to stay for month with  relatives
    in central Beirut after  this  incident  without  being  threatened  or
    molested.  The judge was not satisfied that there was not a sufficiency
    of protection for the first appellant  and  the  children  in  Lebanon.
    Even if this was  not  correct,  there  was  a  viable  alternative  of
    internal relocation and this would not be unduly harsh.  The judge went
    on to make an adverse credibility finding in respect of the evidence of
    the appellants.

11) The judge considered the first appellant's claim that  she  would  lose
    custody of her children in Lebanon.  The judge had regard to  the  case
    of EM (Lebanon) [2006] EWCA Civ 1531.  According to this case there was
    a risk that the right of the first appellant to care for her sons might
    not be recognised but there was no reason to suppose that she would  be
    prevented from seeing her sons.  The breaches  of  her  Article  8  and
    Article 14 rights in this regard would not be such as to be flagrant.

12) Turning to the existence of family or private life in the UK, the judge
    noted that the appellants  could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  They would be returning to Lebanon as family,  apart  from  one
    son, PZ, who had chosen to study in the UK.  Family life  would  resume
    in Lebanon.  Any private life enjoyed in the UK had  been  only  for  a
    short period.  It was not disproportionate  under  Article  8  for  the
    family to return to Lebanon.  The  judge  found  no  breach  of  either
    Articles 2 or 3 or of Article 8.

Application for permission to appeal

13) The first ground of the application for permission to appeal was  based
    on a conclusion expressed by the judge at paragraph 20 of the  decision
    in the following terms:

         "From the totality of the evidence and  submissions  before  me,  I
         find that if the appellant were to  be  returned  to  Lebanon  that
         there would be a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  in  terms  of  the
         humanitarian protection provisions."

14) It was submitted that because of this finding it was  unclear  why  the
    appeal had been dismissed.  The reader was left  in  doubt  as  to  the
    judge's intentions and this constituted an error of law.

15) The second ground was that the judge had failed to consider  adequately
    the best interests of the children.  In terms of EM (Lebanon) it  would
    be likely that the children would be returned  to  the  care  of  their
    father.  The judge discussed this case and  accepted  the  evidence  of
    supporting witnesses in relation to this matter.  In view  of  this  it
    was unclear whether the judge had given sufficient consideration to the
    best interests of the children, particularly  as  their  father  had  a
    peripatetic lifestyle due to the threats he received and he  relied  on
    the protection of bodyguards.

16) The third ground was that the judge did not give adequate  reasons  for
    not accepting the evidence of the witnesses and finding their  accounts
    to be lacking in credibility.  Consistent evidence was  given  by  five
    witnesses as to what had occurred in Lebanon in April/June 2013 and  as
    to the family situation at the date of the hearing.  The judge did  not
    give sufficient reasons at paragraph 18 of  the  decision  for  finding
    that these witnesses were not credible.

17) Permission to appeal was granted on all of these grounds.

18) In a rule 24 notice dated 13 March 2015, the first contention was  that
    in paragraph 20 of the decision, quoted at paragraph 13 above, the word
    "not" had clearly been omitted between the word "would" and  the  words
    "be a real risk of serious harm".

19) The notice then proceeded to state that the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal set out in three places, at paragraphs 16, 17 and 18, that  he
    did not accept the evidence of the appellants.  There was no reason  to
    assume that the best interests of the children would lie anywhere  else
    than remaining with their mother in the cultural context in which  they
    were raised.  The issue of custody was misconceived.

Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

20) The hearing before me was on the issue of whether there was an error of
    law in the decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.   For  the
    appellants Mr Criggie acknowledged that it was difficult  to  say  that
    the alleged error in paragraph 20 was material.  It was clear that  the
    word "not" had been omitted from the sentence.   Accordingly  he  would
    not rely on the first ground  in  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal in an attempt to show that the decision was perverse.

21) In relation to the second ground, Mr Criggie observed that four of  the
    children were under 18 at the date of the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal  and  he  submitted  that  their  interests   had   not   been
    sufficiently considered.  The oldest son, PZ, had a student visa.   The
    children's father had  a  peripatetic  lifestyle  in  Lebanon  and  was
    guarded by bodyguards.  His living arrangements were fluid and were not
    secure.  In Lebanon the father would be given custody of  the  children
    and this would lead to difficulties.  They  would  be  returning  to  a
    volatile living situation.

22) It was further pointed out  that  when  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal referred to EM (Lebanon) he cited the decision of the Court of
    Appeal, rather than the decision of the House  of  Lords.   Mr  Criggie
    submitted that it was the Court  of  Appeal  decision  which  had  been
    lodged by the respondent and it might be a further error for the  judge
    not to have referred to the subsequent House of Lords' decision.

23) Mr Criggie acknowledged that there was no evidence from the  children's
    father but there was evidence from people who knew him, as well as from
    the children.  According to  the  evidence  there  had  been  a  schism
    between the first appellant and the  children's  father  following  the
    incident in June 2013 because the father was unwilling to  protect  the
    family.  The first appellant had not spoken to her husband since.   The
    older children and a family friend were in contact.

24) On the third ground, Mr Criggie submitted  that  the  judge  had  heard
    evidence from five witnesses, all members of the same family,  but  had
    given their evidence little weight or found  it  not  credible.   There
    were bound to be some inconsistencies between the witnesses.  The judge
    did not give adequate reasoning for finding that the witnesses were not
    credible.  He accepted the evidence of PKZ and of the family friend, Mr
    Bilan, in relation to how the children's father was living.

25) There was a discussion of the issue of whether there was a  sufficiency
    of protection for the appellants in Lebanon, taking their  evidence  at
    its highest.  In relation to this Mr Criggie submitted that the  police
    in Lebanon were stretched to breaking point because of the situation in
    Syria.  There was also corruption.  The police could not be relied upon
    to provide a sufficiency of protection.

26) For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien referred to the rule  24  notice.   She
    acknowledged that the  decision  was  not  "a  perfect  exposition"  in
    respect of the assessment of credibility but points were  made  by  the
    respondent in the reasons for refusal letter in relation to the  issues
    of sufficiency of protection.  There was a  functioning  government  in
    Lebanon.  The high standard  for  showing  there  was  not  substantive
    protection was  not  reached.   The  family  could  live  elsewhere  in
    Lebanon.  The issue of custody was a secondary one.  The  family  could
    not succeed with their claims under humanitarian  protection  or  under
    Articles 2, 3 or 8 on the basis of their fear of crime in Lebanon.

Discussion

27) I have approached this appeal on the basis that an error of law made by
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of  the  assessment  of
    credibility would not be material if, taking the  appellants'  evidence
    at its highest, there was no error of law in the judge's assessment  of
    the risk on return and of the  best  interests  of  the  children.   In
    considering this I therefore assume that the family were threatened  as
    they claim and this was the reason they left Lebanon.

28) The finding of the judge was that there was a functioning police  force
    in Lebanon and that the police had, according to the family's evidence,
    taken statements following the incident in June 2013.  The  police  had
    not been able to take further action because of the reluctance  of  the
    children's father to give details to the police.  It was not suggested,
    however, that the police were unwilling or unable to act.

29) In relation to the threats to the eldest daughter and her evidence that
    she was followed on numerous occasions in April 2013, the evidence  was
    that these matters were never reported to the police.  Furthermore, the
    eldest daughter suffered  no  actual  harm  and  there  was  no  actual
    violence against her.  As the Presenting Officer submitted on behalf of
    the respondent at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, not  only
    were the calls not reported to the police but the eldest  daughter  did
    not either change her telephone number or use  a  different  telephone.
    There was no evidence that the police would  not  have  acted  in  this
    matter if it had been brought to their attention.

30) The  judge  further  concluded  at  paragraph  17  that  on  the  first
    appellant's evidence even after the incident in June 2013, she was able
    to stay for a month with relatives  in  central  Beirut  without  being
    threatened or molested.  At paragraph 18 the judge  stated  that  there
    was nothing to indicate that the  people  the  first  appellant  feared
    would find her in another part of Beirut or another part of Lebanon.

31) Before the First-tier Tribunal  it  was  acknowledged  that  the  state
    authorities in Lebanon were "stretched" because of the number of Syrian
    refugees entering the country.  The judge relied on a US report of June
    2013 which stated that overall the police were responsive and had  made
    significant improvements in rendering police assistance  although  they
    might have difficulty responding to crimes based on the time of day and
    location.  This might lead to diminished levels of  service  and  cases
    going unsolved or unresolved.  The judge concluded, however,  that  the
    authorities were still functioning although they were  under  pressure.
    This is consistent with the appellant's own evidence about  the  police
    response to their report of the incident on June 2013.  I conclude that
    the judge was entitled on the evidence and for  the  reasons  given  to
    find that there was a sufficiency of protection for the  appellant  and
    her family in Lebanon.

32) Even having made this finding, the judge went on  to  consider  whether
    the appellants could relocate to avoid any further threats  being  made
    against them in an attempt to influence the children's father.   Again,
    I note that the judge found that the appellants were able to stay  with
    the relatives in central Beirut between  June  and  July  2013  without
    difficulty.  The first appellant feared they would be  traced  but  the
    evidence does not support this claim.   The  appellant's  evidence  was
    that their car was stopped when returning from the mountains  but  this
    was on their return from a country home they occupied, the location  of
    which might have become known to  those  who  wanted  to  threaten  the
    children's father.

33) The father himself is described as staying each night  in  a  different
    place and having two bodyguards to protect him.  The  evidence  of  the
    first appellant was that it was not unusual in Lebanon  for  people  to
    have bodyguards because of the  level  of  crime  and  particularly  of
    kidnapping.  Even if people rely on bodyguards for their protection, it
    does not follow from this that there is not a sufficiency of protection
    provided by the authorities.  The choice of having a bodyguard might be
    made by those who feel themselves particularly at  risk,  such  as  the
    appellant's father, or those who  have  a  particularly  high  fear  of
    crime.  On the basis of the evidence the children's  father  would  not
    appear to have any financial difficulty in relation to  the  employment
    of bodyguards and the availability of extra protection of  this  nature
    is a matter which the judge would  have  been  entitled  to  take  into
    account.

34) I am satisfied that even taking the evidence at its highest, the  judge
    gave adequate reasons for finding first that there was a sufficiency of
    protection for the appellants in Lebanon and, secondly,  that  even  if
    this were not the case there  was  a  viable  alternative  of  internal
    protection, of which it would not be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh  to
    expect the appellants to avail themselves.  I do not consider that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in dismissing the appeals
    on the grounds of humanitarian protection and under Articles 2 and 3.

35) This leaves the issue of the best interests of the children in relation
    to Article 8.  Here the judge assumed that it was in the best interests
    of the children to return with their mother to Lebanon, apart from  the
    eldest son, PZ, who has chosen to study in the UK.  On the face of  it,
    it is difficult to see what  other  conclusion  the  judge  might  have
    reached in relation to the best interests of the children.  At the date
    of the hearing before me they had been in the  UK  for  just  over  two
    years.  They arrived as visitors and  they  do  not  have  a  need  for
    international protection.  The judge noted that  they  had  no  adverse
    health issues, although the eldest daughter gave evidence that she  was
    taking medication for scoliosis.

36) At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it  was  acknowledged  on
    behalf of the respondent that on divorce the first appellant's  husband
    would be given custody of the children.  It was further submitted  that
    he had not shown any interest in his family in the  UK.   Reliance  was
    placed on the case of EM (Lebanon) to show that Shari'a Law, as applied
    in Lebanon, was not oppressive.  The first appellant would  still  have
    access to the children.  It could not be assumed that contact would  be
    drastically reduced.

37) Mr  Criggie  pointed  out  that  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    respondent relied on the Court  of  Appeal  judgment  in  EM  (Lebanon)
    rather than the decision of the House of Lords, reported as [2008] UKHL
    64.  Mr Criggie submitted before me that this in itself might amount to
    an error of law, although the point was not brought up before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

38) This point is of some potential significance.  The House of  Lords,  of
    course, reached a different conclusion from the  Court  of  Appeal  and
    found that, if in the circumstances of that case custody was awarded to
    the father on the child's return to Lebanon, the right to  respect  for
    family life would not only be flagrantly violated but  complete  denied
    and nullified.  This was in circumstances set out at  paragraph  40  of
    the Court's decision, where it was pointed out that there was a bond of
    deep love and mutual dependence between the appellant and her  son  and
    this could not be replaced by a new relationship between  the  son  and
    his father, who  had  inflicted  physical  violence  and  psychological
    injury on the mother and who had been sent to  prison  for  failing  to
    support the son.  The son had never consciously  seen  his  father  and
    felt strongly antagonistic towards him.

39) As was pointed out at paragraph 37 by the Court:

         "Families differ widely, in their composition  and  in  the  mutual
         relations which exist between the members, and marked  changes  are
         likely to occur over time within the same family.  Thus there is no
         pre-determined model of family or family life to  which  Article  8
         must be applied.  The Article requires respect to be shown for  the
         right to such family life as is or may be enjoyed by the particular
         applicant or applicants before the court, always bearing  in  mind,
         since any family must have at least two members, and may have  many
         more, the participation of other members who share in the  life  of
         that family.  In this context, as in most Convention contexts,  the
         facts of the particular case are crucial."

40) In the circumstances of this appeal, there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    children are irreconcilably estranged from their father.  The  evidence
    of PZ, though he is not one of the  appellants,  was  that  his  father
    sponsors him at university in the UK and pays his fees.  He has  stayed
    with his father at his  uncle's  house,  seemingly  after  his  parents
    started living apart.  The evidence of PKZ appeared to be that  he  has
    not had direct contact with his father since arriving in the UK and the
    evidence of the oldest daughter, PAZ, was that she has not had  contact
    with her father since she left Lebanon.

41) Nevertheless, on the basis of the evidence  the  relationships  between
    the children  and  their  father  are  completely  different  from  the
    relationship between the father and son described in EM (Lebanon).  The
    principal point of law in EM (Lebanon) was that for  Article  8  to  be
    engaged  in  these  circumstances  the  threshold  test  would  require
    flagrant breach of the right to family life such  as  would  completely
    deny or nullify the right in the destination  country.   A  serious  or
    discriminatory  interference  with  the  right   protected   would   be
    insufficient.  On the basis of  the  evidence  in  this  appeal,  there
    appears  to  be  no  suggestion  that  there  would  be  a  denial   or
    nullification of family life between the appellants and  their  mother,
    even were custody of the minor children to be formally awarded to their
    father.  Accordingly, the appellants have not shown that were  they  to
    return to Lebanon, and custody were to be awarded to  their  father  in
    the event of a divorce, this would be a breach  of  Article  8  in  the
    terms described in EM (Lebanon).  I am therefore  satisfied  that  even
    though the judge was not referred to the decision of the House of Lords
    in that case, the judge could not have found  a  breach  of  Article  8
    arising from the issue of custody in the circumstances of this  appeal.



42) In relation to Article 8 the judge did not refer to section 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  as  amended.   As  was
    pointed out in  AM  (s  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260,  it  is  not
    necessarily an  error  of  law  to  fail  to  refer  to  section  117B.
    Nevertheless as pointed out in Deelah (section  117B  -  ambit)  [2015]
    UKUT 515, section 117B applies to consideration of  Article  8  outside
    the Rules.  It is stated  in  section  117B  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls  is  in  the  public  interest  and,  in
    addition, little weight should be given to a private  life  established
    by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious.  Although the judge did not refer to up to date case law on
    the application of Article 8, it was stated in SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387 that compelling circumstances are required  for  an  appeal  to
    succeed under Article 8 outwith the Rules.

43) At paragraph 23 of the decision the judge indicated that there was  "no
    good arguable case"  for  considering  Article  8  outwith  the  Rules.
    Although the higher  courts  have  made  it  clear  that  there  is  no
    intermediate test of having a good arguable case  before  consideration
    may be given to Article 8 outwith the Rules (as, for example  in  Ashiq
    [2015] CSIH 31 at paragraph 6), on the evidence in  this  appeal  there
    were no compelling circumstances which would have required the judge to
    consider the application of Article 8 outwith the Rules.  In any event,
    as the judge observed, the return to the appellants to Lebanon would be
    proportionate having regard  to  the  public  interest  in  immigration
    controls.

44) The difficulty for the appellants in seeking to establish an  error  of
    law in respect of the judge's consideration of Article 8 is that,  even
    again taking their case at the highest, it  cannot  be  shown  how  the
    appellants would succeed under  Article  8  on  the  basis  that  their
    removal would be a disproportionate interference with  their  right  to
    respect for their private or family life.  With this in mind it  cannot
    be said that the judge erred in making his  decision  under  Article  8
    either in relation to the best interests of the children or in relation
    to the question of custody on divorce.

Conclusions

45) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

46) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

47) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   I  have
    not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason  of  substance
    for such an order to be made.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
