
[pic]

Upper Tribunal   AA/08395/2012
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  AA/09042/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|On 5 February 2014                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     SQ
                                     MQ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Symes, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Busch, instructed by The Treasury Solicitor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. MQ, born in October 1997, arrived in the United Kingdom  from  Pakistan
    with his mother SQ on 24 June 2012; each having had leave to enter as a
    visitor conferred on them until 21 November 2012.  On 27 June  2012  SQ
    contacted the  Asylum  Screening  Unit  and  she  subsequently  claimed
    asylum, with MQ as her dependent, on 31 July 2012. This application was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 30 August 2012  and  on  the  same
    date the  Secretary  of  State  made  decisions  in  relation  to  both
    appellants, (i) varying their leave to enter so  that  each  had  "none
    remaining" and (ii) to remove them from the United Kingdom pursuant  to
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


 2. Judge Kanagaratnam dismissed the appellants' appeals to the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a determination of 21 November 2012,  both  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds. The appellants' asylum claims are no longer being
    pursued and nothing more need be said about them.


 3. MQ has a serious medical condition -  Beta  Thalassaemia  Major  -  for
    which he was receiving treatment in Pakistan prior to  his  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom, and has been receiving  treatment  here  since  his
    arrival. The appellants advanced human rights claims to  the  Secretary
    of State by reference to Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR). These were  founded  upon
    the assertion that to return MQ to Pakistan would be to subject him  to
    inhuman treatment or lead to an unlawful interference with his right to
    respect for his private life as a consequence  of  the  fact  that,  if
    returned, he would probably die in his late teens  or  early  twenties,
    whereas in this country he would have a much longer and better life.


 4. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  refused,  first  by
    Designated Judge Murray and then, upon renewal, by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Latter.  The appellants thereafter applied to the Administrative  Court
    for permission to bring Judicial  Review  proceedings  challenging  the
    Upper Tribunal's refusal to grant permission to  appeal.  On  19  April
    2013, Cox J refused permission on the papers. There being no  right  to
    renew  this  application  to  the  Administrative  Court   orally   the
    appellants then appealed to the Court of Appeal.  Permission to  appeal
    was granted by Sir Stanley Burnton on 17 July 2013, and, in a  decision
    of the 22 October 2013,  the  Court  of  Appeal  (the  Vice  President,
    Lewison and Underhill LJJ) allowed the appellants' appeals against  Cox
    J's decision, granted the appellants permission to apply  for  Judicial
    Review and,  upon  dealing  with  the  Judicial  Review  substantively,
    quashed the Upper Tribunal's refusal to  grant  permission  to  appeal,
    remitting "the case to the UT for it to determine the appeal". We treat
    the latter decision from the Court of Appeal as incorporating an  order
    granting the appellants permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal;
    neither party before us has suggested otherwise.


 5. It is by this rather circuitous route that the appeal came before us.


Error of Law in First-tier Tribunal's determination


 6. At the outset of the hearing Ms Busch accepted, and we concluded,  that
    the First-tier Tribunal's  determination  contained  an  error  of  law
    requiring it to be set aside, for the reasons given in paragraph 24  of
    the judgment of the Vice President of the Court of Appeal, ([2013] EWCA
    Civ 1251):


   "[24] In my judgment, the consideration of Article 8 by the  FTT  in  the
        present case was similarly flawed.  It was incumbent upon the Judge
        to identify all features  of  MQ's  private  life  which  would  be
        subjected to interference upon his removal.  These were  headed  by
        the discontinuation of  the  treatment  he  is  receiving  in  this
        country.  It seems to me that the issue of interference  admits  of
        only one answer here and the FTT erred in coming  to  the  contrary
        conclusion.  The real issue is proportionality.  Unfortunately, the
        FTT  seems  to  have  excluded  health   considerations   and   the
        discontinuation of the UK treatment from its ZH  assessment.   That
        was a material error of law."


Re-making of Decision


Scope of the re-making


 7. As identified above, the Court of Appeal found there to be  a  material
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of the  Article
    8  ECHR  ground.  It  found  no  error  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    consideration of the appellants' Article  3  claim.  As  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal's task upon 'remittal' the following was said in the  judgment
    of the Vice President:


   "[27] I do not intend to predict or seek to influence the outcome of the
         present case on remittal.  On the one hand, MQ can pray in aid  his
         lawful entry and his status as a child with the protection  of  the
         ZH approach.  On the  other  hand,  he  arrived  with  his  serious
         medical conditions at  an  advanced  stage  and,  although  not  an
         unlawful entrant, it will  be  relevant  to  consider  whether  his
         arrival here was a manifestation of "health tourism".  If  it  was,
         that would fall to be weighed in  the  balance.   After  all,  this
         country is under no international obligation always to act as  "the
         hospital of the world".  The difficult question is whether it would
         be disproportionate to remove this child in the light  of  all  the
         evidence in the case, including  the  medical  evidence  which,  at
         present, is not as clearly presented as it could be."


 8. The appellants' skeleton argument, prepared for the hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal, sought to pursue both Article  3  and  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds. This prompted the following response from  the  respondent  in
    her skeleton argument of the 31 January 2014:


   "[6]...the  suggestion  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should   contemplate
         "extending the scope  of  the  remittal"  to  consider  Article  3,
         whether  or  not  it  admits  the  Appellants'  new  evidence,   is
         misconceived, and amounts to a proposed abuse of the procedures  of
         the Court. It was,  with  respect,  for  the  Court  of  Appeal  to
         determine the scope of the remittal. That is not a matter  for  the
         Upper Tribunal. The  Court  expressly  limited  the  scope  of  the
         remittal in this case to Article 8, and dismissed  the  Appellants'
         appeal under Article 3 in clear terms...


   [7] In her further submission, if the Appellants wish  to  make  further
         submissions with respect to Article 3, the proper way for  them  to
         do so is by way of submissions to her under paragraph  353  of  the
         Immigration Rules (HC395). They cannot circumvent that step  (which
         might or might not lead to a further decision, with a further right
         of appeal), by requesting  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  countenance  a
         further appeal under Article 3, notwithstanding the  Order  of  the
         Court of Appeal.


   [8] The Respondent would respectfully invite the Upper Tribunal, at  the
         outset of the hearing of  this  appeal  (or  indeed  prior  to  its
         commencement, in writing) to  direct  that  argument  and  evidence
         should be limited to matters pertaining to Article 8 of  the  ECHR,
         and that matters relating to Article 3 will not be heard"


 9. The respondent maintained this  position  at  the  hearing  before  us;
    although it is fair to say that she  did  so  with  significantly  less
    vigour than had been the case in her skeleton argument.


10. We gave our ruling at the hearing, concluding that we  would  determine
    both the Article 8 and Article 3 ECHR grounds. Our reasons for doing so
    are as follows.


11. Once a determination of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside  the
    Upper Tribunal must either remake the decision under appeal or remit it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for it to determine: section 12(2)(b) of the
    Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007. If the Upper Tribunal remits
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal it has power to  give  directions
    which limit the scope of the re-making. If it decides  to  re-make  the
    decision itself then it is for the Upper Tribunal to decide the  nature
    and scope of the hearing that is required  for  such  purpose.  In  the
    instant matter we have set aside the determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the reasons given above and it is agreed that the decision
    should be re-made by the Upper Tribunal. We have discretion as to scope
    of the re-making, and in particular as to the substantive grounds  that
    should be considered. The existence of such discretion flows  from  the
    terms of the 2007 Act itself, and was identified by the Court of Appeal
    in Kizhakudan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 566.


12. Kizhakudan involved an appeal by a student  who  succeeded  before  the
    First-tier Judge on the basis of grounds that were  subsequently  found
    to be wrong in law.  Article 8 arguments went unmentioned  before  that
    tribunal as a consequence of it having  given  an  indication  that  it
    found favour with the appellant's arguments on other matters. The Upper
    Tribunal was asked to consider  Article  8  submissions,  despite  such
    ground not having been pursued before the First-tier Judge.  The  Upper
    Tribunal Judge considered that it was  not  open  to  him  to  consider
    Article 8, ostensibly because it had not been pursued before the First-
    tier and, therefore, the First-tier could not be said to have erred  in
    its consideration of it. The  Court  of  Appeal  considered  the  Upper
    Tribunal's approach to have been errant, stating as follows:

         "[28] ...He [the Upper Tribunal Judge] had no need for any  further
         error of law  to  give  him  jurisdiction  to  deal  anew  with  Mr
         Kizhakudan's appeal.  He already had the common ground error of law
         in relation to  the  proper  interpretation  of  the  Secretary  of
         State's policy guidance (paragraph 1  of  his  determination).   He
         therefore was in the position where he had either  to  re-make  the
         decision for himself, or to remit the matter back to the First-tier
         Tribunal: see section 12(2)(b) of the 2007 Act.  What  he  was  not
         required to do was to look at the matter solely through the lens of
         the argument before IJ Widdup, as though he needed to find a second
         error of law, this time with respect to Article 8, before he  could
         be permitted to consider that issue for himself."

13. The Court went on to say:


   "[30] However, SIJ  Waumsley  considered  that  he  could  not  consider
         article 8 unless IJ Widdup had erred in law in failing to  consider
         it.  He therefore put it out of his hands to  consider  whether  he
         ought to look at the matter in terms of article 8.  In my judgment,
         however, SIJ Waumsley had a discretion to consider  the  article  8
         point, even if, as he was entitled to think, the point had not been
         properly raised in the First-tier Tribunal, nor by any respondent's
         notice.  It  is  plain,  however,  that  SIJ  Waumsley  refused  to
         consider his discretion.  Whether or not any of the thoughts  which
         led to the way he expressed the matter in his permission to  appeal
         decision entered sub silentio into his thinking  does  not  matter;
         but it is of course a matter of concern that they may have done so.
          In any event, he never reached a consideration of his discretion."


14. In the instant appeal a substantial amount of new evidence, relating to
    both Article 3 and Article 8 considerations, was  admitted  before  the
    Upper Tribunal prior to the final hearing. Although Ms  Busch  asserted
    that the correct approach would be for the  appellant  to  submit  this
    material  as  a  'fresh  claim'  pursuant  to  paragraph  353  of   the
    Immigration Rules, no explanation was given as to why the  exercise  of
    the respondent considering the fresh material could not equally well be
    carried out within the confines of the instant appeal:  indeed  it  was
    not suggested by Ms Busch that the respondent  had  not  already  given
    consideration to this material.


15. There is a clear nexus between the Article 3 and Article 8  grounds  in
    this appeal; both being underpinned  by  MQ's  medical  condition,  the
    difference in the treatment he would receive in the United Kingdom  and
    Pakistan and the consequences to MQ of that  difference  in  treatment.
    Given  this  nexus,  the  fact  that  the  new  material  relevant   to
    consideration under both articles has already been admitted  before  us
    and  that  the  Secretary  of  State   has   already   given   detailed
    consideration to this  material,  we  concluded  that  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to exercise our discretion  so  as  to  allow  the
    appellants to pursue the Article 3 ECHR ground.


16. For the sake of completeness, we  reject  the  respondent's  submission
    that the Court of Appeal  has  already  determined  the  scope  of  the
    remittal and that we should defer to its  decision.  If  the  Court  of
    Appeal had determined  the  scope  of  the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal we would have expected to find clear wording to this effect in
    its judgment, or order, particularly given that the appeal came  before
    it by way of a Cart Judicial Review and not by way of an appeal against
    a substantive decision of the Upper Tribunal. We can find no such clear
    wording.


Summary of the Evidence


17. Having identified the scope of the hearing before us we now turn to the
    evidence,  which,  broadly  speaking,  falls  into  three   categories;
    evidence from the appellants, medical evidence and  country  background
    evidence.


Appellants' evidence


Evidence of SQ


18. SQ's evidence was given in the form of witness  statements,  interviews
    with the Secretary of State's officials and oral  evidence  before  the
    tribunal.  She is from the Peshawar region of Pakistan  and  has  lived
    there all of her life. Her family also lives in that area.  She  has  a
    Masters degree in International Relations and was previously a  teacher
    in Pakistan, but gave this up to look after MQ  full-time.  Immediately
    prior to coming to the United Kingdom she  was  a  housewife.   In  her
    asylum interview she maintained that  she  retains  a  private  tuition
    centre in Pakistan and  also  has  a  boutique  selling  dresses.   She
    further confirmed that her husband was in employment with  a  bank  and
    that her elder son had applied for university.


19. MQ has suffered with Thalassaemia, a genetic blood disorder,  since  he
    was 6 months old.  He requires blood transfusions  every  three  weeks.
    The  first  appellant  stated  that  the  blood  he  received  for  the
    transfusions given in Pakistan was not screened or  filtered,  and  the
    quality of the blood was not monitored to the same level as that in the
    UK.  She thought MQ to be at risk of  contracting  infections  such  as
    Hepatitis B and C or HIV from the transfusions.  She  claimed  that  MQ
    did not receive appropriate chelation therapy (removal of iron from the
    blood) following his blood transfusions in Pakistan, and that the large
    deposits of iron in his blood as a consequence could  cause  damage  to
    his organs.


20. In November 2006 the appellants came to the UK to join the husband  and
    father who was studying here.  During this  time  MQ  received  medical
    treatment but he returned to Pakistan in February 2007.  It was claimed
    that in 2009 MQ witnessed a shooting outside his home and a  man  tried
    to kidnap him from his home near Hyderabad. He had also been beaten  up
    by five Afghan boys whilst walking through a mountainous area near  his
    home and had witnessed a  random  bomb  blast.   SQ  stated  that  this
    affected the lives of the family in Pakistan.


21. In her asylum interview SQ claimed that in 2012 she came to the  UK  to
    visit her sister. Whilst  here  she  watched  a  children's  television
    programme  involving  children  with  special  needs.  This  led  to  a
    conversation with her brother-in-law,  which  then  led  to  the  first
    appellant searching the internet for UK based  charities  dealing  with
    Thalassaemia patients. This internet search  led  her  to  the  Refugee
    Council's website, which provided information on how to  claim  asylum.
    Having read this information she decided to make such a claim.


22. However, also in her asylum interview, SQ stated that she  had  entered
    the UK for treatment to save the MQ's life, asserting there  to  be  no
    haematologist  in  Pakistan.  She  confirmed  that  MQ  received  blood
    transfusions every three weeks in  Pakistan  but  maintained  that  the
    blood was unscreened. MQ has severe iron overload,  which  has  led  to
    severe growth retardation.  He has the physical appearance of a 9  year
    old.


23. In her witness statement dated 8th November 2012, SQ maintained that MQ
    had previously received treatment at the Fatimid Foundation in Peshawar
    from 1995 to 2006 (she recorded 1998-2006  in  her  statement  of  28th
    January 2014) but this stopped because other  children  had  contracted
    hepatitis A, B and C. She believed this to be because of the receipt of
    unscreened blood. There was no haematologist at the Fatimid Foundation.


24. From 2006 MQ had treatment at the DUAA Welfare Foundation, and remained
    there until early in 2012. The cost of the treatment  there  was  1,000
    Pakistani rupees per month.  There was no haematologist  or  laboratory
    and conditions at the clinic were bad.


25. She had to pay for  chelation  therapy,  the  treatment  costing  5,000
    Pakistani rupees per month for 30 tablets (Asnra 40 gs).  Often MQ  had
    to skip treatment for a month because the family did not have the money
    to pay for  it.  Sometimes  he  had  to  use  inferior  or  alternative
    medication called L1, which cost 400 to 500 Pakistani rupees.


26. In her  statement  of  8  November  2012  SQ  maintained  that  MQ  had
    contracted malaria and typhoid in 2010, which she  believed  was  as  a
    result of him having received unscreened blood.  It was  at  this  time
    that he stopped growing. We observe that in her asylum interview SQ had
    stated that "he [MQ] never ate well and that's why his growth  reduced"
    [AIR q27].


27. SQ further confirmed that MQ's treatment in the UK  consisted  of  more
    blood transfusions and better treatment with the chelation therapy; his
    weight and height have increased, he is a happier child and his  mental
    health seems more positive. From 31 January 2013 MQ would be  receiving
    endocrine gland treatment to assist with his growth.


28. In her witness statement of 28 January 2014, SQ confirmed that  MQ  had
    been treated at Whittington Hospital and St John's  Hospital  in  Leeds
    whilst they were in the United  Kingdom  2006.  Her  husband  had  been
    working as a grade 1 officer at the Allied Bank in  Peshawar,  but  had
    come to the United Kingdom to study the ACCA examinations.  She gave up
    her job in 2003 (having been working in a nursery school), in order  to
    take MQ for blood transfusions and to administer  his  iron  chelation.
    After she gave up her job at the school she started giving home tuition
    lessons but this did not provide a regular income.  She  also  assisted
    other  women  in  making  dresses  which,  although  not  regular,  was
    something to keep her busy and helped to pay for MQ's medication.


29. Since  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  MQ  had  been  receiving
    treatment. He had improved and is now  very  independent.  He  goes  to
    school, is intelligent and is treated like a normal boy.


30. However, her other son, who remains living in Pakistan, needs her as he
    has mental health problems, does not have anyone to look after him, has
    become severely depressed, stopped studying, started  smoking  and  has
    locked himself away believing that his mother had abandoned him to stay
    in the UK with his brother.  Her husband works in a bank and he  is  at
    the bank all the time so he does not have  time  to  look  after  their
    eldest son. Her mother-in-law is old and frail. Her  relationship  with
    her husband is at breaking point and that he does not speak to  her  on
    the phone.  He has informed her that she must  return  to  Pakistan  by
    April this year and that if she does  not  he  will  divorce  her.  Her
    statement thereafter reads:


         "For that I will not be able to live with myself because there will
         be nothing else for me to  live  for.   I  cannot  risk  having  my
         marriage being destroyed because  in  our  culture  my  husband  is
         within his right to divorce me as a wife who has  left  the  family
         home and has been abroad for over a year now."

31. SQ states, thereafter, that her husband blames her for MQ's  condition.
    As a result she requested that if she had to return to  Pakistan  there
    would be some provision made for MQ in the UK as she did  not  wish  to
    take him back to Pakistan.  Her sister could  not  take  responsibility
    for him so he would have to be  looked  after  by  a  carer  or  social
    services or foster parents for a period of  time.   She  was  concerned
    that her husband would divorce her if she did not return.


32. In her oral evidence SQ stated that she  did  not  say  in  her  asylum
    interview that she had come to the United Kingdom to  obtain  treatment
    for her son. She had come to visit her sister here and she had asked Dr
    Shah, a good friend of hers, why her son was so small. It had not  been
    her intention to claim asylum here. She had intended to take MQ to  see
    the doctor and then return to Pakistan.


33. SQ accepted that MQ had  been  receiving  treatment  in  Pakistan,  but
    stated that this included unscreened  blood  transfusions  and  limited
    chelation therapy. She confirmed that MQ had  been  inoculated  against
    Hepatitis B and that he had previously contracted typhoid in  Pakistan.
    She continued by stating that MQ requires constant  looking  after  and
    could not be left alone. He is in safe hands at school  in  the  United
    Kingdom. She thought that, because of MQ's needs, she could  only  work
    from home in Pakistan.  Her  elder  son  is  currently  in  college  in
    Pakistan. If she and MQ are granted leave  to  remain  here  she  would
    return to Pakistan for a few months leaving MQ in the  United  Kingdom.
    She would first ensure that MQ would be in safe hands. She did not know
    who would pay for MQ's care whilst she was in Pakistan. Her  elder  son
    may, at some stage, wish to live in the United Kingdom, but her husband
    would not move here.


34. SQ was then taken to a passage in a medical report  authored  by  a  Dr
    Qureshi, stating that  no  one  need  go  without  treatment  for  Beta
    Thalassaemia in Pakistan. SQ agreed that this was so, although she also
    observed that a girl had died in Pakistan from Hepatitis  C  contracted
    from infected blood.


Evidence of MQ


35. Turning to the evidence of MQ, we have two statements before  us  drawn
    in his name (dated 8 November 2012 and 27 January 2014). He  also  gave
    oral evidence to the tribunal. In his  earlier  statement  MQ  told  of
    headaches and vomiting after having had a blood  transfusion,  that  he
    felt upset because of his height and that his  classmates  in  Pakistan
    teased him and would not share their lunch with  him,  because  he  was
    thought to have a disease. He related two attempts to  kidnap  him  and
    that, as a consequence, he  cried  when  left  alone  through  fear  of
    another attempt being made. He wanted to  become  a  doctor  but  fears
    dying in his late teens if returned  to  Pakistan.  He  had  seen  many
    children dying of Thalassaemia, one girl died of Hepatitis C.   He  had
    friends in England.


36. MQ provides much the same evidence in his more  recent  statement.  The
    treatment meted out to him by  other  children  in  Pakistan  made  him
    depressed. He had felt  much  better  since  his  arrival  in  the  UK,
    although he missed his father and  brother.  His  mother  cried  a  lot
    because she missed his elder brother;  this  made  him  depressed.   He
    enjoys school in the UK, and has many friends here who are good to him.
    He was currently in year 11, preparing for his GCSE's. He travelled  to
    school alone and  sometimes  went  out  with  his  friends.  He  saw  a
    television program showing how blood banks in Pakistan mix  blood  with
    water. He lives a normal life in the United Kingdom but  would  not  be
    able to do so in Pakistan, and neither would he be safe there.


37. In his oral evidence MQ confirmed that  he  had  been  at  his  current
    school for one year and two months, and that he would take  his  GCSE's
    in the summer. He receives 2 hours support  a  week,  and  there  is  a
    support teacher in the class all the time  to  assist  any  pupil  that
    requires help. He had no friends in school in Pakistan  but  does  have
    friends here.  There was no cross examination of MQ.


Medical Evidence - a summary

Dr Shah

38.  Dr  Farrukh  Shah  is  Consultant  Haematologist  at  the  Whittington
    Hospital, London. She began her haematology training  as  long  ago  as
    1997, gaining an FRCPath in 2002 and being awarded an MD in 2008  as  a
    result of  research  undertaken  with  a  Professor  John  Porter  into
    "Differential iron loading trends in patients with Sickle Cell  Anaemia
    [SCA] and Thalassaemia". She was appointed as Consultant  Haematologist
    at the Whittington Hospital in 2004  with  primary  responsibility  for
    patients with SCA and Thalassaemia and was involved in the  writing  of
    the national standards for care of Thalassaemia in 2008.


39. Dr Shah prepared medical reports relating to MQ on  30  July  2012,  12
    November 2012, 29 August 2013, 10 September 2012 and 17  January  2014;
    the latter three being  jointly  authored  with  Dr  Andrew  Robins,  a
    Consultant Paediatrician.


40. In the earliest of  her  reports  Dr  Shah  confirms  that  MQ  has  "a
    transfusion  dependent  beta  thalassaemia  major",   requiring   blood
    transfusions every two to three weeks "in order to maintain life".  She
    identified that blood transfusion therapy results in the development of
    iron overload, which is associated with potentially fatal complications
    such as heart failure due to the deposition of iron in  the  heart,  or
    liver cirrhosis due to iron disposition in the liver. Recent data shows
    that survival rates are extremely good in well treated and well managed
    Thalassaemia patients, life expectancy in  the  United  Kingdom  "being
    near normal with a good quality of life."


41. She further reports that in Pakistan there was "inadequate  transfusion
    and inadequate chelation". Chelation is the process by  which  iron  is
    removed from the blood. She has visited Pakistan twice, in her role  as
    an expert in Thalassaemia, in 2005 and 2011. She  visited  the  Fatimid
    Centre in Peshawar, as well as  centres  in  Lahore  and  Karachi.  The
    majority of care for Thalassaemia patients in Pakistan is  provided  by
    non-governmental organisations and, it is said, "therefore  subject  to
    poor control". Chelation is expensive in comparison  with  the  average
    income and therefore children receive little or no  chelation  therapy.
    As to the area of Pakistan where the appellants come from,  North  West
    Frontier Province, access to blood transfusions is extremely  difficult
    and a patient's family members are generally responsible for collecting
    blood donors and taking them to the  blood  donation  centre,  so  that
    their children can be  transfused.  Finding  willing  blood  donors  is
    challenging. Some centres have paid donors. Such people in general  are
    addicted to drugs and "both the quality of the blood and the  infection
    risk associated with the blood donation is extremely high".


42. There is, said Dr Shah, a continuing high  risk  for  MQ  of  receiving
    blood donations from infected donors and therefore MQ would be at  risk
    of developing HIV or Hepatitis C as a consequence of  his  life  saving
    blood transfusions. Many patients, it is  said,  are  already  infected
    with Hepatitis C.


43. Dr Shah added there was restricted access to iron chelation therapy  in
    Pakistan and that, on arrival in the United Kingdom, MQ was found to be
    "extremely severely iron loaded with liver iron concentration in excess
    of 43 mg/g dry weight", the highest level that the MRI technology being
    used  by  the  Whittington  Hospital  could  record.   He  already  has
    significant endocrine damage, which will significantly  impact  on  his
    ability "to grow and  develop  into  a  young  man".  The  severe  iron
    overload has damaged MQ's pituitary gland and he had a low value  on  a
    screening test for growth hormone deficiency.  Dr Shah  confirmed  that
    MQ has stopped growing and is an extremely small  child  for  his  age.
    There was no evidence of pubertal and development in MQ.


44. It was further opined that  should  MQ  be  returned  to  Pakistan  the
    prognosis was extremely poor and he would in all likelihood die by  the
    time he was in his late teens or early twenties  from  iron  associated
    cardiac failure or liver cirrhosis.


45. She was, also, of the opinion that  should  MQ  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom,  with  a  concerted  multi-disciplinary  effort  he  could  be
    effectively de-ironed over the next three to five years and  "we  would
    expect him to be able to grow to a more acceptable height, and  at  the
    very  least  transition  through  puberty   with   appropriate   multi-
    disciplinary support".


46. In a further short report, dated 12 November  2012,  Dr  Shah  confirms
    that, in addition to the medical problems identified above, MQ has been
    diagnosed with Hypogonadothrophic hypogonadism and showed  evidence  of
    growth hormone deficiency and severe growth retardation. Treatment  for
    the above conditions requires two years to complete but can take longer
    if there are other complications. It is said that although the relevant
    treatment may  be  available  in  Pakistan,  it  is  doubted  that  the
    expertise would be available to take MQ through the treatment.


Dr Shah and Dr Robins


47.  Dr  Robins  was  appointed  as  a  Consultant  Paediatrician  at   the
    Whittington hospital in 1995 and in 1997 set up joint sickle  cell  and
    thalassaemia clinics there.


48. In their first joint report, of 29 August 2013,  the  doctors  identify
    that they have shared MQ's care since July 2012 and that 'they' provide
    long-term care for children with blood disorders such as  Thalassaemia.
    Under the heading "Diagnosis" (in relation to MQ) the doctors list  the
    following: (i) Beta Thalassaemia major, (2) severe  iron  overload  (3)
    severe delay in growth and puberty (due to severe  iron  overload)  (4)
    worsening hypersplensim and rather bizarrely,  (5)  immigration  status
    unresolved.


49. It is further confirmed that in  January  2013,  after  six  months  of
    treatment, MQ's iron level was in the measurable range and after twelve
    month's of treatment the liver iron concentration was at  a  much  more
    acceptable level, although still double that which  the  doctors  would
    want. At the age of 15� years MQ's height was 145 cm (the average of  a
    10 year old) and his weight was not yet 30 kg (the average weight of  a
    9 year old). He has no  visible  signs  of  normal  male  puberty.  His
    skeletal age is retarded by 3 years.


50. MQ requires (i) a blood transfusion every three to four weeks (ii) oral
    iron chelation with Deferasirox 1g daily (iii)  vitamin  D  replacement
    therapy; 20,000 mg orally on  alternate  days  and  (iv)  human  growth
    hormone injections,  Genotropin  0.6  mg  daily.  MQ  has  had  various
    infections and during such times requires antibiotics.  He  would  also
    benefit from surgery removing his spleen, which is enlarged.


51. In answer to the question posed of them by the  appellants'  solicitor:
    "Please comment on  our  client's  survival  in  Pakistan  taking  into
    account the  environmental  conditions  there  (pollution  etc.)",  the
    doctors state:


   "...long term survival of children with Thalassaemia major in  countries
         with less health resources, such as  Pakistan,  is  very  different
         from  the  UK  and  other  well-resourced  health  economies.   The
         majority...would be dead by their late teens or early twenties as a
         consequence of severe cardiac failure or  death  from  septicaemia,
         Hepatitis B or Hepatitis C as well as Malaria."


52. In relation to MQ in particular they wrote:


         "We still have more to do to ensure a  good  outcome  in  terms  of
         these goals.  If he were not allowed to continue his treatment,  MQ
         would not undergo the changes of puberty and would progress towards
         total endocrine failure with probable onset  of  insulin  dependent
         diabetes, hepatic cirrhosis and a very early death.

          In Pakistan he would not be able  to  have  a  safe  and  reliable
         supply of drugs, for chelation and hormone replacement therapy,  on
         the grounds of cost and risk of counterfeit  medication.  Even  his
         supply of  blood  for  transfusion  would  be  less  reliable.   In
         addition the necessary monitoring for his treatment response  (e.g.
         Ferriscan MRI) would also be inadequate or non-existent.

         Living in Pakistan with hypersplenism (if he  does  not  undergo  a
         splenectomy in the  UK [MQ] is likely to have frequent episodes  of
         infection of bleeding one  or  the  other  of  which  may  be  life
         threatening. If he were post  splenectomy  in  Pakistan  he  is  at
         higher risk of infections (e.g. pneumococcus, meningitis or malaria
         infections) some of which can be very serious or life threatening"

53. In response to  a  question  regarding  MQ's  hormone  treatment  being
    withdrawn, the following is said:


   "If [MQ] is deported to Pakistan as (sic) he would most likely  be  left
         with severely stunted growth and lack of pubertal development.  The
         psychological impact of this on his long-term health is  likely  to
         be great. This in our experience would mean that MQ would disengage
         with all treatment relating to his Thalassaemia and die prematurely
         due to the consequences of iron overload or as a direct consequence
         of infection due to problems relating to this spleen"


54. In a short letter of the 10 September  2013  Doctors  Shah  and  Robins
    indicate that Defereoxamine is listed by the World Health  Organisation
    as an essential  drug  for  children  "for  antidotes  and  also  under
    haemoglobinopathy where it states that Deferasirox can (sic) used as an
    alternative drug to chelate iron overload". MQ is  being  treated  with
    Defereosirox but can be treated with Defereoxamine. The cost  of  these
    drugs is prohibitive in Pakistan. Dimercaprol cannot be used  to  treat
    MQ. As to blood screening the following is said:


   "Blood transfusions in  Pakistan  are  generally  from  either  directed
         donations  from  family  members  or  from  blood  collected   from
         voluntary donors who are often paid by the donor centres to  donate
         blood. Blood is collected from NGOs and is technically  tested  for
         HIV, Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C.  However,  there  is  a  lack  of
         regulation of the NGOs, a lack of quality assurance process and the
         absence of  sufficient  penalties  when  testing  requirements  are
         breached. There have been reports of serious concerns  about  blood
         not  being  tested  and  documents  being  falsified   to   suggest
         compliance with testing. Blood screened for HIV, hepatitis B and  C
         as well as Syphilis is a minimal requirement in  all  countries  as
         recommend (sic) by the WHO)"


55. An updated report from Dr Robins and Dr Shah dated  17th  January  2014
    confirms that MQ's local circumstances had  not  changed  significantly
    since the report dated  29th  August  2013.  He  has  remained  on  the
    treatment previously described and is making  slow  progress  with  the
    growth hormone treatment.  It confirms that the psychosocial impact  on
    MQ has been significant and would be severe if he  were  to  be  denied
    leave to remain in the UK. The report notes that Dr  Robins  has  never
    travelled to Pakistan.


56. Neither Dr Shah nor Dr Robins would be able to supervise MQ's treatment
    should he return to Pakistan. In Pakistan there is  a  "grave  lack  of
    essential monitoring tools such as MRI quantification of iron burden in
    the liver and heart...and no machine adequately calibrated to undertake
    either Ferriscan Liver iron assessment  or  Cardiac  T2  assessment  in
    Pakistan."


57. Whilst in Pakistan in 2005 and 2011 Dr Shah saw many children who  were
    on minimal transfusion regimes and little or no chelation. The cost  of
    treatment is  significant.  There  have  recently  been  programmes  by
    investigative journalists on blood banks and how blood is being diluted
    and also reports highlighting the state of government hospitals and the
    existence of counterfeit drugs. Dr Shah believes that  the  decline  in
    the provision in health care in the Punjab (which is  better  resourced
    than Peshawar) is due to political instability and lack  of  investment
    and resources.


58. Doctors Shah and Robins were  specifically  asked  to  comment  on  the
    accuracy of evidence given by Dr Qureshi. We think it prudent to  refer
    to such comments after summarising Dr Qureshi's evidence.


Dr Bashir Qureshi


59. Dr Qureshi FRCGP, FRCPCH, FFSRH-RCOG, AFOM-RCP, Hon. FRSPH, began as  a
    practising medical doctor (general practitioner) in London in 1964  and
    still continues in this role. He is a former Member of the  Council  of
    the Royal College of General Practitioners, an Emeritus Vice  President
    of the Royal Society of Public Health (2008  onwards)  and  a  founding
    member of the Society of Expert Witnesses. He has  published  over  180
    articles, written 14  Chapters  in  13  medical  texts  and  given  381
    lectures,  both  nationally  and  internationally.  He  has   4   years
    experience working in Pakistan.


60. Dr Qureshi provides a report relating to MQ dated 28 October  2012.  He
    states that he undertook extensive research in relation to  the  report
    between 3 October 2012 and 25 October 2012.


61. As to treatment for MQ  in  his  home  area  of  Pakistan,  Dr  Qureshi
    indicates that he spoke to a Dr Noaman  Siddiqui,  Consultant  at  Ayub
    Khan Medical College and Hospital, Abbottabad, Pakistan. In his  report
    he provides evidence as to the "gist" of this conversation. It is  said
    that both Abbottabad city  and  Hayatabad  town,  near  Peshawar,  have
    centres for the treatment of Thalassaemia patients,  the  latter  being
    called the Fatimid Medical Centre. Money from Zakat 'donations' is used
    to run centres where qualified doctors  give  free  treatment  to  poor
    Thalassaemia patients. Others pay subsidised nominal  charges.  No  one
    need go without treatment. In Dr  Siddiqui's  centre,  the  approximate
    cost of a fortnightly blood transfusion  is  Rs  1000  (�7),  for  oral
    tablets twice a day for Chelation of iron  overload,  approximately  Rs
    8000 (�54) or cheaper.  Finally Dr Siddiqui  commented  to  Dr  Qureshi
    that Dr Shah had visited the centre  in  Attottabad  and  treated  many
    patients for free for a short while. The findings in Dr  Shah's  report
    are consistent with his own (Dr Qureshi's) own research. Treatments for
    many conditions are better in England than in Pakistan  and,  for  many
    reasons, people in Britain live longer in general than people  in  many
    Asian and African countries.


62. Dr Qureshi continued by stating that some facilities  in  Pakistan  are
    run by the government, some by charities and some by private companies.
    Treatment for Thalassaemia is available  throughout  Pakistan  although
    with varying provisions, standards and outcomes. Treatment is available
    for both  the  rich  and  the  poor,  either  free  or  subsidised.  In
    conclusion Dr Qureshi opined:


   "The  facts  are  clear  that  the  blood  transfusion   treatment   for
         Thalassaemia and oral treatment for Chelation  iron  overload,  and
         their complications, is available in Pakistan. It is affordable  if
         one can pay for it but it is free if one is very poor. With  annual
         Zakat donations many charities run free clinics.


   Many doctors practising in Pakistan have degrees from the  UK  and  have
         links with Britain. They can invite  British  specialists  like  Dr
         Farrukh Shah to Pakistan and send patients for  special  treatments
         to Britain. In this way Pakistan is not an isolated country.


   Understandably  the  quality  of  treatment  would  vary  with   patient
         condition,  treatment  centre,  skills  for  doctors,   technology,
         country to country and  city  to  city  within  the  same  country.
         Financial resources play a major role.


   I am convinced that the treatment in Britain would  be  better  than  in
         Pakistan...


   The treatment for Thalassaemia Major is  available  in  Pakistan;  their
         blood  transfusion  is  satisfactory  although  difficult  to  get.
         However,  their  Chelation  therapy  for  reducing  iron  overload,
         resulting from blood transfusion, it  is  very  unsatisfactory  and
         very expensive in relation to earnings in Pakistan.


   According to the medial report [MQ] has a very high iron overload  at  a
         very toxic level in spite of the treatment in Pakistan.  He  is  so
         ill that he has stopped growing. If he is returned to Pakistan,  he
         may live about six years and die in his early 20's...It is expected
         that with British treatment and support for a  few  years,  he  may
         have a chance to live a normal life.  Nevertheless,  the  treatment
         would be life long."


63. As identified above, Dr Shah and Dr Robins were asked to  make  comment
    on Dr Qureshi's evidence in their joint report of 17 January  2014.  In
    response to Dr Qureshi's summary of his conversation with Dr  Siddiqui,
    and in  particular  the  observation  that  "no  one  need  go  without
    treatment" Dr Shah identified that she had met Dr Siddiqui and that  he
    is an experienced clinician. It was said,  however  -  in  reliance  on
    paragraph 26.30 of the UKBA's Country of Origin report -  that  only  a
    small proportion of the Zakat is provided to charities and that in  all
    the centres Dr Shah had visited, including Dr Siddiqui's, patients were
    inadequately chelated and transfused, as is supported  by  MQ's  health
    problems.


Dr Satinder Sohata

64. Dr Satinder Sohata, a Consultant in  forensic  psychiatry,  provides  a
    report dated 12  November 2012. It is confirmed in the report  that  MQ
    has a history of minor behavioural difficulties,  symptoms  of  anxiety
    such as a fear of defecating in public place, maladaptive coping skills
    and recurrent  memories  and  nightmares  of  a  shooting  incident  in
    Pakistan.  It  was  considered  that  the  history  of  mental   health
    difficulties are understandable and proportionate  given  his  physical
    health problems:


         "The nature and severity of his symptoms do not meet the  threshold
         for clinical diagnosis and are likely to  parallel  improvement  in
         his physical condition.  Crucially they do not greatly impact  upon
         his day to day functioning to make a diagnosis of  mental  disorder
         appropriate"

65. The report added that MQ was at "low risk of harm to himself", although
    the 'risk to self' could increase  given  the  prospect  of  return  to
    Pakistan where  his  life  expectancy  is  likely  to  be  dramatically
    reduced.


Country background evidence

66. We have identified above some features of the  evidence  given  by  the
    medical professionals relating to the circumstances for this  appellant
    in Pakistan. In addition, we have  also  been  provided  with  evidence
    relating generally to the circumstances in Pakistan of  a  considerably
    broader scope. The evidence we identify  below  is  intended  to  be  a
    summary of that  placed  before  us.  The  fact  that  reference  to  a
    particular document, or evidence contained within a  document,  is  not
    set out below does not mean that we have not taken such  evidence  into
    account.


67. The Pakistan Country of Origin Information Report (COIR) of  June  2012
    identifies, at paragraph 27.01, that the  Human  Rights  Commission  of
    Pakistan recorded in its annual report, "The State of Human  Rights  in
    2011", published March 2012, that:


         "In the fiscal year 2010 to 2011, the health budget was as  low  as
         0.23% of the federal budget, the lowest  in  over  ten  years.   Of
         that, 47% went unutilised by the end of the year although there was
         no explanation of how this came to  be.   According  to  unofficial
         sources, corruption in the health sector  was  the  cause  of  much
         wastage".

68. In the Pakistan COIR  of  August  2013  it  identified  that  IRIN  had
    reported on 17 May 2013 that health care in  Pakistan  is  one  of  the
    country's most corrupt sectors, according to Transparency International
    [26.01]. In a Country of Origin  Information   Response,  compiled  and
    researched by the COI Service and dated 28 August 2012, it is said  the
    Thalassaemia Society of Pakistan was  established  in  1994  and  is  a
    organisation of volunteers who have dedicated themselves  to  providing
    the best care  and  treatment  for  children  with  Thalassaemia.  That
    society identifies that there is an established Thalassaemia centre  in
    the paediatric department of Sir  Ganga  Ram  Hospital,  Lahore,  where
    children with Thalassaemia are given free treatment. The Fatimid Centre
    also provides free medical assistance to children with Thalassaemia  in
    its centres in Karachi, Lahore, Peshawar and Muitan.


69. The USSD Consular Information Sheet on  Pakistan,  of  24  March  2011,
    reports that: "Adequate basic non-emergency medical care  is  available
    in major Pakistani cities, but is limited in rural areas".


70. The Executive Summary to the "Country Cooperation Strategy for WHO  and
    Pakistan 2005-2009" reads:


   "The health sector is in need  of  major  strengthening.  The  level  of
         investment in  health,  in  spite  of  recent  rapid  increases  in
         resource allocation by the government, is still low. More than  75%
         of health financing is out of pocket. The  private  health  sector,
         catering for 80% of health care delivery, is not regulated..."


71. In the same report, it is said:


   "The health profile in Pakistan  is  characterised  by  high  population
         growth rate, high  infant  and  child  mortality  rate...The  major
         causes of these  high  rates  of  mortality  include  malnutrition,
         diarrhoea, acute respiratory illness  and  other  communicable  and
         vaccine-preventable diseases...Over 35% of children below  5  years
         of age are short for their age...Other communicable  diseases  such
         as tuberculosis, malaria, hepatitis C, typhoid and meningitis, also
         contribute significantly to the burden of disease.


   The estimated total health expenditure in Pakistan is US$ 18 per  capita
         of which public expenditure on health is US$  4  per  capita.  This
         compares  unfavourably  with  the  figure  of  US$  34  per  capita
         recommended by the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health.


   There is an elaborate public sector health care delivery  system,  which
         consists of about 10,000 first level care facilities, more than 900
         secondary and tertiary care hospitals,  and  almost  70,000  health
         houses...


   The Poverty Reduction Strategy for Pakistan was adopted in 2002  and  it
         terms the current health status of the nation  as  very  poor  with
         serious governance deficiencies, inequity in access to  health  and
         inadequate budgetary spending..."


72. The State of Pakistan's Children  report  for  2012,  authored  by  the
    Society for  the  Protection  of  the  Rights  of  the  Child  (SPARC),
    identifies the "deteriorating  state  of  children  in  Pakistan."  The
    report also states that Pakistan failed to submit a  compliance  report
    on time to the Committee on The Rights of The Child in  line  with  its
    international commitments under the United Nations  Convention  on  the
    Rights of the Child. The Ministry of Human Rights in Pakistan confirmed
    to SPARC that:


   "The Charter of Child Rights Bill 2009 will be merged with the  National
         Commission on the Rights of Children  Bill.  Under  the  bill,  the
         National Commission for the Rights of  Children  (NCRC)...will  lay
         down various rules and regulations to define the various rights  of
         children...The role of the NCRC will be to serve as the focal point
         for facilitating, coordinating  and  reporting  all  child  related
         international commitments to the  provinces.  The  NCRC  will  also
         develop a national policy and plan for the protection and promotion
         of children's rights."


73. The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan reported,  in  2012,  that  the
    protection of child rights did not appear to  be  a  priority  for  the
    government. The country has a high infant mortality rate when  compared
    to other South Asian countries; up to  10  million  children  suffering
    from malnutrition. Children with disabilities were  a  largely  ignored
    segment of society, although, in October 2012,  the  Secretary  Capital
    Administration and Development announced the establishment  of  special
    desks in all government hospitals to provide free medical treatment  to
    persons with disabilities as a priority; Pakistan does  not  'guarantee
    the right to health' as a basic human right to its citizens; the health
    sector in 2012 continued to present a dismal picture... the  trajectory
    of budget allocation to the health sector in Pakistan has progressively
    been on a downward route was 0.27% of GDP in 2010-11 and 0.2% in  2012-
    13; there is also a high rate of drug addiction in Pakistan and a  high
    number of incidents of death due to the lack of  drug  regulations  and
    the use of substandard and fake drugs. The federal  government  adopted
    the Drug Regulatory Authority of Pakistan Act (DRAP) in  November  2012
    in an attempt to tackle this situation. This law is aimed at preventing
    the sale of fake, sub-standard and unregistered medicines.  The  report
    further confirms that whilst there was a developing private  sector  in
    Pakistan this was too expensive for the majority of the population, who
    relied on overcrowded and overstretched public health-care facilities.


74. We also have before us numerous recent news articles  relating  to  the
    regrouping of the Taliban in  Peshawar,  where  they  are  increasingly
    showing their presence through a campaign of intimidation and violence;
    although they are said not to pose a threat to the overall  control  of
    the city. In October 2013 Taliban militants used a  bomb  to  target  a
    team delivering polio vaccinations to children in  northwest  Pakistan.
    There has also been a "wave of sectarian violence" in that area.


Submissions


75. Both parties produced  detailed  skeleton  arguments  and  supplemented
    their submissions orally. We have  considered  the  entirety  of  these
    submissions, even if not specifically identified below.


Appellants' submissions


76. Mr Symes' skeleton argument runs to some  67  paragraphs,  covering  28
    pages. In  paragraph  9  of  the  skeleton  it  is  accepted  that  the
    appellants do not seek to pursue their appeals on asylum grounds. There
    then follows a summary of those  parts  of  the  evidence  said  to  be
    relevant to the tribunal's determination [9-17].


77. The relevance of MQ being a minor, it  is  said  in  relation  to  both
    Articles 3 and 8 ECHR, is that the State is under a  stronger  duty  to
    take positive steps to help a  minor  than  an  adult:  reliance  being
    placed, inter alia, on the decision in E v Chief Constable of the Royal
    Ulster Constabulary [2008] UKHL 66. Mr Symes' continues  by  submitting
    that both the United Kingdom and Pakistan owe duties to MQ (i) to treat
    his best interests as a primary consideration and (ii) to  ensure  that
    he receives the necessary healthcare, which again is  relevant  to  the
    tribunal's consideration of  both  Article  3  and  8  [22-23].  It  is
    asserted, in relation to both Articles, that  "where  health  treatment
    factors  are  shown  to  engage  the  responsibility  of   the   public
    authorities abroad, the threshold for a successful claim is diminished"
    [28]; this reflecting the internationally accepted approach to  Article
    3 of the Convention on the Rights to the Child ("CRC") [29].


78. In relation to Article 8, it is accepted that this appeal  "involves  a
    classic balancing exercise  with  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  well
    familiar"[6], and that there is no duty to evaluate the  relative  care
    arrangements in the expelling and destination  countries  [27].  It  is
    further asserted, however, that the  correct  treatment  has  not  been
    available to MQ in the past and would only be available in  the  future
    if the relevant experts were flown to Pakistan.


79. A summary is given in the skeleton argument of various duties  said  to
    be imposed by Articles 6, 23 and 24 CRC, and further reference is  made
    to obligations said  to  derive  from  the  International  Covenant  on
    Economic, Social and  Cultural  Rights  ("ICESCR"),  the  World  Health
    Organisation Constitution and the Convention on the Rights  of  Persons
    with Disabilities ("CRPD") [30].


80. In paragraph 31 of the skeleton it is submitted as follows:


   "Logically, it is extremely difficult to  conceptualise  how  any  other
         factor or factors can be said to outweigh the best interests  of  a
         child, when the best interests of the child are to  be  treated  as
         having a high priority and when what is at  stake  is  the  child's
         interest in not experiencing a high level  of  suffering  and  then
         death. That would, also, seem to follow from the authorities."


81. Thereafter, Mr Symes' observes and submits that (i) MQ and  SQ  entered
    the United Kingdom lawfully; (ii) MQ has spent sufficient time  in  the
    United Kingdom to build up private life by  way  of  his  relationships
    with peers and his studies; (iii) he  has  received  medical  treatment
    whilst here; (iv) the appellants travelled  from  Pakistan  where  they
    have suffered problems, albeit not of a type which could found a viable
    asylum claim; (v) MQ should not be fixed with any adverse  consequences
    drawn from his mother's conduct; (vi) MQ's future in Pakistan would  be
    no different to his past; (vii) in  the  case  of  a  child,  the  view
    articulated in Akhalu [2013]  UKUT  400  i.e.  that  seriously  adverse
    considerations of health whilst relevant  as  constituting  a  material
    consideration of central importance to the individual  concerned,  will
    normally be outweighed by the countervailing public interest in removal
    because of a disparity of health care facilities in all but a very  few
    rare cases, should not hold sway given the section 55 duty; and, (viii)
    the treatment for MQ's condition in Pakistan is wholly inadequate [34].




82. Mr Symes' submissions of legal principle,  in  relation  to  Article  3
    ECHR, can be summarised as follows [28, 29, 36 and 37] :

       (i)  the "minimum level  of  severity"  for  inhuman  and  degrading
           treatment is reached more readily in the case of a minor;


        ii) the State is under a stronger duty to  take  positive  steps  to
            help a minor, under Article 3 ECHR, than an adult;


       iii) Duties owed by states under international law (such as the  duty
            to treat a child's best interests as a primary consideration and
            to ensure  that  a  child  receives  necessary  healthcare)  are
            relevant as to how one views the responsibilities  of  both  the
            expelling  and  receiving  state  when  Article   3   is   being
            considered;

        iv)  Where  health  treatment  factors  are  shown  to  engage   the
            responsibility of the public authorities abroad, the  Article  3
            threshold is diminished;

         v) The test propounded in D v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 42  and
            N v United Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 423 is not  appropriate  where
            there is a failure to engage with the duties to sick children in
            the receiving state. It is part of the reasoning of D v UK and N
            v UK, or follows inevitably from it, that Article 3  ECHR  makes
            it unlawful to remove a person if substantial grounds have  been
            shown for believing that there is  a  real  risk  that  he  will
            suffer inhuman or degrading treatment (or death) as  the  result
            of not being able to obtain medical treatment which the State of
            removal is responsible for providing him.  This  proposition  is
            made good by the approach taken in three subsequent decisions of
            the ECtHR: M.S.S v Belgium and  Greece  (Application  30696/09),
            Sufi and Elmi v UK (Applications 8319/07 and 11449/07) (2012) 54
            EHRR 9 and S.H.H. v United Kingdom (Application 60367/10).

83. Applying this legal analysis to the facts of the instant case Mr  Symes
    submits that Pakistan is  responsible  for  MQ's  inability  to  secure
    adequate medical treatment, and the  lack  of  such  medical  treatment
    would lead to  MQ  suffering  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.  As  a
    consequence the appropriate "legal test  is  real  risk  and  not  very
    exceptional circumstances" [38].


84. Continuing, Mr Symes observes that MQ would require blood  transfusions
    upon his return, and submits that because the blood  is  unscreened  he
    would be at high risk of being infected with HIV and Hepatitis  C.  The
    blood transfusion therapy would also lead  to  increased  iron  in  his
    system, which would stunt his growth and  eventually  cause  his  death
    [41]. Either a hospital run by the State or an NGO  authorised  by  the
    State would inject the blood into MQ's  body  which  would,  literally,
    lead to the inhuman a degrading  treatment  suffered  by  MQ.  Further,
    Pakistan has failed to discharge its duties to provide a minimum  level
    of healthcare in the past and would  continue  to  do  so.  Article  12
    ICESCR recognises the "right  of  everyone  to  the  enjoyment  of  the
    highest attainable standard of physical and mental health". Whilst this
    must be dependent on resources being available, there are  nevertheless
    minimum obligations. In  the  Economic  and  Social  Council's  General
    Comment E/C 12/2000/4 - number 3, the Committee  confirmed  that  State
    parties have "core obligations", one being "to provide essential  drugs
    from time to time defined under the WHO Action Programme  on  Essential
    Drugs". Two such drugs, taken from the "WHO  Model  List  of  Essential
    Medicines for  Children"  of  April  2013,  are  the  chelating  agents
    Deferoxamine and Domercaprol; the former being a  drug  that  could  be
    used to chelate MQ [45-46]. The  failure  of  the  Pakistani  state  to
    provide these drugs is a breach of its  obligations  under  the  ICESCR
    and, consequently, it is responsible for MQ's inability to  secure  the
    drugs necessary to chelate him, as well as bearing  responsibility  for
    MQ being provided with unscreened blood [47].


85. Article 24 CRC sets out various healthcare rights including the  "right
    of the child to the enjoyment of the  highest  attainable  standard  of
    health  and  to  facilities  for   the   treatment   of   illness   and
    rehabilitation of health." This forms part of the safety net of  rights
    for children in the CRC. The Committee  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child
    addresses  healthcare  rights  in  General  Comment   No.   15   (2013)
    identifying that certain  duties  are  imposed  'straight  away'.  They
    identify that States have an obligation to make all essential medicines
    on  the  WHO  Model  Lists  of  Essential  Medicines  "accessible   and
    affordable". As to the CRPD, by Article  25(b),  States  parties  shall
    "Provide those health services  needed  by  persons  with  disabilities
    specifically because of their disabilities... and services designed  to
    minimise and prevent further disabilities, including among children and
    older persons." By Articles 4 and 24 of ICESCR  Pakistan  is  under  an
    obligation to "take steps" to  achieve  the  full  realisation  of  the
    rights that its citizens have to enjoy the highest attainable  standard
    of physical and mental health. This, it is  submitted,  is  an  onerous
    obligation [48-59].


86. Pakistan fails to comply with its international duties and consequently
    is to be held responsible for MQ's suffering and eventual death. It  is
    further said that, "Pakistan  is  guilty  of  a  notorious,  lamentable
    failure to take concrete steps to improve children's healthcare and, in
    some respects, provision has  regressed".  Various  passages  from  the
    background evidence are thereafter cited in support of this proposition
    [60].


87. In his oral submissions Mr Symes "followed the scheme of [his] skeleton
    argument"; first referring us to passages from the medical reports,  in
    particular those of Dr Shah, the contents of which we  have  identified
    above.


88. He submitted that in both Article 3 and Article 8 cases,  where  health
    treatment factors were shown to engage the responsibility of the public
    authorities, the threshold for a successful claim was diminished.


89. With reference to Article 3 the normal  test  was  whether  there  were
    substantial grounds shown for believing that the person in question, if
    expelled, would face a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  treatment
    contrary to Article 3 in that state.  It is only  where  the  state  of
    removal  would  not  be  responsible,  that   the   "very   exceptional
    circumstances" test applied. Mr Symes then carefully took the  tribunal
    through the decisions in N v Secretary of State [2005] UKHL 31 (HL),  N
    v United Kingdom,  M.S.S., Sufi and Elmi, and S.H.H.,  submitting  that
    there is a continuum of factual scenarios protected by Article 3,  with
    scenario's such as those considered in the cases of D v United  Kingdom
    and N, at one end and the circumstances presenting in the instant  case
    being at the other.


90. There is a strongly developing international consensus about  the  role
    of governments in protecting and caring  for  children  and  for  those
    reasons a Contracting State should be much readier to find a  state  of
    removal responsible for any inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  that  a
    child would suffer as a result of a receiving State's unwillingness  to
    protect a child from disease.


91. Not least, Pakistan owes MQ duties under international  law,  which  it
    had grossly failed to discharge in the past and would fail to discharge
    in the future. There is, it is said, a  clear  under  spend  on  health
    facilities by the authorities in Pakistan, and this  is  likely  to  be
    attributable to corruption.


92. In respect of Pakistan, the fact that there is terrorism  and  conflict
    within Peshawar is a relevant factor. Although there  has  not  been  a
    collapse of authority in Pakistan, there are  clear  failings  that  do
    attract the responsibility of the authorities in  Pakistan.  This  lies
    close to the scenario identified in Sufi and  Elmi  and,  consequently,
    the appropriate threshold for consideration under Article 3 is that  of
    real risk.  Even if this is not the case, given that MQ is a minor  and
    given Pakistan's failure to meet its international obligations,  the  N
    'exceptionality' threshold has  been  met  and  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed on Article 3 grounds.


93. In the alternative, the best interests of MQ are that he remains in the
    United Kingdom to obtain treatment here, and in all  the  circumstances
    the appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds.


Respondent's submissions

94. In her skeleton argument Ms Busch accepted the nature of MQ's illnesses
    and the evidence as to the treatment he had received in  Pakistan.  She
    identifies nine propositions said to derive from the opinions of  their
    Lordships House in N v Secretary of State. These are, in summary, that:


       i) The rationale  underlying  the  immigration  cases  in  which  the
          Strasbourg Court had distinguished the case of D v  UK  reflect  a
          recognition that Article 3 does not require the Contracting States
          to undertake the obligation of providing aliens indefinitely  with
          medical treatment lacking in their home countries;


      ii) Aliens subject to expulsion cannot claim any entitlement to remain
          in the territory of a Contracting State in order  to  continue  to
          benefit  from  medical,  social  and  other  forms  of  assistance
          provided by that state. Article 3 imposes no such  "medical  care"
          obligation on Contracting States. This is so even  where,  in  the
          absence of medical treatment, the life of  the  would-be  expelled
          immigrant will be significantly shortened;


     iii) The Court's task in the circumstances of  N  was  to  analyse  the
          jurisprudence of the Strasbourg Court  and,  having  done  so  and
          identified its limits, to apply it to the facts of  the  case.  It
          was not for it to search for a solution to N's problem  which  was
          not found in the Strasbourg case law.


      iv) The Strasbourg Court in D treated the issue of whether there  were
          "exceptional circumstances"  which  would  render  his  removal  a
          violation of Article 3 as a matter of fact.  What  made  his  case
          exceptional, however, was the fact  that  he  was  terminally  ill
          while still present in the territory of the expelling state;


       v) The question on which a Court has to concentrate  is  whether  the
          present  state  of  the  applicant's  health  is  such  that,   on
          humanitarian grounds, he ought not to be expelled unless it can be
          shown that the medical and social facilities that he so  obviously
          needs are actually available to him in the receiving state;


      vi) According to Lord Hope: "... What the  [Strasbourg  Court]  is  in
          effect saying is that the fact that the treatment  may  be  beyond
          the reach of the applicant in the receiving state  is  not  to  be
          treated as an exceptional circumstance. It might be  different  if
          it could be said that it was not available there at all  and  that
          the applicant was  exposed  to  an  inevitable  risk  due  to  its
          complete absence...";


     vii) The effect of any extension of the scope of Article 3 would be  to
          afford all those with N's condition a right to asylum  in  the  UK
          until such time as the standard of medical treatment  of  HIV/AIDS
          had reached that which is available in Europe. This  would  result
          in  a  very  great  and  no  doubt  unquantifiable  commitment  of
          resources which it is, to say the least, highly questionable  that
          the states parties to the Convention would ever have agreed to;


    viii) The test  in  cases  of  the  kind  in  question  is  whether  the
          applicant's illness has reached such a critical stage (i.e. he  is
          dying) that it would be inhuman treatment to deprive  him  of  the
          care which he is currently receiving and send him home to an early
          death unless there is care available there to enable him  to  meet
          that fate with dignity;


      ix) There may be other exceptional cases, with  other  extreme  facts,
          where the humanitarian considerations are equally compelling;  and
          the law must be sufficiently flexible to accommodate them.


95. The following four principles are then  drawn  by  Ms  Busch  from  the
    Strasbourg court's decision in N v United Kingdom:


       i) The fact that the applicant's circumstances,  including  his  life
          expectancy, would be  significantly  reduced  if  he  were  to  be
          removed from the Contracting State is not sufficient in itself  to
          give rise to a breach of Article 3.  The  decision  to  remove  an
          alien who is suffering from a serious mental or  physical  illness
          to a country where the facilities for treatment  of  that  illness
          are inferior to those available in the Contracting State may raise
          an issue under Article 3, but only in  a  very  exceptional  case,
          where the humanitarian grounds against the removal are compelling;


      ii) The Court did not exclude that there may be other very exceptional
          circumstances where the humanitarian  considerations  are  equally
          compelling. However, it considered that  it  should  maintain  the
          high threshold set in D and applied in subsequent case law,  which
          it regarded as correct in principle, given that in such cases  the
          alleged future harm would not emanate from the intentional acts or
          omissions of public authorities or non-state bodies,  but  instead
          from a naturally occurring illness  and  the  lack  of  sufficient
          resources to deal with it in the receiving country;


     iii) Inherent in the whole of the Convention is a  search  for  a  fair
          balance between  the  demands  of  the  general  interest  of  the
          community  and  the  requirements  of  the   protection   of   the
          individual's fundamental rights.  Article  3  does  not  place  an
          obligation on the Contracting State to alleviate such  disparities
          through the provision of free and unlimited  health  care  to  all
          aliens without a right to stay within its jurisdiction. A  finding
          to the contrary would place too great a burden on the  Contracting
          States;


      iv) Although the application before it, in common  with  many  of  the
          previous cases that it had  considered,  was  concerned  with  the
          expulsion of a person with an HIV and AIDS-related condition,  the
          same principles must apply in relation to the person of any person
          afflicted with any serious, naturally occurring physical or mental
          illness  which  may  cause  suffering,  pain  and   reduced   life
          expectancy and require specialised medical treatment which may not
          be so readily available in the applicant's country  of  origin  or
          which may only be available at substantial cost.


96. Various passages from the  decisions  in  Sufi  and  Elmi,  GS  and  EO
    (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012] UKUT  00397  (IAC)  and  S.H.H.
    were then cited, and  it  was  submitted  that:  "it  is  plain...that,
    despite the different approach which the Court  took  with  respect  to
    Article 3 in M.S.S., and in Sufi and Elmi, it remains of the view  that
    the very exceptional circumstances test is the applicable test  in  the
    typical Article 3 ill-health case." [21].


97. As to the relationship between Articles 3 and 8  ECHR,  the  respondent
    accepts that it is possible in principle for an immigration  case  that
    fails under Article 3 to succeed under Article  8.  It  was  submitted,
    however, that such a case will be rare: reliance being  placed  on  the
    judgment of Moses LJ in MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  CIV  279  at
    [23], and that of the Upper Tribunal in Akhalu.


98. In answer to the submissions made by the appellants in relation to  the
    alleged breach by  Pakistan  of  its  international  obligations  (e.g.
    ICESCR), it was submitted  that  the  approach  commended  by  them  is
    misconceived because (i) it is  wrong  to  focus  on  the  adequacy  of
    medical care in Pakistan in  general,  as  opposed  to  what  would  be
    available to the appellant personally and, in any event,  (ii)  the  UK
    cannot be held responsible for providing medical care for any child  in
    Pakistan to make up for deficiencies in the provision of such  care  in
    that nation, including deficiencies  amounting  to  violations  of  its
    international obligations. If the United Kingdom were held  responsible
    for any child, this would lead to the inescapable  conclusion  that  it
    would  be  responsible  for  all  such  children.  This  is  manifestly
    unsustainable.


99. So far as the evidence relating to MQ is concerned,  it  was  submitted
    that starting point should be the conclusions found in paragraph 10  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's determination, i.e. that  MQ's  circumstances
    do not exceed the N v SSHD threshold. Further, there is no risk  of  MQ
    dying imminently and, whilst there is some evidence that he may  be  at
    some additional risk of contracting HIV or Hepatitis C as a  result  of
    blood transfusions, he has had regular blood transfusions in  the  past
    and has not contracted either one of those diseases as a result. It  is
    not the case that there will  be  no  available  treatment  for  MQ  in
    Pakistan.


100. The instant Tribunal is bound by the decision of the House of Lords  in
    N v SSHD, as a consequence of this being a 'health case'. The  Tribunal
    must consider whether there are exceptional circumstances  irrespective
    of the fact that MQ is a minor. Ill health cases fall into  a  category
    of cases in which the source of the  ill  treatment  in  the  receiving
    state does not emanate from intentional acts of the State  or  relevant
    non-State bodies. In the present case MQ is not a 'young child' and  he
    is not returning to an imminent death in Pakistan, but can be  expected
    to  live  for  at  least  a  few  years.   There  are  no   exceptional
    circumstances and the appeal should be dismissed on Article 3  grounds.




101. In relation to Article 8, given that the appeal ought to  be  dismissed
    on Article 3 grounds it could only be allowed on Article 8 grounds in a
    "very rare" case. This is not such a case. There is little evidence  to
    show the appellants  have  any  ties  to  the  United  Kingdom  of  any
    substance. They each have strong and on-going  ties  to  Pakistan.  The
    appellants overstayed their leave and unlawfully remain in  the  United
    Kingdom. Their purpose in doing so was to obtain medical care, which MQ
    is not entitled to. Article 8 does  not  provide  an  obligation  on  a
    Contracting State to provide medical care to an  alien.  There  is,  in
    principle, nothing to distinguish children in this regard.


102. The first appellant's evidence is that, if permitted,  she  intends  to
    return to Pakistan for a short time, leaving MQ in the United  Kingdom.
    The proposition that Article 8 allows for  an  entitlement  to  medical
    care for foreign national parents to deposit their unwell  children  in
    the United  Kingdom  to  obtain  medical  treatment,  making  them  the
    responsibility of the State,  is  both  unpalatable  and  misconceived.
    Whilst the child's best interests must  be  taken  into  account,  such
    interests are a not the primary consideration. In this  respect  it  is
    relevant that the children considered in ZH Tanzania v SSHD [2011] UKSC
    4, were British Citizens, unlike MQ. In any event, it is  open  to  the
    tribunal to conclude, on the facts of this case that it is in the  best
    interests of MQ to return to  Pakistan,  a  country  to  which  he  has
    cultural and linguistic ties, and where his father and brother remain.


103. In her oral submissions Miss Busch once  again  reminded  the  Tribunal
    that MQ is now 16� years  old.  This,  she  asserted,  is  a  generally
    relevant consideration that must be kept in mind throughout.


104. Turning to the facts of the case, it was submitted that either SQ  came
    to the United Kingdom specifically to obtain medical treatment for  MQ,
    in which case this is a  case  involving  medical  health  tourism  or,
    alternatively, if she did not come to get medical treatment for MQ  but
    merely to visit her sister with the intention of returning to Pakistan,
    she must have been satisfied with the treatment MQ was receiving there.
    There is scant evidence of any private life  ties  the  appellants  may
    have established in the United Kingdom since their arrival.


105. The Tribunal is bound by the House of Lords decision in N  v  SSHD  and
    must apply, to its Article 3 considerations, the high threshold set out
    therein. There is no prospect of the appellants meeting this threshold.
    The United Kingdom should  not  be  viewed  as  the  world's  hospital.
    Treatment is available for MQ in Pakistan, as is  demonstrated  by  him
    previously receiving blood transfusions and chelation therapy.


106. The Secretary of State does  not  accept  that  if  Pakistan  fails  to
    comply with its  international  obligations  that  somehow  the  United
    Kingdom is required to compensate for such deficiencies by providing MQ
    with treatment.


107. Ms Busch also took the tribunal through the decisions in D, N v  United
    Kingdom and S.H.H. and M.S.S; noting that in D the applicant was in  an
    advanced stage of a terminal and incurable illness and that  there  was
    no medical treatment to contend with his infections; this being clearly
    distinguishable from MQ's case.


108. As to the decision in N v United Kingdom the court set out the  general
    principles regarding Article 3 and expulsion in paragraph  29  thereof.
    Of importance was the fact that, as in the instant case, there were  no
    intentionally inflicted acts by the receiving state causing the claimed
    ill treatment. It cannot sensibly be said that in the instant case that
    the authorities in Pakistan would intentionally inflict harm on  MQ  by
    withholding medical treatment from him.


109. In relation to the decision in M.S.S., Ms Busch observed  that  Greece,
    a fellow Contracting State, had  been  found  to  be  in  violation  of
    Article 3 through its own inaction and its failure to comply  with  its
    positive obligations under both European and  domestic  legislation  to
    provide reception facilities to asylum seekers. In S.H.H., Afghanistan,
    a non-Contracting State which had no such similar positive  obligations
    under European legislation, could not be  held  accountable  under  the
    Convention for failures  to  provide  adequate  welfare  assistance  to
    persons with disabilities.


110. Regarding the evidence that MQ was  at  risk  of  contracting  HIV,  Ms
    Busch submitted that there was no real evidence put forward that such a
    risk existed and the evidence,  insofar  as  there  is  any,  does  not
    quantify the risk. MQ  had  been  in  Pakistan  for  14  years  without
    contracting Hepatitis  or  HIV  and  there  was  no  evidence  that  he
    contracted Typhoid from the blood transfusions.


111. In summary, Ms Busch  submitted  that  whatever  the  threshold  to  be
    applied to the Article 3 considerations, neither appellant  could  meet
    it.


112. In her submissions on the Article 8 ground Miss Busch  referred  us  to
    the Court of Appeal's decision in MM (Zimbabwe) to the effect that  the
    same high threshold applies to ill-health considerations under  Article
    8 as applies to such considerations under Article 3. She asserted  that
    in the instance appeal the consequences of the interference  caused  by
    removal would be proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  pursued.  The
    requirement of immigration control outweighed the best interests of the
    child, even in the context of the child having medical issues.  MQ  has
    close ties with  his  brother  and  father,  both  of  whom  remain  in
    Pakistan. It was not in the best interests of MQ to be left  in  foster
    care whilst  his  mother  returns  to  the  family  unit  in  Pakistan.
    Consequently the appeal brought on the Article 8 ECHR  ground  must  be
    dismissed.

Discussion

Article 3 ECHR -Legal analysis


113. Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention provides:


   "No one shall  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading
        treatment or punishment"


114. The prohibition under Article 3 is absolute and there can  never  be  a
    justification for acts that breach  that  provision  [Chahal  v  United
    Kingdom (1996) 23 EHRR 413].


115. Ill-treatment must attain a minimum level  of  severity  if  it  is  to
    engage Article 3. 'Inhuman' treatment is conduct that causes sufficient
    mental and/or physical suffering to  attain  the  minimum  standard  of
    severity. Its infliction need not be deliberate. 'Degrading'  treatment
    can be described as conduct which arouses feelings of fear, anguish and
    inferiority such as to humiliate or debase  the  individual  and  must,
    once again, reach a  minimum  level  of  severity.  The  assessment  is
    relative, depending on all the circumstances of the case, including the
    duration of the treatment, its physical and  mental  effects,  and  the
    age, sex, vulnerability and the  state  of  health  of  the  individual
    [Hilal v United Kingdom (Application No. 45276/99) and Ireland v United
    Kingdom (1978) 2 EHRR 25].


116. Contracting States to the Human Rights Convention  have  the  right  to
    control the entry, residence and removal of 'aliens'. However,  Article
    3 applies so as to impose an obligation on a Contracting State  not  to
    remove an individual where substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
    believing that the person concerned faces a real risk in the country to
    which he or she is to  be  removed  of  being  subjected  to  treatment
    prohibited by Article 3 [Soering v United Kingdom [1989] 11 EHRR 439].


117. In N v United Kingdom, a case  we  turn  to  consider  in  more  detail
    below, the  Strasbourg  court  observed,  under  the  heading  "General
    principles regarding article 3 and expulsion":


    "Article 3 principally applies to prevent expulsion where the  risk  of
         ill treatment in the receiving country emanates from  intentionally
         inflicted acts of the public authorities or from  non-state  bodies
         when the  authorities  are  unable  to  afford  the  applicant  the
         appropriate protection" [30].


118.  This principle of law is also embedded  into  domestic  jurisprudence.
    For example, in his decision in Bagdanavicius [2005] UKHL 38; [2005]  2
    AC 668, Lord Brown said, at paragraph 24:

         "The plain fact is that the argument throughout has been bedevilled
         by a failure to grasp the  distinction  in  non-state  agent  cases
         between on the one hand the risk of serious harm and on  the  other
         hand the risk of treatment contrary to article 3.  In  cases  where
         the risk "emanates from intentionally inflicted acts of the  public
         authorities in the receiving country" (the language of para 49 of D
         v United Kingdom  24  EHRR  423,  447)  one  can  use  those  terms
         interchangeably: the intentionally  inflicted  acts  would  without
         more constitute the proscribed treatment. Where, however, the  risk
         emanates from non-state bodies, that is not so: any harm  inflicted
         by non-state agents will not  constitute  article  3  ill-treatment
         unless in addition the  state  has  failed  to  provide  reasonable
         protection."

119.  The application  of  Article  3  is  not,  however,  limited  to  such
    circumstances. There is sufficient flexibility to address  applications
    in contexts where:


   "...the source of the risk of the proscribed treatment in the  receiving
         country stemmed from factors which could not engage either directly
         or indirectly the responsibility of the public authorities of  that
         country" [N v United Kingdom at paragraph 31].


120. The nature of the circumstances that attract the protection of  Article
    3, but do not engage either directly or indirectly  the  responsibility
    of the public authorities of the receiving state, has been the  subject
    of  extensive,  although  not  exhaustive,  domestic   and   Strasbourg
    authority.


121. In D v United Kingdom  the  Strasbourg  court  was  concerned  with  an
    individual who had been arrested after arriving in the  United  Kingdom
    without leave to enter and with a large  quantity  of  cocaine  in  his
    possession.  D was charged, prosecuted and convicted. Whilst in  prison
    he was diagnosed with HIV/AIDS.  Immediately  before  his  release  the
    Secretary of State gave directions for his removal to his home country,
    St Kitts.


122. The court noted that the principle that Article 3 could be violated  in
    expulsion cases had been applied only in cases where the  risk  to  the
    individual of being  subjected  to  any  of  the  proscribed  forms  of
    treatment emanated from "intentionally inflicted  acts  of  the  public
    authorities in the receiving country or from those of non-State  bodies
    in that country when the authorities there are  unable  to  afford  him
    appropriate protection." It then went on to say [49]:


   "... Aside from these situations and given the fundamental importance of
         Article 3 in the convention  system,  the  Court  must  reserve  to
         itself sufficient flexibility to address the  application  of  that
         Article in other contexts which might arise. It  is  not  therefore
         prevented from scrutinising an applicant's claim  under  Article  3
         where the source  of  the  risk  of  proscribed  treatment  in  the
         receiving country stems from factors  which  cannot  engage  either
         directly or indirectly the responsibility of the public authorities
         of that country, or  which,  taken  alone,  do  not  in  themselves
         infringe the standards of that Article. To limit the application of
         Article 3 in  this  manner  would  be  to  undermine  the  absolute
         character of its protection. In any  such  contexts,  however,  the
         Court must subject all the circumstances surrounding the case to  a
         rigorous scrutiny, especially the applicant's personal situation in
         the expelling State.


123. The court held that D's removal to St Kitts would  be  a  violation  of
    Article 3 because he was "in the advanced  stages  of  a  terminal  and
    incurable illness" [51]; and the abrupt withdrawal  of  the  healthcare
    and support he was receiving in this country  would  entail  "the  most
    dramatic consequences for him" in that "removal will hasten his  death"
    [52].  In so doing it stated:

          "[53] In view of these exceptional circumstances  and  bearing  in
         mind the critical  stage  now  reached  in  the  applicant's  fatal
         illness, the implementation of the decision to  remove  him  to  St
         Kitts would amount to inhuman treatment ... in violation of Article
         3 ... his removal would expose him to a real risk  of  dying  under
         the most distressing circumstances and would thus amount to inhuman
         treatment...

         [54]...in the very exceptional circumstances of this case and given
         the  compelling  humanitarian  considerations   at   stake...   the
         implementation of the decision to remove the applicant would  be  a
         violation of Article 3." (our emphasis)


124. The House of Lords considered the application of the decision in  D  in
    its decision N v Secretary of State. This  case  concerned  an  illegal
    entrant from Uganda who was diagnosed as HIV-positive shortly after her
    arrival  in  the  UK.  Although  her  Article  3  claim  was  initially
    successful before an adjudicator, it ultimately failed before the House
    of Lords, even though she had been receiving treatment  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which had resulted in a drastic  improvement  in  her  medical
    condition and the withdrawal of such treatment would shorten  her  life
    expectancy because it would not be replicated in Uganda.


125. Their Lordships reminded themselves that there was no suggestion of  N:
    "being subjected to any of  the  forms  of  treatment  that  article  3
    proscribes from intentionally inflicted acts of the public  authorities
    in Uganda or from those non-state agents in that country against  which
    the authorities there are unable to afford her appropriate  protection.
    We are dealing here with a  decision  of  the  Strasbourg  court  which
    created what the Court of Appeal rightly accepted was an "extension  of
    an extension" to the article 3 obligation." - [Lord Hope  of  Craighead
    at [23]: see also Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead at [8], Baroness Hale  of
    Richmond [70], Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood [86], with Lord Walker
    of Gestingthorpe expressing agreement with the speeches of all  of  the
    other Law Lords [55]].


126. Having considered the 'pressing  humanitarian  considerations'  of  the
    case, Lord Nicholls concluded that N did not fall within the  class  of
    "exceptional" case recognised in D v UK


127. Lord Hope opined, with the express agreement of Lord Walker:


   "[48]... Strasbourg has adhered throughout to two basic  principles.  On
         the one hand, the fundamental nature of the  article  3  guarantees
         applies  irrespective  of  the   reprehensible   conduct   of   the
         applicant...On the other hand, aliens who are subject to  expulsion
         cannot claim any entitlement  to  remain  in  the  territory  of  a
         contracting  state  in  order   to   continue   to   benefit   from
         medical...assistance  provided  by  the  expelling  state.  For  an
         exception to be made where expulsion is resisted on medical grounds
         the circumstances must be exceptional...The question on  which  the
         court has to concentrate  is  whether  the  present  state  of  the
         applicant's health is such that, on humanitarian grounds, he  ought
         not to be expelled unless it can be  shown  that  the  medical  and
         social facilities he so obviously needs are actually  available  to
         him in the receiving state... [t]he Strasbourg court  has  been  at
         pains in its decisions  to  avoid  any  further  extension  of  the
         exceptional category of case which D v United Kingdom represents...


   [50] ...What the court is in effect saying is that  the  fact  that  the
         treatment may be beyond the reach of the applicant in the receiving
         state is not to be treated as an exceptional circumstance. It might
         be different if it could be said that it was not available there at
         all and that the applicant was exposed to an inevitable risk due to
         its   complete   absence...   For   circumstances   to   be..."very
         exceptional" it would need to be shown that there  were  compelling
         humanitarian grounds for not removing him to a place  which  lacked
         the medical and social services which  he  would  need  to  prevent
         acute suffering while he is dying..."


128. Having considered the "notion of humanitarian  considerations"  invoked
    by Law LJ in his judgment in N in the Court  of  Appeal  "not...at  all
    helpful" [67], Baroness Hale founded her conclusions on  the  following
    understanding of Strasbourg authority:

         "[69] In my view, therefore, the test, in this  sort  of  case,  is
         whether the applicant's illness has reached such a  critical  stage
         (i.e. he is dying) that it would be inhuman  treatment  to  deprive
         him of the care which he is currently receiving and send  him  home
         to an early death unless there is care available  there  to  enable
         him to meet that fate with dignity. This is to the same  effect  as
         the text prepared by my noble and  learned  friend,  Lord  Hope  of
         Craighead. It sums up the facts in D. It is not met on the facts of
         this case.
         [70] There may, of course, be other exceptional cases,  with  other
         extreme facts, where the humanitarian  considerations  are  equally
         compelling. The law must be sufficiently  flexible  to  accommodate
         them..."
129.  Having given careful and  detailed  consideration  to  the  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence, Lord Brown opined:

         "[86] The unmistakable conclusion to be drawn from this  series  of
         recent decisions is that the Court has  adopted  the  clear  stance
         that article 3 is not breached by the return of an AIDS sufferer to
         his or her home country save in circumstances closely comparable to
         those in D itself.


         [87] This is not perhaps surprising.  D  represented,  as  Laws LJ
         below observed, "an extension of an  extension  to  the  article 3
         obligation".  The Court in Bensaid (para 40) spoke  of  "the  high
         threshold set by article 3, particularly where the case  does  not
         concern the direct responsibility of the Contracting State for  the
         infliction of harm".

130.  His Lordship went on to say:

         "[90]  As  already  indicated,  my  clear  understanding   of   the
         subsequent Strasbourg case law is that the Court has now adopted 'a
         restrictive line'.  It has not been prepared to grant 'an  absolute
         right for seriously ill persons to remain in the  host  country  to
         get treatment, provided they had managed to set foot  there.'   The
         'very far-reaching' consequences of such a right would give rise to
         positive obligations which the Court has not thought  it  right  to
         impose upon the Contracting States."

      And then:

         "[93] The  logical  distinction  between  the  two  very  different
         scenarios presented respectively by D and the later cases is surely
         this.  D appeared to be close to death; paragraph 21 of the Court's
         judgment there records that at the hearing  on  20 February 1997:
         "according to his counsel, it would  appear  that  the  applicant's
         life was drawing to a close much as the experts had  predicted"  (a
         medical report of June 1996 having stated that D's  prognosis  was
         limited  to  8-12  months).   The  critical  question   there   was
         accordingly where and in what circumstances  D  should  die  rather
         than where he should live and be treated.   D  really  did  concern
         what was principally a negative obligation, not to deport D  to  an
         imminent, lonely and distressing end.  Not so the more recent cases
         including  the  present  one.   Given  the  enormous  advances   in
         medicine, the focus now is rather on the length and quality of  the
         applicant's life than the particular circumstances of  his  or  her
         death.  In these cases, therefore, the real question is whether the
         State is under a positive obligation to  continue  treatment  on  a
         long-term basis.  It is precisely in this type  of  case  that  the
         Court's statement in D (para 54), that those  subject  to  removal
         "cannot in  principle  claim  any  entitlement  to  remain  on  the
         territory of a Contracting State in order to  continue  to  benefit
         from medical, social or other forms of assistance provided  by  the
         expelling state", has particular application.


         [94] ...It must be shown that the applicant's medical condition has
         reached  such  a  critical  stage   that   there   are   compelling
         humanitarian grounds for not removing him or her to a  place  which
         lacks the medical and social services when he or she would need  to
         prevent acute suffering while he or she is dying"

131.  When N came  to  be  considered  by  the  Strasbourg  court,  it  also
    concluded that the Article 3 claim must fail, the majority  summarising
    the applicable principles in the following terms:

    "[42] Aliens who are subject to expulsion  cannot  in  principle  claim
         entitlement to remain in the territory of a  contracting  state  in
         order to continue to benefit from medical, social or other forms of
         assistance and services provided by the expelling state.  The  fact
         that the applicant's circumstances, including his life  expectancy,
         would be significantly reduced if he were to be  removed  from  the
         contracting state is not sufficient  in  itself  to  give  rise  to
         breach of art 3.  The decision to remove an alien who is  suffering
         from a serious mental or physical illness to a  country  where  the
         facilities for the treatment of that illness are inferior to  those
         available in the contracting state may raise an issue under art  3,
         but only in a very exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds
         against the removal are  compelling.   In  D  v  UK  ...  the  very
         exceptional circumstances were that the  applicant  was  critically
         ill and appeared to be close to death, could not be guaranteed  any
         nursing or medical care in his country of origin and had no  family
         there willing or able to care for him or provide him  with  even  a
         basic level of food, shelter or social support.


   [43] The court does not exclude that there may be other very exceptional
         cases where the humanitarian considerations are equally compelling.
         However, it considers that it should maintain  the  high  threshold
         set in D v UK... and applied in its subsequent case law,  which  it
         regards as correct in principle,  given  that  in  such  cases  the
         alleged future harm would emanate not form the intentional acts  or
         omissions of public authorities or non-state  bodies,  but  instead
         form a naturally occurring  illness  and  the  lack  of  sufficient
         resources to deal with it in the receiving country.


   [44]...Advances in medical science, together with  social  and  economic
         differences between countries, entail that the level  of  treatment
         available in the Contracting State and the country  of  origin  may
         vary considerably. While it is  necessary,  given  the  fundamental
         importance of Article 3 in the Convention system, for the Court to
         retain a  degree  of  flexibility  to  prevent  expulsion  in  very
         exceptional cases, Article 3 does not place an obligation  on  the
         Contracting  State  to  alleviate  such  disparities  through   the
         provision of free and unlimited health care to all aliens without a
         right to stay within its jurisdiction. A finding  to  the  contrary
         would place too great a burden on the Contracting States."


132.  There are competing submissions before is as to the  correct  approach
    this Tribunal should take to its consideration of the Article 3 ground.




133.  Mr Symes submits that: "Article  3  makes  it  unlawful  to  remove  a
    person if substantial grounds have been shown for believing that  there
    is a real risk that he will suffer inhuman or degrading  treatment  (or
    death) as the result of not being  able  to  obtain  medical  treatment
    which the State of removal is responsible for providing him" [paragraph
    37 of the appellants' skeleton argument].  By  'State  of  removal'  Mr
    Symes is here referring to the country to which an individual, in  this
    case MQ, will be removed i.e. Pakistan.  This  approach,  it  is  said,
    derives from the reasoning in D v United Kingdom and N v United Kingdom
    or "follows inevitably from it"; an approach that  it  is  asserted  is
    made good by the subsequent decisions in  M.S.S.,  Sufi  and  Elmi  and
    S.H.H.


134.  We find no support for Mr Symes' submission, in either D  or  N,  that
    we  should  not  apply  the  exceptional  circumstances  test  to   our
    considerations in this case.  Neither do we accept that  the  decisions
    in M.S.S, Sufi and Elmi and S.H.H. extend the scope of Article 3 so  as
    to 'make good' Mr Symes' proposition.


135.  Turning to the Strasbourg court's decision in  M.S.S.;  in  this  case
    the applicant, an asylum seeker and as such "a member of a particularly
    underprivileged and vulnerable population  group  in  need  of  special
    protection" had spent months in Greece living in  a  state  of  extreme
    poverty, unable to cater for his most basic needs: food, hygiene and  a
    place to live, and with an ever-present  fear  of  being  attacked  and
    robbed. There was no likelihood of his situation improving.


136.  The Court found:

         "[366] In  the  instant  case  the  Court  has  already  found  the
         applicant's conditions of detention and living conditions in Greece
         degrading... It notes that these facts were well known  before  the
         transfer of the applicant and were freely ascertainable from a wide
         number of sources...  It also wishes to emphasise that it cannot be
         held against the applicant that  he  did  not  inform  the  Belgian
         administrative authorities of the reasons why he did not wish to be
         transferred to Greece.  It is established that the procedure before
         the Aliens Office made no provision for such explanations and  that
         the   Belgian   authorities   applied   the    Dublin    Regulation
         systematically...


         [367] Based on these conclusions and the obligations  incumbent  on
         the States under Article 3 of the Convention in terms of expulsion,
         the Court considers that by transferring the  applicant  to  Greece
         the Belgian authorities knowingly  exposed  him  to  conditions  of
         detention  and  living  conditions  that  amounted   to   degrading
         treatment."

137.  Underpinning these conclusions was an  earlier  conclusion,  drawn  in
    relation to the treatment received by the applicant in Greece, that:


   "[264]...It follows that, through the fault of the [Greek]  authorities,
         the applicant has found himself in a  situation  incompatible  with
         art. 3 of the Convention. Accordingly there has been a violation of
         that provision." [264] (our emphasis)


138.  Here we think the Strasbourg court was simply identifying that in  its
    conclusion the Article 3 proscribed treated meted out to the  applicant
    in Greece, a Contracting State to the Human Rights Convention, emanated
    from the intentional acts or omissions of the Greek  authorities.  This
    being so, no question arose  as  to  whether  there  were  'exceptional
    circumstances'. This is no doubt  why  it  made  no  reference  to  its
    earlier decision in N v United Kingdom.


139.  The 'fault' of  the  Greek  authorities  had  been  established  as  a
    consequence of a combination of a number of features of the case,  most
    particularly that the obligation to provide  accommodation  and  decent
    living conditions to asylum seekers had entered into  positive  law  in
    Greece, through transposition of the European Reception  Directive.  It
    failed to adhere  to  the  obligations  imposed  by  its  own  domestic
    legislation or those imposed on it by the Reception Directive.  Had  it
    done so,  the  applicant's  suffering  would  have  been  substantially
    alleviated.


140.  In Sufi and Elmi the Court  stated,  when  considering  the  issue  of
    internal relocation  within  Somalia  and  in  particular  whether  the
    applicants would be at risk of Article 3 ill-treatment  on  account  of
    the dire humanitarian conditions  in  refugee  camps  in  southern  and
    central Somalia:

        "[281] The Court recalls that N. v. the United  Kingdom  concerned
        the removal of an  HIV-positive  applicant  to  Uganda,  where  her
        lifespan was likely to be reduced on account of the fact  that  the
        treatment facilities there were inferior to those available in  the
        United Kingdom. In reaching its conclusions, the Court  noted  that
        the alleged future harm would emanate not from the intentional acts
        or omission of public authorities or non-State bodies  but  from  a
        naturally occurring illness and the lack of sufficient resources to
        deal with it in the receiving country. The Court  therefore  relied
        on the fact that neither the applicant's illness nor  the  inferior
        medical facilities were caused  by  any  act  or  omission  of  the
        receiving State or of any non-State  actors  within  the  receiving
        State.
        [282] If the dire humanitarian conditions in Somalia were solely or
        even predominantly attributable to poverty or to the  State's  lack
        of resources to deal with a naturally occurring phenomenon, such as
        a drought, the test in N. v. the United Kingdom may well have  been
        considered to be the appropriate one. However,  it  is  clear  that
        while drought has contributed  to  the  humanitarian  crisis,  that
        crisis is predominantly due to the direct and indirect  actions  of
        the parties to the conflict. The reports indicate that all  parties
        to the conflict have employed indiscriminate methods of warfare  in
        densely populated urban areas with no regard to the safety  of  the
        civilian population (see paragraphs 82, 123, 127, 132, 137, 139-140
        and 160,  above).  This  fact  alone  has  resulted  in  widespread
        displacement and the breakdown of social,  political  and  economic
        infrastructures.  Moreover,  the   situation   has   been   greatly
        exacerbated by al-Shabaab's refusal  to  permit  international  aid
        agencies to operate in the areas under  its  control,  despite  the
        fact that between a third and a half of all Somalis are living in a
        situation of serious deprivation.
      [283] Consequently, the Court does not consider the  approach  adopted
        in N. v. the United Kingdom to be appropriate in the  circumstances
        of the present case. Rather, it prefers  the  approach  adopted  in
        M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, which requires it to have  regard  to
        an applicant's ability to cater for his most basic needs,  such  as
        food, hygiene and shelter, his vulnerability to  ill-treatment  and
        the prospect of his situation improving within a  reasonable  time-
        frame (see M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, cited above, � 254)." (our
        emphasis)


141.  The Court  in  Sufi  and  Elmi  identified  that  it  was  a  relevant
    component of the decision in N v United Kingdom that it  could  not  be
    said that the harm  N  was  at  risk  of  suffering  emanated  from  an
    intentional act or omission of public authorities or a  non-State  body
    [281]. In  Sufi  and  Elmi  the  court  were  faced  with  a  different
    situation, where the harm likely to be faced  by  the  applicants  upon
    return to Somalia was found to derive, predominantly, from  the  direct
    and indirect actions of the parties to the  conflict  in  that  country
    [282]; this being in the context of there having  been  no  functioning
    state in Somalia. On this basis the Court distinguished the case from N
    v United Kingdom.


142.  The rationale underlying the decisions in M.S.S.  and  Sufi  and  Elmi
    for not considering the N threshold is, also, clearly identifiable from
    the Strasbourg court's more recent decision in  S.H.H..  In  S.H.H.  an
    Afghan national from Nangarhar province, whose lower right leg had been
    amputated, left leg and right hand had been seriously injured  and  who
    was suffering from depression, had arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2010 and claimed asylum shortly thereafter. His application was refused
    by the Secretary of State, who (i)  broadly  disbelieved  the  evidence
    given by the applicant because of the inconsistencies in his claim  and
    the vagueness of his account, (ii) concluded that the  applicant  would
    not be at risk from Hezb-i-Islami upon return and (iii) in relation  to
    his medical problems found that the  applicant's  case  was  not  'very
    exceptional' so that it did not cross the high  threshold  of  severity
    such as to engage Article 3.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the
    applicant's appeal and permission to appeal was refused.


143.  Before the Strasbourg court  the  applicant,  inter  alia,  complained
    that he would be at risk in Afghanistan on the basis that (i) he  would
    be particularly vulnerable to violence because of his disabilities  and
    (ii) due to his lack of familial support. He  asserted  that  he  would
    face living conditions and discrimination in Afghanistan of a type that
    reaches the Article 3 threshold. In so submitting it  was  argued  that
    his case could be distinguished from N v United Kingdom because it  did
    neither involved a naturally occurring illness, nor the consequences of
    a serious medical condition and the lack of treatment available to  it.
    It was further submitted that the  United  Nations  Convention  on  the
    Rights of Persons with Disabilities should inform the scope of  Article
    3 and, as such, there would be a real risk that he would  face  inhuman
    and degrading treatment upon return to Afghanistan  due  to  government
    inaction.


144.  In its conclusions the court referred at some length  to  its  earlier
    decisions in N v United Kingdom, Sufi  and  Elmi  and  M.S.S.  [75-77].
    Having found there to have been no evidence that disabled  persons  per
    se were at greater risk of violence than the general Afghan  population
    [85-87], the court turned its mind to the nature and relevance  of  the
    living conditions that awaited  the  applicant  in  Afghanistan,  which
    involved a consideration of the appropriate  principles  against  which
    such assessment ought to take place.


145.  Having undertaken such as  assessment  it  found,  for  the  following
    reasons, that the principles of  N  v  the  United  Kingdom  should  be
    applied. First:


   "[89] The Court recalls that N. concerned the removal of an HIV-positive
         applicant to Uganda, where her lifespan was likely to be reduced on
         account of the  fact  that  the  treatment  facilities  there  were
         inferior to those available in the United Kingdom. In reaching  its
         conclusions, the Court noted that the  alleged  future  harm  would
         emanate not  from  the  intentional  acts  or  omission  of  public
         authorities or non-State bodies  but  from  a  naturally  occurring
         illness and the lack of sufficient resources to deal with it in the
         receiving country. The Court also stated that  Article  3  did  not
         place  an  obligation  on  the  Contracting  State   to   alleviate
         disparities in the availability of medical  treatment  between  the
         Contracting State and the country of origin through  the  provision
         of free and unlimited health care to all aliens without a right  to
         stay within its jurisdiction (ibid, � 44). The Court  acknowledges
         that, in the present case, the  applicant's  disability  cannot  be
         considered to be a  "naturally"  occurring  illness  and  does  not
         require medical treatment. Nevertheless, it  is  considered  to  be
         significant that in both scenarios the future  harm  would  emanate
         from a lack of  sufficient  resources  to  provide  either  medical
         treatment or welfare provision rather than the intentional acts  or
         omissions of the authorities of  the  receiving  State"  [89]  (our
         emphasis)


    Second:


   "[90] The Court considers that the present  case  can  be  distinguished
         from M.S.S. In that case, a fellow Contracting State,  Greece,  was
         found to be in violation of Article 3 of the Convention through its
         own  inaction  and  its  failure  to  comply  with   its   positive
         obligations under both European and domestic legislation to provide
         reception facilities to asylum  seekers.  Central  to  the  Court's
         conclusion was its  finding  that  the  destitution  of  which  the
         applicant in that case complained was linked to his  status  as  an
         asylum seeker and to the fact that his asylum application  had  not
         yet been examined by the Greek authorities. The Court was  also  of
         the opinion that, had they examined the applicant's asylum  request
         promptly, the Greek authorities could have substantially alleviated
         his suffering (see paragraph 262 of the judgment). By contrast, the
         present application concerns the living conditions and humanitarian
         situation in Afghanistan, a non-Contracting  State,  which  has  no
         such similar positive obligations under  European  legislation  and
         cannot be held accountable under the  Convention  for  failures  to
         provide adequate welfare assistance to persons  with  disabilities.
         In that regard, it is recalled that the Convention does not purport
         to be a means of requiring Contracting States to impose  Convention
         standards on other States (see, as a  recent  authority,  Al-Skeini
         and Others v. the United Kingdom [GC], no. 55721/07, � 141, 7 July
         2011)"; (our emphasis)


    Third:


   "[91] Although in Sufi and Elmi v. the United Kingdom, cited above,  the
         Court followed the approach set out in M.S.S., this was because  of
         the exceptional and extreme  conditions  prevailing  in  south  and
         central Somalia. In  particular,  there  was  clear  and  extensive
         evidence before the Court that the humanitarian crisis  in  Somalia
         was predominately due to the direct and  indirect  actions  of  all
         parties to the conflict who had employed indiscriminate methods  of
         warfare and had refused to permit  international  aid  agencies  to
         operate (paragraph 282 of the  Sufi  and  Elmi  judgment).  On  the
         current evidence available, the Court is not able to conclude  that
         the situation in Afghanistan, albeit very serious as  a  result  of
         ongoing conflict, is  comparable  to  that  of  south  and  central
         Somalia [91]." (our emphasis)


      Fourth:


   "[e]ven though the difficulties and inadequacies in  the  provision  for
         persons with disabilities in Afghanistan cannot be understated,  it
         cannot be said  that  such  problems  are  as  the  result  of  the
         deliberate actions or omissions of the  Afghan  authorities  rather
         than attributable to a  lack  of  resources.  Indeed  the  evidence
         suggests that the Afghan  authorities  are  taking,  albeit  small,
         steps to improve provision for disables persons  by,  for  example,
         the National Disability Action Plan..."


146. The Court dismissed the application, determining the  applicant's  case
    not to be a "very exceptional one, where the  grounds  against  removal
    are compelling."


147. As we have identified above, Article 3 principally  applies  so  as  to
    prevent expulsion where the risk of 'ill treatment'  in  the  receiving
    country emanates  from  intentionally  inflicted  acts  of  the  public
    authorities or from non-state bodies when the authorities are unable to
    afford the applicant the appropriate protection. It  is  only  if  "the
    source of the risk of the proscribed treatment in the receiving country
    stems from factors which cannot engage either  directly  or  indirectly
    the responsibility of the public authorities of  that  country"  (D  at
    [49])  i.e.  the  risk  of  ill  treatment  does   not   emanate   from
    intentionally inflicted acts of the public  authorities  or  from  non-
    state bodies when the authorities are unable to  afford  the  applicant
    the appropriate protection, that consideration turns to  whether  there
    are "exceptional circumstances" of the type  identified  in  D  and  N.
    Nothing in the decisions of the Strasbourg court in M.S.S. or Sufi  and
    Elmi leads us to conclude that the Court intended to extend  the  scope
    of Article 3 beyond that identified in N v United Kingdom.


148. Turning back to domestic jurisprudence, on closer analysis  it  appears
    to us as though there is little difference between the legal  principle
    Mr Symes now seeks to establish and that  which  the  Court  of  Appeal
    rejected in its decision in ZT  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1421.


149. In ZT the Court of Appeal (Buxton,  Sedley  and  Jonathan  Parker  LJJ)
    considered a case involving a Zimbabwean national  with  HIV.  She  was
    receiving treatment in the United Kingdom,  which  had  stabilised  her
    condition. It was not in dispute that if returned to Zimbabwe she would
    not survive past one or two years. ZT's appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision to remove her to  Zimbabwe  had  been  allowed  by  an
    adjudicator on Article 3 ECHR grounds, a decision that was subsequently
    overturned by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal (IAT). In  the  Court  of
    Appeal the appellant, by then represented by Nicholas Blake QC,  sought
    to submit, on the basis of  arguments  that  had  not  previously  been
    deployed, that the IAT were wrong to find error  in  the  adjudicator's
    determination or, alternatively, that it  had  erred  itself  when  re-
    making the decision on Article 3 and 8 grounds. In his judgment  Buxton
    LJ (with the agreement of Jonathan Parker LJ), said as follows:


   [12] Mr Blake recognised that he was constrained, as is this  court,  by
         the decision of the House of Lords in N [2005] 2 AC 296,  analysing
         the Strasbourg jurisprudence and in particular D v  United  Kingdom
         24 EHRR 423. Their Lordships addressed  the  question  in  somewhat
         differing language, but to  the  same  general  effect,  which  can
         perhaps be best represented by the guidance given by Baroness  Hale
         of Richmond in her paragraphs 69-70:


     "the test, in this sort of case, is whether  the  applicant's  illness
           has reached such a critical stage (ie he is dying) that it would
           be inhuman treatment to deprive him of  the  care  which  he  is
           currently receiving and to send  him  home  to  an  early  death
           unless there is care available there to enable him to meet  that
           fate with dignity. This is  to  the  same  effect  as  the  test
           proposed by my noble and learned friend, Lord Hope of Craighead.
           It sums up the facts in D. It is not met on the  facts  of  this
           case. [70] There may, of course,  be  other  exceptional  cases,
           with other extreme facts, where the humanitarian  considerations
           are equally compelling. The law must be sufficiently flexible to
           accommodate them"


   [13] Mr Blake said that there were two respects in which  Ms  ZT's  case
         fell outside the very restrictive regime laid down by  N;  and  one
         respect in which the IAT had in any event wrongly applied N. Before
         addressing the ways in which N is sought to be distinguished  I  am
         bound to make two observations. First, Mr Blake did not  make  much
         headway in persuading at least me that either point had been  taken
         before the IAT. Second, and in any event, it is very  difficult  to
         see how a failure to adopt or to be swayed by either of the  points
         relied on by Mr Blake could amount to an error of law on  the  part
         of the IAT. The test of exceptionality that N sets out makes  it  a
         matter for the judgment of the  tribunal,  once  it  has  correctly
         directed itself as to the requisite standard, to decide whether the
         requirements of the test are met. Failure to accept that a case was
         exceptional could hardly amount to an error of law unless at  least
         the tribunal had rejected  a  plain,  obvious  and  uncontroversial
         issue that took the case out of the N limitations.


   [14] Mr Blake's first ground of distinction between this  case  and  the
         previous jurisprudence was that whereas in N it was  accepted  that
         the receiving country, Uganda, was making proper efforts to counter
         an  impossibly  difficult  situation,  in  the  present  case   the
         difficulties in Zimbabwe had been significantly contributed  to  by
         the  policy  of  the  government  itself,  in  particular  in   its
         malevolent attitude, discriminatory practices in the application of
         health care, and systematic violations of  humanitarian  and  human
         rights laws. It was argued, by analogy with  the  decision  of  the
         European Court of Human Rights in  Soering  11  EHRR  439,  that  a
         separate category of liability under article 3 arose where the lack
         of health care of which the applicant complained was  directly  the
         fault of the receiving state...


    [16] The argument, as a point of law,  is  misconceived.  Soering  came
         nowhere near to laying down any special rule about the behaviour of
         the receiving state, within the ambit of the single rule of article
         3  in  terms  of  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment...  [i]n   the
         particular factual category of health cases, N lays down the  rules
         as to how article 3  should  be  applied.  Those  rules  include  a
         specific requirement of  exceptional  circumstances.  They  do  not
         include a special sub-category, turning on  the  behaviour  of  the
         receiving state, that takes the case outside the normal  article  3
         regime.


   [17] If, as I consider plain, there is no special rule of  law  relating
         to the behaviour of the receiving state, then the weight  that  the
         tribunal gives to that behaviour must be a matter for the  judgment
         of the tribunal applying the guidance in N. Nothing was put  before
         the IAT that suggested that a detailed examination of the behaviour
         of the Zimbabwe government was required of it.


   [18] That said, I can envisage a case in which the particular  treatment
         afforded to an AIDS sufferer on  return,  in  terms  of  ostracism,
         humiliation, or deprivation of basic rights that was added  to  her
         existing medical difficulties, could create an exceptional case..."


150.  This reasoning was later approved and applied by the Court  of  Appeal
    [Pill, Arden and Longmore LJJ] in RS (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ
    839. In RS the Court considered a case of an appellant who had  arrived
    in the UK as a visitor and, shortly, thereafter had been diagnosed with
    HIV. An appeal to  the  Tribunal  was  pursued  on  the  basis  of  the
    consequences to the applicant's health  of  removal  to  Zimbabwe.  One
    aspect of the submissions related to the inability of the applicant  to
    access treatment in Zimbabwe as  a  consequence  of  her  not  being  a
    supporter of Zanu-PF; it also being  alleged  that  the  government  of
    Zimbabwe  use  the  deprivation  of  food  as  a  means  of   political
    suppression.  The Tribunal at first instance  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal on Article 3  grounds,  but  this  conclusion  was  reversed  on
    appeal. The matter then came before the Court of Appeal.


151.  In his judgment Pill LJ concluded, consistently with the  decision  in
    ZT although not with specific  reference  to  it,  that  the  appellate
    tribunal had been correct when identifying error in the first  instance
    tribunal's determination, that being the failure  of  the  tribunal  to
    follow the approach in N. Having then  observed  both  that  Article  3
    principally operates so as to prevent expulsion where the risk  of  ill
    treatment  in  the  receiving  country  emanates   from   intentionally
    inflicted acts of the public authorities or from non-state bodies  when
    the  authorities  are  unable  to  afford  the  applicant   appropriate
    protection, but that the court does not exclude that there may be other
    very  exceptional  cases  where  the  humanitarian  considerations  are
    equally compelling [28 - 29], he concluded that the appellate  tribunal
    had  erred  in  consideration  of  whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances, having failed to properly analyse  the  material  before
    it.


152.  In her decision Arden LJ specifically  expressed  agreement  with  the
    decision of Buxton LJ in ZT [41]. Longmore LJ agreed with the judgments
    of both Pill and Arden LJJ [44].


153.  We are bound to apply the ratio  of  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in ZT and, in any event, we can find nothing in the decisions in
    N v United Kingdom, M.S.S., Sufi  and  Elmi  or  S.H.H,  to  support  a
    contention that this rationale no longer holds good.


154.  Turning finally to the relevance of the fact that the appellant  is  a
    minor. It is clear that an appellant's minority  is  a  primary  matter
    relevant to the assessment of whether the claimed proscribed  treatment
    attains the minimum level of severity required to engage Article 3 [N v
    United Kingdom at paragraph 29].


155.  It must also, in our view, be a relevant factor in  assessing  whether
    a reasonable level of protection  will  be  available  in  a  receiving
    state; sufficiency of protection being judged according to  whether  it
    is  reasonable  provision  in  all  the  circumstances  of   the   case
    [Bagdanavicius [2005] EWCA Civ 1605 at paragraph 55(14),  such  finding
    being left undisturbed by the House of Lords [2005] UKHL 38].


156.  In GS and EO, the Presidential panel  observed  [85(7)(c)]  that  when
    considering whether 'exceptional circumstances' exist in any given case
    a "potential factor may be where the child to be returned  is  a  young
    child." Whilst we endorse the conclusion that a person's minority  will
    be a potential factor in such considerations, we cannot  ourselves  see
    any reason to restrict such potential to only  "young"  children.  Each
    case must be determined on its own  facts.  The  crucial  consideration
    will be the effect of removal on the particular  applicant.  Whilst  it
    may be that removal will have a potentially greater adverse effect on a
    younger child than one approaching majority, this will  not  always  be
    the case.


 Article 3: Conclusions - MQ


157.  As we  have  identified  above,  Mr  Symes  submits  that  should  the
    Pakistani  State,  either  directly,  or  indirectly  through  licensed
    medical  operators  outwith  the  state  machinery,  provide  MQ   with
    treatment for his illness, there would be a  high  risk  of  a  medical
    professional (either  in  a  hospital  run  by  the  state  or  an  NGO
    authorised by the state), "injecting blood into MQ's body" carrying  "a
    deadly and painful infection and ultimately lethal build up  of  iron".
    Thus, the State, or its agents, would "literally be putting blood  into
    MQ's body that will cause him to suffer pain and kill him".


158.  In its simplest form, and we mean no disservice to the  extent  of  Mr
    Symes' submission by summarising it thus, it is submitted that (i)  the
    Pakistani state has a responsibility to  provide  a  minimum  level  of
    healthcare in compliance with its international obligations, (ii)  that
    the minimum level of  care,  inter  alia,  includes  an  obligation  to
    provide Deferoxamine, a chelation agent that could be used  to  chelate
    MQ and (iii) the  Pakistani  state  does  not  provide  this  drug,  or
    otherwise provide  healthcare  in  compliance  with  its  international
    obligations. As a consequence, the Pakistani state will be  responsible
    for MQ's suffering (inhuman and/or degrading treatment) and  ultimately
    his death.


159.  Applying the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in ZT to  the  facts  of
    the instant case, the behaviour of the Pakistani state, of the type  Mr
    Symes' seeks to identify in his submissions, is to be considered within
    the context of our assessment of  whether  'exceptional  circumstances'
    exist. It does not require  us  to  consider  the  case  on  the  lower
    threshold.


160.  Nevertheless, we have gone on to consider  Mr  Symes'  submissions  on
    the basis argued, in the eventuality that we are either  wrong  in  our
    understanding of the decision in ZT, or that  the  decision  in  ZT  is
    later found to be legally incorrect. In  doing  so  we  have  had  full
    regard to MQ's age in the assessment of whether the claimed  proscribed
    treatment attains the minimum level of severity engaging Article 3.


161.  We do not accept that it has been demonstrated on the evidence  before
    us that there is a real risk of MQ contracting an illness from a  blood
    transfusion, let alone an illness serious enough all other things being
    equal and even given his minority, to engage Article 3.


162.  Dr Shah gave evidence, in her report of 30 July 2012 that MQ would  be
    at high risk of receiving  blood  donations  from  infected  donors  in
    Pakistan. This is very different from saying that he would be  at  high
    risk of contracting an infection from receiving inflected blood,  which
    no doubt is why Dr Shah later states, in the same report, that MQ would
    be 'at risk' of developing HIV or Hepatitis C as a consequence  of  the
    life saving blood transfusion, not 'high risk'.


163.  Further, there was no attempt by Dr Shah to quantify  what  she  means
    when using the term 'high risk'; neither, more significantly, does  she
    offer an opinion as to the extent of the risk of MQ developing  HIV  or
    Hepatitis C, or indeed any other  infection,  if  he  were  to  receive
    infected blood. She simply opines that a  risk  exists.  This  evidence
    does little, if anything, to assist in our assessment of whether such a
    risk is real.


164.  In her  more  recent  report,  jointly  written  with  Dr  Robins  (10
    September 2013), it is said that blood taken by NGO's  is  "technically
    tested" for HIV, Hepatitis B and C, however, "there have  been  reports
    of serious concerns" about blood not  being  tested  or  reports  being
    falsified  to  suggest  compliance,  as  a  consequence  of  the   lack
    regulation and the absence of sufficient penalties. Again, there is  no
    attempt therein to quantify the level of the risk of  MQ  developing  a
    serious, or  indeed  any,  infection  as  a  consequence  of  receiving
    infected blood.


165.  Attached to the report of 10 September 2013 is  a  news  article  from
    IRIN dated as long ago as 2008 in which it is said that a UNAIDS report
    identifies that only 50% of the 1.5 millions bags of  blood  transfused
    annually in Pakistan are screened. This article does not  identify  how
    these statistics were collated, whether there was any disparity between
    the private and  public  sector  providers,  or  indeed  between  blood
    collected by  NGO's  and  that  collected  by  other  bodies.  It  does
    helpfully observe, however, that between 2004  and  2006  at  least  91
    blood banks were closed down by the authorities in Karachi alone, 78 of
    which were privately owned, showing that there is at least some attempt
    by the authorities to engage with  this  problem.  No  more  up-to-date
    figures are provided.


166.  Dr Qureshi's evidence of 28 October 2012 - set out under  the  heading
    "The availability of treatment of the child's diagnosis outlined  above
    in the area, Hayatabad, Peshawar, North West Frontier of Pakistan" - is
    that:  "their  (sic)  blood  transfusion  is   satisfactory,   although
    difficult to get". No specific comment is made to the effect that there
    is a risk of MQ receiving infected blood and a consequent risk  of  him
    contracting an illness from that blood.


167.  SQ also provided evidence relevant to this  issue,  stating  that  she
    believes that between 1995 and 2006  a  lot  of  the  children  at  the
    Fatimid Foundation contracted Hepatitis A, B and C, and  other  medical
    problems; she 'believes' as a consequence of the  fact  that  they  had
    received unscreened blood. She does not identify the  basis  for  these
    beliefs and, more significantly, she  did  not  give  evidence  of  any
    similar incidents after 2006.


168.  It is important, we find, that having received blood  transfusions  in
    Pakistan approximately once every two to three weeks since the age of 8
    months, MQ is said to have contracted an  infection  from  contaminated
    blood only  twice  during  this  time,  that  being  in  2009  when  he
    contracted  Malaria  and  2010  when  he  contracted   Typhoid,   which
    necessitated a five-day stay in hospital. Even assuming these illnesses
    were contracted as a consequence of MQ  receiving  contaminated  blood,
    the evidence for which is extremely thin (as to which see paragraph  17
    of the Court of Appeal's judgment), the fact that he has contracted  no
    other illness from contaminated blood during such a lengthy  period  of
    time is not supportive of a conclusion that there is a real risk of him
    contracting an illness, let alone a serious illness such as Hepatitis C
    or HIV, in the future.


169.  Having considered all of the available evidence before us  we  do  not
    accept that it has been demonstrated that there is a real  risk  of  MQ
    contracting an infection from contaminated blood received from a  blood
    transfusion in Pakistan.


170.  Furthermore, we do not accept that, of itself, the  act  of  providing
    MQ with regular blood transfusions, which ultimately has the effect  of
    increasing the iron levels in his blood and,  in  the  absence  of  the
    availability of adequate chelation therapy, to eventual organ  failure,
    constitutes 'treatment' which is proscribed by Article 3. Although  the
    indirect consequence of providing MQ with  blood  transfusions  is  his
    serious ill health and death, probably within  the  next  five  to  ten
    years, the fate that awaits him if he does not receive the transfusions
    is significantly worse. Without the transfusions MQ's death upon return
    to Pakistan would be imminent and his suffering  significant.  In  such
    circumstances it cannot be concluded that the Pakistani State, or NGO's
    authorised or licensed by it, are inflicting proscribed treatment on MQ
    by providing him with blood transfusions. His  suffering  derives  from
    his  illness  not  the  fact  that  he  is  given  life  saving   blood
    transfusions. This conclusion is, in our view, entirely consistent with
    the well-established  principle  that  a  State  may  be  justified  in
    inflicting treatment that would otherwise breach Article 3 in order  to
    serve the ends of Article 2 [see for example X v Germany (1984) 7  EHRR
    152].


171.  Turning then to consider Mr Symes' submission made to the effect  that
    (i) Pakistan has  a  responsibility  to  provide  a  minimum  level  of
    healthcare to its citizens generally, and child citizens in particular,
    in compliance with its international obligations; (ii) this includes an
    obligation to  provide  Deferoxamine  -  a  chelation  agent  which  is
    identified on the WHO's list of 'essential drugs  and  which  could  be
    used to adequately chelate MQ (iii) it does not provide this drug,  and
    would not provide it to MQ and  consequently  this  leads  to  (iv)  it
    bearing responsibility for MQ's suffering and ultimately his death, and
    (v) MQ's return to Pakistan being in breach  of  Article  3  ECHR.  Put
    simply, it is said that the act, or more particularly the omission,  of
    the Pakistani state in failing to provide MQ with the necessary  health
    care  in  accordance  with  its  international  obligations  will  lead
    directly to him suffering inhuman treatment of sufficient  severity  so
    as to engage Article 3.


172.  The fact  that  chelation  therapy  is  available  in  Pakistan  is  a
    consistent theme in the  evidence  before  us.  MQ  received  chelation
    treatment whilst  living  in  Pakistan,  although  such  treatment  was
    undoubtedly inadequate to meet his needs. On his arrival in the  United
    Kingdom MQ was found to be "extremely severely  iron  overloaded",  his
    liver iron concentration being in excess of  the  level  that  the  MRI
    technology available to Dr Shah could record.


173.  Dr Shah indicates that chelation therapy is expensive in  Pakistan  in
    comparison with the average income. She  particularly  identifies  that
    the cost of Deferoxamine is prohibitive in Pakistan, although she  does
    not  specify  its  cost.  Dr  Qureshi  identifies  that  treatment  for
    Thalassaemia patients is available either free, or  is  subsidised,  in
    Pakistan and that the cost, in Dr Siddiqui's centre, for oral chelation
    tablets is approximately "Rs  8000 or cheaper"; unhelpfully he does not
    indicate the period of time such tablets would  last.  SQ  states  that
    whilst she was living in Pakistan MQ's chelation therapy cost  Rs  5000
    per month for Asnra 40gs or Rs 400-500 per month for  the  inferior  L1
    medication. On occasion she found these costs to be prohibitive.


174.  There can also be no doubt, given  the  medical  evidence  before  us,
    that with appropriate chelation therapy MQ's  life  would  be  extended
    significantly and the other problems caused by the iron overload in his
    body would, if not  be  ameliorated  completely,  then  be  appreciably
    reduced. Thus far he has not obtained adequate treatment  in  Pakistan,
    or at least he has not been able to do so  on  a  sufficiently  regular
    basis so as to ensure that his blood does not  become  overloaded  with
    iron. There is nothing in the evidence before us to suggest  MQ's  fate
    would be any different if he were to return to Pakistan.


175.  Assuming in MQ's favour that Pakistan has failed  in  its  obligations
    and  responsibilities   imposed   by   international   agreements   and
    conventions, both generally in respect of the provision of health  care
    to its citizens and specifically in respect of children, which has  the
    consequence of it failing to provide, at an affordable cost or at  all,
    the  particularised  treatment  and  drugs   that   MQ   requires   we,
    nevertheless, do not accept that the 'harm' MQ is likely to suffer as a
    consequence of this can be said to emanate from the intentional acts or
    omissions of the Pakistani state. It emanates from the fact that MQ has
    a naturally occurring illness.


176.  It may be that the consequences  to  MQ  arising  from  his  naturally
    occurring illness are exacerbated because of the  absence  of  adequate
    medical treatment in Pakistan and, on the assumption we  have  set  out
    above, that may in turn be as a consequence of  Pakistan's  failure  to
    comply with certain of its international obligations, but the emanation
    of MQ's suffering is his illness. In any event, on the evidence  before
    us the appellants do not even come  close  to  demonstrating  that  any
    relevant act, or omission, on the part of the Pakistani authorities  in
    this regard can be considered to be intentional or  deliberate,  within
    the meanings attributed to such phrases in the  context  of  Article  3
    considerations. In coming to this conclusion we have taken full account
    of all of the evidence before us, including the fact that  it  is  said
    that there has been an under utilisation of health care budget  in  the
    recent past with wastage likely caused by corrupt practices,  and  that
    the expenditure of health per capita compares  very  unfavourably  with
    the per capita spending recommended by the Commission on Macroeconomics
    and Health. Furthermore, we do not  accept  that  there  is  sufficient
    proof before us to demonstrate a causal link between corruption and the
    lack of resources for health care in Pakistan.


177.  We also observe that  (i)  the  SPARC  report  on  Pakistan  for  2012
    identifies the setting up of the National Commission for the Rights  of
    Children, which  is  to  serve  as  a  focal  point  for  facilitating,
    coordinating and reporting all child related international  commitments
    to the provinces, as well as developing a national policy and plan  for
    the protection and promotion of children's rights (ii) in October  2012
    the Secretary Capital  Administration  and  Development  announced  the
    establishment of special desks in all government hospitals  to  provide
    free medical treatment to persons with disabilities as a  priority  and
    (iii) the federal government adopted the Drug Regulatory  Authority  of
    Pakistan Act (DRAP) in November  2012  in  an  attempt  to  tackle  the
    problem of counterfeit drugs. These actions suggest the authorities  in
    Pakistan are taking steps to improve the  provision  for  children  and
    disabled persons, and in particular those requiring heath care.


178.  For these reasons, even assuming we are wrong in our conclusion as  to
    the ratio of the Court of Appeal's decision in ZT,  we  do  not  accept
    that there are substantial grounds for believing that MQ faces  a  real
    risk of ill treatment in  Pakistan  emanating  from  the  intentionally
    inflicted acts of the public authorities there or from non-state bodies
    in circumstances where the authorities are  unable  to  afford  MQ  the
    appropriate protection.


179.  Finally, therefore, we turn to consider whether  MQ's  case  discloses
    the type of exceptional circumstances  identified  by  their  Lordships
    House in N so as  to  lead  us  to  conclude  that  his  removal  would
    otherwise breach Article 3.


180.  We have set out the circumstances of MQ's illness in detail above  and
    we have taken the entirety of those  circumstances  into  account  when
    coming to our conclusions on the Article 3 ground. In  summary  MQ  has
    suffered from  Beta  Thalassaemia  since  infancy.  He  requires  blood
    transfusions every two to three weeks, one of the consequences of which
    is iron overload in his body. This is associated with potentially fatal
    complications such as heart failure, or liver cirrhosis. It also  leads
    to endocrine damage, which affects the ability to grow and mature. With
    appropriate iron chelation therapy, such as that found  in  the  United
    Kingdom, MQ's life expectancy is nearly normal, with a good quality  of
    life. MQ did not receive adequate iron chelation  therapy  in  Pakistan
    and is unlikely to do so in the future. On his arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom the iron levels were extremely high  and  he  already  had,  by
    then, very serious endocrine problems leading to him having a  physical
    appearance of a child  much  younger  than  his  age.  If  returned  to
    Pakistan he would, we find, receive regular blood transfusions, much as
    he did prior to his arrival here. There is a risk, but not a real risk,
    of him receiving infected blood from a transfusion which leads to there
    being a consequent, although even smaller, risk of him  contracting  an
    illness from receiving infected blood in Pakistan.


181.  Absent receiving adequate chelation therapy in Pakistan MQ  will  once
    again become overloaded with iron. He is, as a consequence,  likely  to
    die in some pain in his late teens or early twenties.  His  ability  to
    grow and mature will also be further impacted upon. This will also,  no
    doubt, lead to him developing mental health difficulties, as Dr  Sahota
    identifies he has in the past. MQ  is  also  currently  suffering  from
    hypersplenism and would benefit from surgery to remove the spleen. This
    would bring risk of itself, again, as identified above.


182.  MQ would, however, be returned with and to the care of his  family  in
    Pakistan.   His  parents  have  a  home  there  and  his   mother   has
    demonstrated already that she takes great care of him.  He would not be
    alone there and he would not  be  destitute.  The  shortening  of  life
    expectancy does not of itself make a  case  exceptional.  This  is  the
    position even if life expectancy is reduced to just a few  weeks  as  a
    consequence of removal. Neither does the fact that MQ will be subjected
    to ever increasing levels of suffering as time goes by in Pakistan.


183.  We accept that the scope given to Article 3 is to be informed  by  the
    Conventions Mr Symes' referred us to in  his  submissions  and  we  are
    mindful of the principle that the European Convention does not apply in
    a vacuum and must be interpreted in harmony with the general principles
    of international law (S.H.H. at [94]). We  have  identified  above  the
    steps the authorities in Pakistan are taking to improve  provision  for
    disabled persons and children in that country. Even if it can  be  said
    that  Pakistan  has  failed,  and  would  continue  to  fail,  in   its
    obligations under the various international conventions  identified  by
    Mr Symes, it certainly cannot be said that there is any  malign  intent
    underlying such failure. It is also  to  be  recalled  that  the  Human
    Rights Convention is not a means of  requiring  Contracting  States  to
    impose Human Rights Convention  standards  on  non-contracting  states,
    such as Pakistan (S.H.H. at [90]). Neither  does  Article  3  place  an
    obligation on  Contracting  States  to  alleviate  disparities  in  the
    availability of medical treatment between states. We must also consider
    the circumstances of MQ's return.


184.  The clear view  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (paragraph  13  of  its
    determination), and more recently the Court of Appeal (paragraphs 17-19
    and 29-30 of its judgment) was that the evidence  "even  taken  at  its
    highest, and making every  allowance  for  the  age  of  MQ,  does  not
    establish that the high threshold [required by N] is satisfied."


185.  Whilst there has been a good deal more evidence, and  in  depth  legal
    submissions, placed before us than there has previously  been  in  this
    appeal, we nevertheless come to the same conclusion as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Court of Appeal in relation to Article  3  ground.  Having
    considered all of the circumstances before us, including the fact  that
    the appellant is still a  minor,  we  conclude  that  this  is  not  an
    exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds against  requiring  MQ
    to return to Pakistan are compelling.


SQ - Article 3


186.  It has not been suggested before us  that,  absent  MQ  succeeding  on
    Article 3 grounds, SQ could succeed in demonstrating that requiring her
    to return to Pakistan would lead to a breach of her Article  3  rights.
    Insofar as SQ has a case to be considered under Article 3 it is  rooted
    in the fact that she will have to watch  MQ's  suffering  and  eventual
    death. There are no words that can adequately describe how  distressing
    a circumstance this must be for SQ, and  indeed  for  MQ's  father  and
    sibling. However, this distress and suffering  does  not  equate  to  a
    conclusion that to remove SQ in such  circumstances  would  lead  to  a
    breach of Article 3 ECHR, and we conclude it would not.  It  cannot  be
    said that the distress and suffering that SQ will undoubtedly  have  to
    bear in Pakistan arises through any human agency; it emanates from MQ's
    naturally occurring illness and the consequences thereof.


187.  We find that requiring SQ to return to Pakistan would not  lead  to  a
    breach of Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.


Article 8


188.        Neither appellant can succeed under the Immigration  Rules,  and
    it was not suggested otherwise. We  therefore  proceed  straight  to  a
    consideration of Article 8 which provides:

        "1. Everyone has the right to respect for his  private  and  family
        life, his home and his correspondence.


        2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with  the
        exercise of this right except as is in accordance with the law  and
        is necessary in a democratic society in the interests  of  national
        security, public safety or the economic well-being of the  country,
        for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
        health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and  freedoms
        of others."


 189. There is no fixed relationship between Article 3 and Article  8  ECHR.
      Each article has to be approached and applied in its own  terms  -  JA
      (Ivory Coast) and ES (Tanzania) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1353 at [17].


 190. In considering the Article 8 ground we adopt and apply the  five-stage
      approach as set out by the House of Lords in  Razgar  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department  [2004] UKHL 27.


 191. The appellants have no family life in the  United  Kingdom,  save  for
      with each other. Whilst SQ's sister (MQ's aunt)  lives  here,  neither
      speak to the extent of the relationship they have with her, save  that
      in her most  recent  statement  SQ  states  that  if  she  returns  to
      Pakistan, leaving MQ in the United Kingdom, her sister will  not  take
      responsibility for MQ. Instead it is  postulated  that  MQ  "could  be
      looked after by a carer, or social services or foster patents."

 192. MQ clearly has a private life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Whilst  this
      primarily consists of his medical treatment, which we have set out  in
      detail above and do not repeat again, he  also  speaks  of  his  close
      friends and his education, evidence we accept. The evidence  discloses
      that he performs well at school, with  minimal  support.  It  is  MQ's
      intention that he will take his GCSE's in  the  middle  part  of  this
      year. Although, as we state  above,  we  have  heard  nothing  of  his
      relationship with his aunt, such  relationship,  to  the  extent  that
      there is one, must also form a part of MQ's private life in the United
      Kingdom.

 193. SQ's evidence discloses little private life in the United Kingdom save
      for her involvement in  MQ's  life,  and  in  particular  his  medical
      treatment. As with MQ we proceed on the basis that she has established
      at least some private life with her sister  and  her  sister's  family
      here, although  the  current  extent  of  that  private  life  is  not
      identifiable.

 194. It is well established that the private life aspect of Article  8  may
      be engaged in a case which involves physical or mental health [Bensaid
      v United  Kingdom  [2001]  33  EHRR  10]  and  we  conclude  that  the
      consequences to the private lives of each of the  appellants  of  them
      leaving the United Kingdom would be of sufficient severity  so  as  to
      engage Article 8.

 195. Such interference is in accordance with the  law  in  that  it  is  in
      accordance with  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  would  also  be  for  a
      legitimate  aim  identified  in  Article  8(2);  the  maintenance   of
      immigration control being rooted, particularly in the instant  appeal,
      in the economic well being of the country.

 196. We finally turn to the question of whether such interference would  be
      proportionate to the legitimate aim sought  to  be  achieved.  As  the
      Court of Appeal identified, this is the  real  issue  in  the  instant
      appeal [24]. It is for the respondent to justify interference with the
      appellants' engaged Article 8 rights.

 197. In Razgar Lord Bingham identified that the issue of proportionality:


         "involves the striking of a fair balance between the rights of  the
         individual and the interests of the community which is inherent  in
         the whole of the Convention."


 198. We begin our consideration of this issue with an  assessment  of  MQ's
      best interests.


 199. The concept of the child's best  interests  derives  from  the  second
      principle of the Declaration on the Rights of the Child of 20 November
      1959. The term was thereafter used in Article 3(1) of the 1989  United
      Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, The requirement that  a
      child's best interests must be treated as a primary  consideration  is
      further to be found in Article 24(2) of European  Union's  Charter  of
      Fundamental Rights, which became legally binding with the  entry  into
      force of the Lisbon Treaty on 1 December 2009, and, domestically,  in
      Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 200. This latter provision has now been the subject of consideration by the
      Supreme Court on four separate occasions since its implementation - ZH
      (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]  2  AC
      166; BH v Lord Advocate [2012] 4 All ER 600; H (H) v Deputy Prosecutor
      of the Italian Republic, Genoa [2013]  1  AC  338  and  most  recently
      in Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC
      74.

 201. In  Zoumbas,  Lord  Hodge,  delivering  the  judgment  of  the  Court,
      identified seven legal principles in relation to the best interests of
      the child, which "are not in doubt":


        "(1)  The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
            proportionality assessment  under article 8 ECHR;
         (2) In making that assessment, the best interests of a  child  must
            be a  primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
            primary consideration; and the child's best interests do not of
            themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;
         (3)  Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
            the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no   other
            consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;
         (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the best
            interests of a child in different ways, it is important to  ask
            oneself the right questions in an orderly manner  in  order  to
            avoid the risk that the best interests  of  a  child  might  be
            undervalued when other important considerations were in play;
         (5)   It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
            circumstances and of what  is  in  a   child's  best  interests
            before one asks oneself whether those interests are  outweighed
            by the force of other considerations;
         (6)  To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
            of all relevant factors   when the interests  of  a  child  are
            involved in an article 8 assessment; and
         (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
            not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

202.  His Lordship then  added  the  "following  comments"  to  these  seven
    principles:


            "[13]...First, the decision-maker  is  required  to  assess  the
          proportionality of the interference with private and  family  life
          in the particular circumstances in which the decision is made. The
          evaluative exercise in assessing the proportionality of a  measure
          under article 8 ECHR excludes any "hard-edged or bright-line  rule
          to be applied to the generality of cases": EB (Kosovo) v Secretary
          of State for the Home Department [2009] AC 1159, per Lord  Bingham
          at para 12. Secondly, as Lord Mance pointed out in H(H)  (at  para
          98) the decision-maker must evaluate the  child's  best  interests
          and in some cases they may point only marginally  in  one,  rather
          than another, direction. Thirdly, as the case of H(H) shows in the
          context of extradition, there may be circumstances  in  which  the
          weight of another primary consideration can tip  the  balance  and
          make the interference proportionate even where it has very  severe
          consequences for children...The third principle in para  10  above
          is subject  to  the  first  and  second  qualifications  and  may,
          depending on the circumstances, be subject to the  third.  But  in
          our view, it is not likely that a court would reach in the context
          of an immigration decision what Lord Wilson described in H(H)  (at
          para 172) as the "firm if bleak" conclusion in  that  case,  which
          separated young children from their parents."


 203. In this appeal  there  is  no  question  of  the  Secretary  of  State
      requiring MQ to leave the United Kingdom without his  mother  SQ,  and
      vice versa. It is also to be recalled that MQ's father, with  whom  we
      are told MQ is close, and his elder sibling,  both  remain  living  in
      Pakistan; there being no prospect, at least of MQ's father, coming  to
      the United Kingdom even if MQ is granted leave to remain here.


 204. Quite candidly SQ stated in her evidence that even if granted leave to
      remain she would leave the  United  Kingdom,  at  least  for  a  short
      period, in order to protect her  relationship  with  her  husband  and
      eldest child. This would have the consequence of MQ remaining  in  the
      United Kingdom without either of his parents and, although SQ's sister
      lives here, it is not proposed that she take over  responsibility  for
      MQ's care. SQ's hope, as we have identified above, is that MQ will  be
      "looked after by a carer, social services, or foster parents... for  a
      short period". It cannot be in MQ's best interests  particularly  when
      he experiences ill health to have his family life disrupted in such  a
      manner.


 205. The nationality of a child is of particular  importance  in  assessing
      where a child's  best  interests  lie.  In  ZH  (Tanzania)  Lord  Kerr
      identified that the significance of  a  child's  nationality  must  be
      considered in two aspects [47]:


   "The first of these is in its role as a contributor to the debate as  to
         where the child's best interests lie. It seems to me  self  evident
         that to diminish a child's right to assert his or  her  nationality
         will  not  normally  be  in  his  or  her  best   interests.   That
         consideration must therefore feature in the determination of  where
         the best interests lie. It was also  accepted  by  the  respondent,
         however, (and I think rightly so) that if  a  child  is  a  British
         citizen, this has an independent value, freestanding of the  debate
         in relation to best interests, and this must weigh in  the  balance
         in any decision that may affect where a child will  live.  As  Lady
         Hale has said, this is not an inevitably decisive  factor  but  the
         benefits that British citizenship brings, as so aptly described  by
         Lord Hope and Lady Hale, must not readily be discounted."


 206. MQ is not a British  citizen.  He  does  not,  therefore,  derive  the
      benefits of having such citizenship adumbrated by Lord Kerr; indeed by
      remaining in the United Kingdom he will lose the benefit of growing up
      in his own country and culture. Furthermore,  this is not a case where
      requiring MQ to return to Pakistan will cause a separation from one or
      either of his parents, indeed quite the contrary is the case; it  will
      lead to his family unit being re-established.


 207. The matters we have identified above point generally towards it  being
      in MQ's best interests for him to return to Pakistan with his  mother,
      where he could grow up in a culture he knows and receive the care  and
      support he requires from his immediate family unit.


208. Requiring MQ to return to Pakistan will, we  accept,  have  an  adverse
    effect  on  his  education.  The  fact  that  his  education  will   be
    interrupted, the stage that MQ is currently at in his education in  the
    United Kingdom, as well as the fact that he has made friends  here,  in
    contrast to his experiences at school  in  Pakistan,  are  all  matters
    supporting the contention that it would be in  MQ  bests  interests  to
    remain living in the United Kingdom, as is  the  fact  that  there  are
    troubles in his  home  area  in  Pakistan.  These  matters  though,  of
    themselves, would not have persuaded us that MQ's best interests lie in
    remaining in the United  Kingdom.  There  is  an  education  system  in
    Pakistan and he has attended school there in the past,  albeit  he  was
    the subject to discrimination and bullying from his peers.


209. Despite what  we  say  above,  we  are,  nevertheless,  driven  to  the
    conclusion that MQ's best interests lie  in  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom, even if he is to remain  here  without  familial  support  and
    care. The driving force behind this conclusion is an obvious one. If MQ
    remains in the UK he will lead a long and relatively  normal  life,  at
    least insofar as life can be 'normal' given the extensive treatment  he
    will require. If he returns to Pakistan MQ  will  be  returning  to  an
    early death, with significant suffering  prior  to  this,  albeit  with
    familial support to help him through the suffering. For this reason  we
    find that MQ's best interests  lie  in  him  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom, even if that is in the absence of MQ.


210. We must now consider this finding  in  the  context  of  the  balancing
    exercise as a whole. In doing so we carry over all that  we  have  said
    above.


211. When carrying out the wider  proportionality  consideration,  we  treat
    the "best interests" of MQ as a primary consideration. It  is,  though,
    not a paramount consideration. In ZH (Tanzania)  Lady  Hale  stated  at
    [33]:


   "In  making  the  proportionality  assessment  under  Art  8,  the  best
         interests of the child must be a primary consideration. This  means
         that they must  be  considered  first.  They  can,  of  course,  be
         outweighed by the cumulative effect of other considerations."


 212. Whilst the appellants entered the  United  Kingdom  on  24  June  2012
      lawfully as visitors, in our view there is a significant doubt  as  to
      SQ motives in doing so. Her evidence before  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
      that she did not enter with the intention of obtaining  treatment  for
      MQ. This though does not chime with the answer she gave at question 86
      of her asylum interview, that "she  just  came  here  for  his  [MQ's]
      treatment"; nor with paragraph 1.2.1 of Dr Sahota's medical report  of
      the 12 November 2012, in which it is stated under the heading "Summary
      of the Case Upon Instructions": "[MQ] came to the United Kingdom  with
      his mother  in  June  2012  to  seek  treatment  for  his  illness..."
      According to the report of Dr Shah and Dr Robbins, MQ has  been  under
      their care since July 2012 i.e. shortly  after  MQ's  arrival  in  the
      United Kingdom: indeed in the chronology drawn by the MQ's legal  team
      for the judicial review application to the Administrative Court, it is
      said that MQ has been receiving treatment at the Whittington  hospital
      since June 2012. If this is the case such treatment  must  have  began
      within a week of the appellants' arrival in the  United  Kingdom.   We
      also observe that in both  her  screening  interview  and  her  asylum
      interview SQ indicates that MQ had previously  received  treatment  in
      the United Kingdom, when the family lived here  in  2006.  She  would,
      therefore, have been well aware of the  possibility  of  MQ  receiving
      life saving treatment in the United Kingdom well  before  her  arrival
      here in 2012. We also observe  that  there  has  been  an  absence  of
      evidence from SQ's sister on this matter.


213. Whilst we accept that SQ has  staunchly  maintained  since  her  asylum
    interview that she legitimately entered the United Kingdom to visit her
    sister, and that she also stated this to be the case in question 57  of
    that interview, when all the evidence is considered in the round we are
    not inclined to believe SQ in this regard.


214. Had we been considering SQ's appeal alone, this is a finding  we  would
    have attached significant weight to. We remind ourselves, however, that
    in  reality  the  foundation  that  underpins  SQ's   claim   are   the
    circumstances of her son. He is a minor and any failings of his  mother
    cannot properly be laid at  his  door.  Given  this,  when  considering
    whether it is proportionate to require MQ to  return  to  Pakistan,  we
    attach no weight to our finding as to  SQ's  motives  in  bringing  him
    here.


215. It remains a fact,  however,  that  MQ's  illness  was  diagnosed  long
    before he came to the United Kingdom in 2012. He is  a  child  who  was
    brought to the UK with a pre-existing medical condition. This is not  a
    case, such as JA (Ivory Coast) and ES (Tanzania) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ
    1353 relied upon by Mr Symes, where  the  appellants  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom lawfully and were subsequently diagnosed for  the  first
    time as being HIV positive. Further, in JA and ES both  appellants  had
    previously been granted leave to remain specifically to  continue  with
    treatment for HIV pursuant to the then existing Home Office  policy,  a
    feature that is also not present in the instant appeal. MQ's  treatment
    in the United Kingdom has always been received under the spectre of the
    knowledge that he may be required to return to his homeland.


216. Ms Busch observes in her skeleton argument  that  the  appellants  have
    overstayed their leave and have subsequently remained living in the  UK
    unlawfully. This, though, is not the case. Both  appellants  still  had
    leave to enter at the time SQ made her asylum application, with  MQ  as
    her dependent. Upon refusing this application the  Secretary  of  State
    varied the appellants' leave so that  they  had  none  remaining.  This
    leave was subsequently extended by the operation of Section 3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and, although we did not  hear  argument  on  this
    point, we cannot readily identify why such leave is not still in  place
    at present.


217. The appellants have, therefore, had leave to enter during the  entirety
    of their stay in the United Kingdom. The fact that they  have  done  so
    only  by  the  vehicle  of  challenging  the  respondent's  immigration
    decisions is, though, not  without  its  relevance.  As  Baroness  Hale
    opined in Razgar [59]:


   "[t]he expelling state be required to assume a more favourable status in
         its own territory than the applicant is currently entitled to.  The
         applicant remains to  be  treated  as  someone  who  is  liable  to
         expulsion, not as someone who is entitled to remain."


218. Despite the additional features of the appellants' lives in the  United
    Kingdom that we identify above, this is  essentially  what  has  become
    known as a 'health case'.


219. We do not, at this stage of the determination, set out once again  MQ's
    health problems. They are extensively documented above. We  have  taken
    all of the evidence in this regard into account and, in particular, the
    circumstances MQ will face upon return to Pakistan as a consequence  of
    his illnesses. He is not at risk of imminent death there, but he is, we
    accept, all other things being equal, not likely to live past his  late
    teens or early twenties.


220. Whilst we accept that the healthcare MQ  will  be  provided  with  upon
    return to Pakistan will be inadequate to meets his  needs,  leading  to
    his premature death and his suffering prior to that, we have found that
    there is nothing malign in the authorities failure to provide for  MQ's
    health care needs. We further  observe,  as  we  did  above,  that  the
    authorities  in  Pakistan  are  now  taking  steps  generally   towards
    improving provision for disabled persons and children  there,  although
    given the uncertainty as to how this will eventually manifest itself we
    do not proceed on the basis  that  any  such  improvement  will  be  of
    material benefit to MQ.


221. The consequences of MQ's illness do not rest only in his favour in  our
    Article 8 considerations. If he remains in the United Kingdom there can
    be no doubt that this will be at a significant financial  cost  to  the
    state. MQ's treatment requirements are substantial  and,  although  the
    effects of reducing his iron overload  to  manageable  levels  will  no
    doubt reduce the need for certain treatment regimes in the future,  his
    overall treatment requirements will still be sizeable.  Added  to  this
    are the financial implications of SQ returning to Pakistan and  leaving
    MQ to be looked after in the United Kingdom by the  state,  even  on  a
    temporary basis.


222. In relation  to  the  relevance  of  such  a  consideration  we  remind
    ourselves of the Court of Appeal's observations in the instant case, at
    [27] that: "...this country is under no international obligation always
    to act as  the  hospital  of  the  world."   This  echoes  the  earlier
    observations of Sedley LJ [16] in JA & ES.


223. In MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 279, the Court of Appeal  (Master  of  the  Rolls,  Moses  and
    McFarlane LJJ) considered the case of a  Zimbabwean  national  who  had
    entered the United Kingdom as a minor, but who was aged 28 years by the
    time of the court's consideration, having been granted Indefinite Leave
    to Remain. MM had committed a significant number of  criminal  offences
    and as a consequence the Secretary of State sought to  deport  him.  It
    was not in dispute that MM had serious mental health  problems.   Moses
    LJ, giving the judgment of the court, identified at [17 and 18] that:


   "...the ECHR does not impose any obligation  on  contracting  states  to
         provide those liable to deportation with medical treatment  lacking
         in their home countries. This  principle  applies  even  where  the
         consequence will be that the deportee's life will be  significantly
         shortened (see Lord Nicholls in N v Home Secretary [2005] 2 AC 296,
         304 [15] and N v UK [2008] 47 EHRR 885 (paragraph 4))


   Although that principle was expressed in  those  cases  in  relation  to
         Article 3, it is a principle which must apply to Article 8 "


224. Having, inter alia, set out the analysis of their  Lordships  House  in
    Razgar, Moses LJ continued [23]:


   "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of medical treatment  in
         the country to which a person is to be deported will be relevant to
         Article 8, is where it is an additional factor to be weighed in the
         balance, with other factors which by themselves engage  Article  8.
         Suppose, in this case, the appellant had  established  firm  family
         ties in this country, then the availability of  continuing  medical
         treatment here, coupled with his dependence of the family here  for
         support, together established 'private life' under Article 8.  That
         conclusion  would  not  involve  a   comparison   between   medical
         facilities her and those in Zimbabwe. Such a conclusion  would  not
         offend the principle expressed above that  the  United  Kingdom  is
         under no Convention obligation to provide  medical  treatment  here
         when it is not available in the country to which the  appellant  is
         to be deported."


225. As the Upper Tribunal (UTJs Warr and Southern)  rightly  identified  in
    Akhalu Moses LJ was not there saying that:


    "...a claimant is disqualified from accessing the protection of article
         8 where an aspect of her claim is  a  difficulty  of  inability  to
         access health care in her country of nationality unless,  possibly,
         her private or family life has a bearing upon her prognosis."


    But rather, that the correct approach is:


   "...not to leave out of  account  what  is,  by  any  view,  a  material
         consideration of central importance to the individual concerned but
         to recognise that the countervailing  public  interest  in  removal
         will outweigh the consequences  for  the  health  of  the  claimant
         because of a disparity of health care facilities in all but a  very
         few rare cases."


226. Mr Symes' advances the submission that it  is  extremely  difficult  to
    conceptualise  how  any  other  factor  can  outweigh  a  child's  best
    interests, when what is at  stake  is  that  child's  interest  in  not
    experiencing a high level of suffering and then  death.  As  a  general
    proposition we do not accept this is so.


227. In our view  significant  weight  should  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest in ensuring that  the  limited  resources  of  this  country's
    health service are used to the best effect for the benefit of those for
    whom they are intended. This applies equally  in  a  case  involving  a
    child. Each case must be considered and determined on its own facts. In
    a case involving a child the child's best interests will  not  only  be
    one of the relevant considerations in the determination of the issue of
    proportionality, but a primary consideration. However, as was  observed
    by Lord Hodge in Zoumbas, "The evaluative  exercise  in  assessing  the
    proportionality of a measure under article 8 excludes any hard-edged or
    bright-line rule to be applied to the generality of cases".


228. We remind ourselves once again of  Lord  Brown's  opinion  in  N  [90],
    which although given in the context of Article 3 has clear  bearing  on
    Article 8 considerations:


    "...my clear understanding of the subsequent Strasbourg case law is that
        the Court has now adopted 'a restrictive line'.  It  has  not  been
        prepared to grant 'an absolute right for seriously ill  persons  to
        remain in the host country to  get  treatment,  provided  they  had
        managed to set foot there.'  The 'very  far-reaching'  consequences
        of such a right would give rise to positive obligations  which  the
        Court has not thought it  right  to  impose  upon  the  Contracting
        States."


229. As has routinely been identified with those  charged  with  determining
    cases involving life threatening illnesses, these are  difficult  cases
    to decide. The appellant's death will not be imminent upon  his  return
    and as his condition worsens  and  his  suffering  and  mental  anguish
    increase, he will have the support and care of his family members.   In
    this case, having taken into account all that we say above, we conclude
    that requiring MQ  to  return  to  Pakistan  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim being pursued. The financial cost to  the  state  of  MQ
    remaining here will be significant, both in terms of  his  health  care
    needs and in terms of him being 'looked after' within the  social  care
    framework. Even in the context  of  MQ  being  a  child  and  therefore
    necessarily  having  to  treat  his  best  interests   as   a   primary
    consideration,  we  do  not  find  that  this  is  a  case  where   the
    consequences of requiring MQ to return to  Pakistan,  contrary  to  his
    best interests, are such that they  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    requiring him doing so.


230. As to SQ, we find nothing in her case that leads us  to  conclude  that
    requiring her to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  with  MQ  would  not  be
    proportionate. We have taken into account the fact  that  she  will  be
    returning to the trauma of watching MQ suffer,  and  that  MQ's  needs,
    both emotional and physical, will leave little time for her to build up
    her own private life outside the family unit in Pakistan; nevertheless,
    other than the support she provides MQ in the United Kingdom, there  is
    little else that can be prayed in aid of her remaining here.


231. For the reasons given  above,  both  appellants'  appeals  against  the
    decisions to vary their leave are dismissed.


Section 47


232. The Secretary of State also made removal decisions in relation to  both
    appellants pursuant to  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006. In  Ahmadi  (s.47  decision:  validity:  Sapkota)
    [2012] UKUT 00147 the Upper Tribunal held that a removal decision under
    section 47 could not be made in  respect  of  a  person  until  written
    notice of the decision to refuse to vary that person's leave to  remain
    had been given to that  person,  and  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    practice of  incorporating  both  decisions  in  a  single  notice  was
    incompatible with the legislation.  The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    against the Upper Tribunal's decision was dismissed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  Javad  Ahmadi
    [2013] EWCA Civ 512, a decision by which  we  are,  of  course,  bound.
    Given that the section 47 removal decisions were made on the 30  August
    2012 i.e. prior to the changes to section 47, we  conclude  that  those
    decisions were both unlawful for the reasons given in Ahmadi.


Decision


The First-tier Tribunal's determination is set aside.


The appellants' appeals against the decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State
      varying their leave to enter are dismissed on all grounds.


The appellants' appeals  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decisions  to
      remove them pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration and Asylum  2006
      are allowed for the reasons given in paragraph 232 above.


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed: Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor              Date: 4 April 2014
[pic]
