
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08493/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 September 2015                 |On 17 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                           PEDRO CANA MILTON VITA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, instructed by Perera & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant,  a  national  of  Angola,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 2 October
    2014 to refuse his application  for  Discretionary  Leave  in  the  UK.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC dismissed the appeal and the
    appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the appellant claims that he  and
    his brother, who is a year younger than him, were separated from  their
    parents during the conflict in Angola when they  were  very  young.  He
    claims that they spent time in a refugee camp until the end of the  war
    and that they then went to a centre where they  were  mistreated.  They
    lived on the streets for a time before living in another  centre.  They
    left Angola for the UK in May 2010 when the appellant was 13 years  old
    and claimed asylum on 9 May 2010. The appellant claims  that  after  he
    came to the UK he was reunited with his elder sister who had  left  the
    family home in Angola when he was very young. He claimed  that  he  and
    his brother  live  with  their  sister  and  her  three  children.  The
    respondent refused the appellant's application but because of  his  age
    he was granted Discretionary Leave until 22 July 2013  when  he  turned
    seventeen and a  half.  The  appellant  applied  for  an  extension  of
    Discretionary Leave and this application was refused on 2 October 2014.
    At  the  hearing   in   the   First-tier   Tribunal   the   appellant's
    representative conceded that the appeal was only on Article  8  grounds
    and not asylum. By the time of the hearing the appellant had obtained a
    DNA report which concluded that the woman  they  believe  to  be  their
    sister was not in fact a blood relative. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    considered the appeal under Article 8  and  found  that,  although  the
    appellant had developed a private  and  family  life  in  the  UK,  his
    removal would be proportionate.

 3. The appellant himself drafted  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pirotta.
    On renewal of the application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Archer  on  the
    basis that it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  erred
    in failing to refer to the best interests of the appellant  given  that
    he was a child when he applied for  further  leave  to  remain  and  in
    failing to refer to section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 in the context of his finding that the appellant enjoys
    family life in the UK with his blood brother.

 4. At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Plowright  summarised  the  grounds  as
    amounting to a submission that the appellant's Article 8 claim was  not
    adequately assessed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge. In particular  he
    submitted that the Judge failed to analyse the appellant's  account  of
    his background in Angola  and  failed  to  take  this  background  into
    account when considering Article 8. He submitted that  this  background
    is of particular importance given the appellant's  young  age  when  he
    came to the UK. He submitted that the issue is  whether  there  is  any
    support for the appellant in Angola and the  Judge  failed  to  address
    this in the  context  of  the  appellant's  history  and  his  age.  Mr
    Plowright submitted that it is arguable that the appellant may meet the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) of the Immigration Rules  but
    accepted that this was not put to the Judge and accepted  that  if  the
    Judge dealt with Article 8 properly including an assessment of material
    aspects of 276ADE (1) (vi) then any  error  may  not  be  material.  He
    submitted that the appellant's best interests should  have  been  taken
    into account as part and parcel of the assessment. He accepted that  as
    the appellant's brother does not have settled status this  relationship
    may not be a strong factor to  be  considered.  He  accepted  that  the
    Judge's failure to consider section117B is not material as there are no
    factors which have adverse effect.

 5. Mr Clarke relied on the  rule  24  response  dated  23  July  2015.  He
    accepted in the light of Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015]  UKUT  00090  (IAC)
    that the Judge erred but submitted that any error is not  material.  He
    relied on the decision in AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and
    submitted that any error was not material as the factors were  at  best
    neutral in this case. The appellant is not financially independent  and
    he can speak Portuguese, as evidenced by the fact that he gave evidence
    in the First-tier Tribunal through a Portuguese interpreter.  He  noted
    that the grounds are silent in relation to paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (vi)
    but submitted that the test  is  whether  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration in Angola.  He  accepted  that
    paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) is not expressly referred  to  but  submitted
    that the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in paragraph 17
    of the decision are sufficient to address this issue.

Error of Law

 6. In the  Reasons  for  refusal  letter  the  respondent  considered  the
    appellant's application in the context  of  the  Rules,  in  particular
    paragraph 276ADE (1) (v) which applies to applicants  aged  between  18
    and  24.  It  was  concluded  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of that part of paragraph 276ADE and Mr Plowright accepted
    that he cannot. It appears that it was not put to the  Judge  that  the
    appellant could meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (vi)
    being aged 18 at the time of the hearing. However looking at  paragraph
    276ADE it is clear that it applies to the date of application. In  this
    case the appellant made the application on 8 July 2013 when he  was  17
    years old. At that time he was not yet 18 and paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi)
    did not therefore apply. Accordingly the Judge did not err  in  failing
    to consider this provision. In any event I am satisfied that the  Judge
    did consider the prospects of the appellant's integration in Angola  in
    his assessment under Article 8.

 7. The Judge accepted that the appellant has established a private life in
    the UK and that he has a family life with  his  brother.  Mr  Plowright
    said that the appellant's brother, who is a year younger then him,  has
    an application outstanding and does not have settled status in the  UK.
    He made no submission that the  Judge  erred  in  relation  to  how  he
    assessed this relationship. In any  event  there  was  little  evidence
    before the Judge as to  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his brother such as to enable him to make any
    further findings.

 8. Mr Plowright submitted that in considering  proportionality  the  Judge
    failed to consider the appellant's background in Angola and  to  assess
    whether there is any support for the appellant in Angola in the context
    of the appellant's history and his age. The Judge set out the  evidence
    in relation to the appellant's background at  paragraphs  4-11  of  the
    determination. There was  little  evidence  before  the  Judge  of  any
    attempts by the appellant to trace his parents in Angola. The appellant
    accepted in oral evidence that he  had  made  no  enquiries  about  the
    possibility of employment and accommodation in Angola [9]. It is  clear
    that the Judge had all of this  evidence  in  mind  when  reaching  the
    conclusions at paragraphs 16-17. At paragraph 17 the Judge referred  to
    the fact that the appellant speaks Portuguese  and  returns  to  Angola
    with the benefit of the education he has gained in the UK.

 9. Looking at the decision as a whole I am satisfied that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge made a decision which was open to him  on  the  evidence
    and that the made no material error of law in the determination of this
    appeal.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on point of law.


Signed      Date: 16 September 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

