
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08718/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 27 November 2013                           |On 11 December 2013          |
|Decision Prepared 27 November 2013            |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                               Muhammad Shafiq
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P D Norris, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
Lawrence &
     Associates Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born  on  28  July  1977  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Fox who in a determination promulgated on 2 October 2013 dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The basis of  the  appellant's  claim  to  asylum  was  that  he  faced
    persecution in Pakistan because of his membership of  the  MSF  (Muslim
    Student Federation). That group had been in a fight with a group  known
    as the PSF after which the appellant claimed he an FIR had been  lodged
    against him and that he had been accused of murder. He claimed that  he
    had been jailed for a year before being granted bail in October 1998.

3.   The appellant also claimed that he had faced rape charges brought by  a
    Muhammad Aslam on the charge  of  raping  his  daughter  Rahana  in  an
    attempt to blackmail him into marriage.

4.   On release from detention the appellant  said  that  he  had  lived  in
    Pakistan but had travelled backwards and  forwards  to  Pakistan  on  a
    number of occasions before coming to Britain as a student.  He  claimed
    that he would face persecution  now  on  return  as  there  were  still
    outstanding charges against him.  He is married to a Pilipino woman who
    is Christian and lives in the Philippines.

5.   The judge did not set out any detail of the appellant's  claim  in  his
    determination nor indeed did he set out any particular  detail  of  the
    evidence given to him.

6.   His findings in paragraphs 37 onwards did, however,  include  reference
    to documentary evidence which had been placed before him including  two
    FIRs and translations thereof.  In paragraphs 42,  43  and  44  of  the
    determination he gave reasons for his findings stating:-

         "42. I also note that the document relied upon dated 2 January 2013
             encoded as Case No. 193/97 is actually stipulated as 193/98 on
             the Urdu version of the document.  It is  an  unusual  feature
             that  the  translated  document  should  correspond  with  the
             appellant's claim although the original document does not.   I
             consider  the  prevalence  and  ease  with  which   fraudulent
             documents are available in light of this discrepancy (Pakistan
             Country of Origin Report dated 7 December 2012 ("COI  report")
             paragraph 33.01 considered).


         43.  However, notwithstanding this  anomaly  it  is  reasonable  to
             conclude that any arrest warrant for the  appellant  has  been
             issued legitimately.  The appellant's evidence is that  he  is
             actively sought in relation to  murder  and  he  has  had  the
             historic and current benefit of legal representation  and  due
             legal process throughout the proceedings.


         44.  Taking the appellant's claim  at  its  highest  the  appellant
             relies  upon  self-serving  and   uncorroborated   claims   of
             persecution by PSF and Mr  Islam  to  support  his  claim  for
             asylum.  For the reasons stated  above  it  is  reasonable  to
             conclude that the appellant is a fugitive from justice and the
             appellant is able to avail himself of  due  legal  process  to
             answer to any allegations that are brought against  him.   The
             objective material does not  assist  the  appellant  in  these
             circumstances."

7.   In the following paragraph he found that  the  appellant's  immigration
    history damaged his credibility but he did not  make  a  clear  finding
    that he did not find the appellant to be credible.   He  dismissed  the
    appeal.

8.   The grounds of appeal stated that the judge had misdirected himself  in
    paragraph 42 of the determination in considering the  FIRs  as  he  had
    linked the translation of one FIR to the other FIR and vice versa.   It
    was therefore the case that he had erred in  his  comments  that  these
    could not be relied on.

9.   It was also claimed that the judge had placed weight, at  the  hearing,
    on the fact that he believed that the appellant had not stated that his
    wife was a Christian until the hearing when in fact that was not  so  -
    the appellant had stated at interview that his wife  was  a  Christian.
    Finally, it was argued that the judge  was  wrong  to  state  that  any
    arrest warrant had been issued legitimately when the reality  was  that
    the appellant has claimed that the arrest warrants had been politically
    motivated.

10.  Mr Nath accepted  that  there  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination of the judge.  He was correct to  do  so.   I  find  that
    there are material errors of law and I set aside the decision.   It  is
    clear that in paragraph 42 the judge was wrong when he clearly mixed up
    the translations of the FIRs with the original documents and that  from
    that flows his conclusion  in  paragraph  44  that  the  appellant  was
    relying upon uncorroborated claims when, of course,  the appellant  was
    relying on the FIRs to corroborate his claim.  Moreover,  the judge had
    not dealt with the claim by the appellant that the arrest warrants  had
    been issued had not been issues for  any  other  reason  other  than  a
    personal vendetta against him because of his political affiliations and
    because he had slighted the daughter of Mr Muhammad Aslam.

11. For the above reasons I set aside the decision of the First-tier Judge.
    I allow the appeal to the limited extent that it  is  remitted  to  the
    first-tier for a  hearing afresh as  the  requirements  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement paragraph 7.2(a) are met.


12. I would add that this determination of this  appeal,  which  was  dealt
    with in the fast track, does not deal with any clarity with the  issues
    raised by the respondent in the letter of refusal and that  these  will
    need to be considered in some detail at the resumed hearing.

Decision

The determination is set aside and the appeal  is  allowed  to  the  limited
extent that it is remitted to the First-tier for a hearing afresh.

Directions
The appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh at  Taylor  House  on  12  March
2014.  No interpreter is required.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
