

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08465/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 29 November 2016                           |On 7 December 2016           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                  Dawda [J]
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw, instructed by Ison Harrison Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 3 May 2016, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal against the  decision  and  reasons  statement  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond that was issued on 22 March 2016.

 2. Judge Raymond decided the appellant was not a refugee  from  Gambia  or
    otherwise in need of  international  protection.   Judge  Raymond  also
    concluded the appellant did not benefit from the article 8 of the human
    rights convention.

 3. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  two  interrelated  bases.   The
    appellant challenged the judge's credibility findings because they were
    made more than three months after the hearing (which took place  on  19
    November 2015) and because they  did  not  demonstrate  the  judge  had
    engaged in a meaningful way with the evidence and arguments relating to
    the appellant's sexual orientation.

 4. Mr Bradshaw and Mr Richards discussed the Court  of  Appeal's  judgment
    SSHD v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868.   The  following  points  were
    agreed.

 5. At [18] the Court reminds us of some general principles.

        18. Another factor which usually figures prominently  in  a  court's
        consideration of the effect of delay upon  the  safety  of  a  lower
        court's  or  tribunal's  decision  is  that  there  were  issues  of
        credibility for the court or tribunal to consider; and that, in  the
        long passage of time until preparation of the decision, the  court's
        or the tribunal's memory of the often subtle features relevant to an
        assessment of credibility may well have dimmed. ...

 6. The Court approved the rule of thumb used by  the  predecessor  of  the
    Upper Tribunal that usually a three-month "delay  between  hearing  and
    preparation  of  the  determination  will  render  the  assessment   of
    credibility issues unsafe and that such a delay tends to undermine  the
    loser's confidence in the correctness of the decision once  delivered."
    (cf [16] of Sambasiyam v SSHD [2000] Imm AR 281, cited at  [20]  of  RK
    (Algeria)).

 7. Of course, delay is not of itself evidence of legal error.   Delay  may
    result for a wide range of reasons.  Where the delay  does  not  affect
    the assessment of credibility, then delay is unlikely to  be  relevant.
    Even where credibility has to be assessed, it may be  that  a  decision
    has been made in good time but  delay  has  arisen  for  administrative
    reasons.  Again, such delay is unlikely to be relevant.

 8. The issue in this appeal, therefore, is whether the delay  is  relevant
    to the soundness of the  credibility  assessment  undertaken  by  Judge
    Raymond.

 9. It is evident from the end of the decision and reasons  statement  that
    Judge Raymond completed  his  decision  on  20  March  2016.   This  is
    supported by the appeal file, which I have examined for myself.  I  can
    find no evidence on file that the judge made a finding relevant to  the
    appellant's credibility within a reasonable period of time and  I  must
    find that Judge Raymond only made his decision on 20  March  2016.   It
    follows that the Tribunal's administration  took  merely  two  days  to
    promulgate the decision and this was not the reason for the delay.  The
    delay between the hearing and the assessment of  credibility  was  four
    months.

10.  In  her  grant  of  permission,  Judge  Plimmer  makes  a  number   of
    observations about the poor quality of Judge  Raymond's  decision,  the
    most pertinent of which reads, "The summary of the evidence  (preceding
    the second called 'reasons') is littered with comments adverse  to  the
    appellant, and is repetitive and confusing."  I agree.

11.  Having  reviewed  the  decision  and  reasons  statement  and   having
    considered the competing arguments,  I  have  decided  that  there  are
    serious  concerns  that  the  delay  in  the  decision-making   process
    undertaken by Judge Raymond has affected the soundness of his decision.



12. There is a strong possibility that the  passage  of  time  meant  Judge
    Raymond was no longer aware of subtleties in the evidence given by  the
    appellant or the arguments made by counsel on his behalf.  For example,
    there are a number  of  issues  in  the  skeleton  argument,  that  was
    provided to Judge Raymond by  counsel  for  the  appellant,  which  are
    simply not addressed in the  decision  and  reasons  statement.   Those
    arguments  relate  to  the  assessment  of   the   appellant's   sexual
    orientation  and  were  therefore  of  significant  importance  to  the
    appellant's case.  It would appear they have been overlooked.

13. As I announced at the end of the hearing, this is not  a  decision  and
    reasons statement that can survive.  I set it aside for the  reasons  I
    have given and order that the appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  Nothing is preserved from  the  decision
    and reasons statement of Judge Raymond.



Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge Raymond contains an error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision.   No
findings are preserved.



Signed                                       Date
Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal               7 December 2016
