

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08373/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Laganside Courts, Belfast            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 October 2014                            |On 7 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                HAMDI MAHAMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

 Appellant:   Mr McTaggart (of Counsel), instructed by Andrew Russell and
                  Company Solicitors
 Respondent:  Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal originates in a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State  for  the  Home  Department  (the  "Secretary  of  State"),   the
    Respondent herein, dated 02 September 2013, whereby the  claim  of  the
    Appellant, a national  of  Somalia  aged  29  years,  for  asylum,  was
    refused.  The Appellant's claim under Article 8 ECHR was also  refused.
    The  ensuing  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")   was
    dismissed.  Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted mainly on
    the ground that the basis upon which the Judge had decided  to  dismiss
    the asylum appeal was unclear.  Specifically, one could  not  determine
    with clarity from the determination whether the Judge had given  effect
    to the country guidance decision in AMM [2011]  UKUT  00445  (IAC)  or,
    alternatively, had departed from this decision, preferring to  adopt  a
    different approach based on relevant persuasive evidence.

 2. Upon the hearing of the appeal,  it  was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the decision of the  FtT  is  unsustainable  in
    law.    Mr Mills, in  making  this  concession,  acknowledged  what  he
    described as "a complete lack of  reasoning"  in  the  FtT's  decision.
    This relates particularly to the key passages in [15] and [16] thereof.
    I agree that the decision of the FtT suffers from a clear indication of
    the legal touchstone adopted by the Judge in dismissing the appeal.  An
    additional feature of the decision  of  some  concern  is  the  Judge's
    espousal of earlier findings - unspecified and unparticularised - of  a
    differently constituted FtT in the dismissal of the Appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal of her first claim for asylum.

DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 3. I decide and direct as follows:

    (a)  The decision of the FtT is set aside.

    (b)  The case is remitted to a  differently  constituted  FtT  for  the
         purpose of rehearing and remaking the decision.

    (c)  A composite appeal bundle, with index and pagination, to include a
         comprehensive witness statement of the Appellant, will be filed and
         served by the Appellant's solicitors by 31 January 2015 at  latest.



    (d)  The case will be relisted for hearing in  the  FtT  on  the  first
         available date thereafter.

    The current, operative country guidance decision of the Upper  Tribunal
    is now, of course, MOJ and Others [2014] UKUT 442 [IAC].






                                                     [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 30 October 2014
