
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08808/2012
     AA/05329/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 July 2013                                 |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Xiujian Liu (first Respondent)
                        Kevin liu (second Respondent)

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Hussain, Burton & Burton Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondents are citizens of China.  The  first  respondent  is  the
    father of the second respondent.  He was born on 13  March  1984.   The
    second respondent was born in the United Kingdom on 23  February  2010.
    I shall refer to the first respondent as  "the  respondent"  throughout
    this determination.  On 12 April 2011, the decision was made to  refuse
    asylum and to issue directions for the removal of the respondent as  an
    illegal entrant from  the  United  Kingdom.   The  respondent  appealed
    against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  N  P  Dickson)
    which, in a determination dated 19 December 2012, dismissed the appeal
    on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds but allowed the appeal on  Article
    8 ECHR grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,
    to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  dismissal  of  the  asylum/Article   3
    ECHR/humanitarian protection appeals have not been  challenged  by  the
    respondent.  The respondent claims to have been abandoned as a child in
    China and he was brought up in a temple.  The judge [42] did not accept
    the credibility of that account.  The mother of the  second  respondent
    no longer has a relationship with the first respondent or the child and
    the first respondent has been the sole parent of the second  respondent
    who has a number of medical problems, including a cleft lip and  palate
    and ongoing speech and language difficulties.  He also  has  a  problem
    with an index finger which may require surgery.

 2. At [59] the judge wrote:

    I have carefully read the decision of ZC (Risk - illegal exit -  loan
    sharks) China CG [2009] UKAIT 00028.  While the head note does refer to
    unsuccessful asylum seekers being unlikely to be imprisoned having left
    China unlawfully, paragraph 24 of the determination refers to  the  New
    York Times' report as to the doubt of what happened to  those  who  are
    repatriated to China in part because there have been so few.  Paragraph
    41 would suggest that at worst an appellant would have a short term  of
    imprisonment and it was most likely that a fine would be  imposed.   In
    ZC the children in that case were fast approaching their 18th birthdays
    and there were relatives who could look after the children if either of
    the appellants were imprisoned.   I  have  previously  found  that  the
    appellant has not given a credible account of  his  history  in  China.
    There may or may not be relatives who would be able  to  care  for  the
    second appellant if the first appellant  suffered  a  short  period  of
    imprisonment.  In view of the child's age it would be quite wrong if he
    were abandoned in China in those circumstances.  Accordingly I  am  not
    satisfied that it  would  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  second
    appellant to be returned to China in view of the current situation.

 3. I consider that that paragraph reveals some difficulties in the judge's
    approach to the facts of this appeal and  his  application  of  country
    guidance.  The headnote of ZC, to  which  the  judge  refers,  actually
    reads as follows:
       (1) Individuals returning to China after having made unsuccessful
      claims for asylum are not reasonably likely to be imprisoned or
      subjected to administrative detention for having left China
      unlawfully; LJ (China - Prison Conditions) China [2005] UKIAT 00099
      upheld. Those able to provide the authorities with information on loan
      sharks or snake heads are even less likely to be at risk of
      prosecution.
      (2) The evidence does not establish that failed asylum seekers
      indebted to loan sharks will come to harm on return to China; the
      information on loan sharks in HL (Risk - Return - Snakeheads) China CG
      [2002] UKIAT 03683 is still applicable.




 4. This headnote contains the country guidance of the  Senior  Immigration
    Judge.  Rather than follow that guidance, the judge has instead found a
    passage in the determination where the Tribunal discusses the evidence,
    including that from the New York Times:
      On 11 June 2006 the New York Times reported:
      "There is some dispute about what happens to those who are repatriated
      to China, in part because there have been so few... A Department of
      Homeland Security spokesman told me, 'We have no reports of people who
      have been sent back to China being persecuted.' Others, though, are
      not so sanguine. Two years ago, Richard Posner, a judge on the U.S.
      Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, vacated a deportation order
      for a Chinese youth because the immigration judge did not consider the
      evidence - numerous human rights reports from both U.S. and British
      organizations - that the asylum seeker might well be sent to jail or a
      labor camp if returned to China. Posner was concerned that the Chinese
      youth might be tortured upon his return, though he also conceded that
      'the treatment of repatriated Chinese by their government is to a
      considerable extent a mystery.' Indeed, one Chinese legal scholar I
      spoke with, Daniel Yu, said that while there is a law on the books in
      China that calls for a short jail sentence if a person leaves the
      country illegally, more than likely whatever punishment there might be
      is at the discretion of local officials." (35.05, cited in COIR)




 5. Curiously, the judge  then  reminds  himself  that  he  has  found  the
    respondent not to have given a  credible  account  of  his  history  in
    China.  I say this is curious because he then immediately  goes  on  to
    give at least some credence to the respondent's assertion that  he  has
    no relatives in China who would assist him, in particular in caring for
    the second respondent if he and the child  were  to  be  separated.   I
    agree with the Secretary of State that this portrays  an  inconsistency
    of approach on the part of the judge.  The burden of proof was upon the
    respondents to prove material facts  which  would  indicate  that  they
    faced a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment upon return to China.
     The respondents had not proved that they did  not  have  relatives  or
    others in China who would assist them.  Further, I find the  judge  has
    assessed the risk of the respondent being  imprisoned  upon  return  to
    China at a much higher level than the country guidance  would  indicate
    was likely.  Moreover, the judge has  then,  in  the  space  of  a  few
    sentences, moved from acknowledging the country  guidance  to  allowing
    the appeal on the basis that the respondent would be imprisoned and the
    second respondent would, as a consequence, be abandoned on the streets.
     I find that there was simply no basis for  reaching  that  conclusion.
    There was nothing in the evidence before the judge which would indicate
    that the Chinese authorities would allow the  very  young  child  of  a
    prisoner to be completely abandoned.  In any event, as  I  have  noted,
    the respondents had failed to show that  third  parties  would  not  be
    available to care for the child.  In the circumstances, I find that the
    judge's reasoning is flawed to the extent that the determination should
    be set aside and the decision remade.

 6. Even if I am wrong in that finding, I find that the judge also erred in
    his assessment at [60]:

    I have also taken into account the medical evidence.  It is likely  the
    second appellant's index finger will be repaired within  the  immediate
    future.  His cleft lip and palate have been  repaired  and  the  wounds
    following the operation have healed.  It is not clear who  was  present
    at the interview with Mr Neil-Dwyer or whether an interpreter was  used
    [Mr Neil-Dwyer is a consultant plastic surgeon at Nottingham Children's
    Hospital].  I have no  detailed  information  concerning  the  previous
    hearing tests and the abnormalities.  However it is intended that  over
    the next year the speech and language therapy team  of  the  Nottingham
    Children's Hospital will see the appellant regularly in order to assess
    his further language and speech production.  Again it would not  be  in
    the second appellant's best interests to  be  removed  from  the  first
    appellant while these tests are ongoing and before any  conclusion  can
    been reached.  It also follows in my view  that  the  second  appellant
    should not be separated from his father, the first appellant.

 7. The judge has not considered  at  all  the  availability  in  China  of
    treatment for the second respondent's health problems.  He  appears  to
    assume that the treatment  can  only  be  carried  out  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I find that there is no basis  for  the  judge  allowing  the
    appeal on that basis.

 8. I did not find that it is necessary  to  receive  further  evidence  in
    order to remake the decision in this appeal.  I adopt  the  finding  of
    Judge Dickson in relation to the respondent's credibility which I  find
    has not been vitiated by any error of law.  I find that the  respondent
    has failed to discharge the burden of proving that  he  does  not  have
    family or friends in China who would help him and the second respondent
    on their return to that country.  Following the clear country  guidance
    of ZC, I find that it is not  reasonably  likely  that  the  respondent
    would be imprisoned upon his  return.   He  would  not,  therefore,  be
    separated from his son.  Even  if  the  first  respondent  were  to  be
    imprisoned, I find the respondents have  failed  to  prove  the  second
    respondent would be, in effect, abandoned  during  the  period  of  any
    imprisonment.  I also find that the respondents have  failed  to  prove
    that the second respondent's medical problems could not be  treated  in
    China.  Such background evidence as there is  in  the  Tribunal's  file
    indicates that China has a fully functioning medical system and I  have
    no reason to suppose  that  language  development  problems  cannot  be
    treated within it.

 9. As regards Article 8 ECHR,  I  find  that  the  family  life  of  these
    respondents will not suffer interference because they will  be  removed
    together to China.  As far as the second  respondent  is  concerned,  I
    acknowledge  that  he  will  suffer  some  disruption  in  his  medical
    treatment.  I have little, if any, other evidence of  the  strength  of
    the private life ties which the first respondent may have in the United
    Kingdom; the second respondent's private life is, in the light  of  his
    youth, consists to a very great of being with his father.  Set  against
    the possible interference caused to the respondents by their removal to
    China, there is the public interest concerned with their removal.   The
    first respondent is a failed asylum seeker.  I  find  that  the  public
    interest concerned with his removal to his  country  of  origin  was  a
    strong one.  I find that the removal of both respondents to China would
    be proportionate in all  the  circumstances.   As  a  consequence,  the
    Article 8 ECHR appeals are dismissed.

DECISION

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal dated 19 December 2012  is
    set aside.  I have remade the decision.  These appeals are dismissed on
    asylum grounds.  These appeals are dismissed on human  rights  grounds.
    Neither respondent is entitled to a grant of  humanitarian  protection.








Signed                              Date 10 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
