
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08343/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field house                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th August 2015                  |On 8th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                             mr Wahidullah khan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Pal - Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Wahidullah Khan a citizen of Afghanistan born  1st
    January 1995.

 2. He appeals against the decision of the Respondent made on  1st  October
    2014 to refuse to grant asylum  and  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant appealed against that decision and  his  appeal
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana on 9th  January  2015.
    Permission was granted to appeal against that determination and on 24th
    March 2015 having heard submissions I found that there was  a  material
    error of law in the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana
    and I set his decision aside with no preserved findings of fact.

 3. I now proceed to remake the decision.

 4. The main ground seeking permission to appeal against the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana was that he erred  in  ignoring  the
    central submission put forward at  the  hearing  that  the  Appellant's
    brother's case had recently been actively reviewed  by  the  Respondent
    and his brother had been  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  (ILR)
    having been granted refugee status in 2007.  It seemed to me, and I  so
    found, that it was arguably a material error of law for Judge Chana  to
    fail to take any account whatsoever of this.

 5. The Appellant claims that his father was a member of Hizb-i Islami (HI)
    and that as a result of this his  family  home  was  attacked  and  his
    mother was harassed by the local police.  Apparently  the  police  were
    looking for his father.  His brother  left  Afghanistan  for  the  same
    reasons and gave the same reasons for his fear of persecution on return
    to Afghanistan.  His claim was dismissed by the Home Office but allowed
    on appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant claims to fear the
    people who were coming to the family home asking  questions  about  his
    father.

 6. I have a statement from the Appellant prepared on 6th August 2014.   He
    states the following.

 7. He arrived in the UK on 26th August 2011 and claimed  asylum.   He  was
    placed in foster care.  His asylum application was refused but  he  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain (DLR) until 1st  July  2012.   He
    moved to live with his elder brother  in  Maidstone  but  continued  to
    receive support from Social Services.  He had provided a  statement  to
    the Home Office refuting the reasons for refusal given in their initial
    refusal letter but noted that the second refusal letter referred to the
    contents of the first refusal letter which he felt was unfair.  He  had
    also given the Home Office details of  his  brother,  Safigoulla  Khan.
    This was never mentioned by the Home Office.  He and his  brother  came
    from  the  same  family  and  they  provided  details  of  the   family
    background.  They gave similar  accounts.   His  brother's  appeal  was
    allowed.  He was found to be credible.  He does not understand why,  if
    his brother's claim was allowed, the Home Office can take the view that
    it would be safe for him to return to Afghanistan.

 8. He has had no contact with his mother since he arrived  in  the  UK  or
    with the rest of his family.  He does not know whether they  are  alive
    or where they are.  He has had no assistance from the  Home  Office  in
    looking for his family.  He only has his elder brother and  his  foster
    parents.  When he was in the care of his foster  parents  they  treated
    him like their own.  He is still in touch with them.

 9. He has health problems.  He suffers severe  headaches  and  depression.
    He has nightmares and flashbacks of the attacks on their home.  He  has
    been told that he is  exhibiting  symptoms  of  Post  Traumatic  Stress
    Disorder (PTSD).

10. He has made friends.  He has a mentor called David Clifford  who  takes
    care of him and has taught him lots of things.  He relies on him a lot.
     David encouraged him to get proper therapy for his depression.

11. He would be harmed by his father's  enemies  if  he  were  returned  to
    Afghanistan.  Social Services helped him approach the British Red Cross
    to look for his family.  They have not done anything because  they  are
    too busy.  He is waiting for an appointment.

12. In a statement dated 14th August 2012, he said that he was  very  young
    when the police officers would come to his home asking questions  about
    his father and does not  really  recall  much  of  what  happened.   He
    remembers that his mother was very upset  and  was  crying  when  these
    people came.  She explained that they had to leave their  home  because
    of visits from the police and it was then that his elder  brother  fled
    Afghanistan and came to the UK.  His mother took him  and  his  younger
    brother and sister to Peshawar. She sold land to get him the  money  to
    come to the UK.

13. In a statement dated 25th November 2011 the Appellant said he  has  one
    sister  and two brothers including the one in the UK.  He said that one
    night in June 2011 his mother told him that he had to go with a man who
    would take him from Afghanistan.  His mother  had  moved  them  all  to
    Pakistan because the Government Police kept asking about his father and
    harassing them.  He was unable to remember when they went  to  Pakistan
    but said they lived in  Peshawar  for  about  five  years.   They  then
    returned to Afghanistan because they felt that Pakistan was  not  safe.
    They had some trouble with the police because  they  had  no  ID.   The
    attacks on the house started about six  days  after  they  returned  to
    Afghanistan.  The house was  burnt  down.   He  said  that  during  the
    attacks on his house he was very scared.  One night as  they  ran  away
    they heard the sound of shots being fired.  Vehicles had approached the
    house.  His mother said she did not know who the people attacking  them
    were.  The attacks would happen at night.  Either they would  be  woken
    up by the sound of vehicles or their mother would wake them  up.   They
    would then run away.  The house was destroyed during the  last  attack.
    It was burnt down.  They were attacked every two or three nights.  They
    went to their uncle's.  He knew that his brother was in  the  UK.   His
    mother had given him his phone number.  When he has to talk about  what
    happened he feels unwell and sad.  He does not know  where  his  mother
    and siblings are.  He does have an uncle and gave details of  the  area
    in which he lives.

14. I have a statement from the Appellant's brother dated 8th August  2014.
    He states that his whole family was  targeted  and  persecuted  by  his
    father's enemies on account of being a commander  with  Hizb-i  Islami.
    He fled Afghanistan and claimed asylum in the UK in 2008.  They were in
    Pakistan for five years and then his brother came to the UK.    He  has
    had no contact with his family recently.  He did have contact  when  he
    first arrived here but lost contact.  It would not be possible for  his
    brother to relocate within Afghanistan and in any  event  they  do  not
    know where the rest of their family is and  he  would  have  no  family
    support or protection.  The family home has been destroyed.  The  Judge
    who heard his appeal accepted his account.

15. I also have a statement from David Clifford dated 12th August 2014.  He
    states that he met the Appellant in February 2013 when  he  volunteered
    as a "mentor" with Kent  Refugee  Action  Network  and  the  Supporting
    Vulnerable Refugee Youth Project.  He sees the Appellant at least  once
    a week for around 90 minutes.  The Appellant has met many of his family
    and he was invited to spend Christmas with them in 2013 but was  unable
    to make it.  They are friends.   He  believes  that  the  Appellant  is
    genuinely very afraid of what would happen to him if he had  to  return
    to Afghanistan although the Appellant has never actually spoken to  him
    about it.  He describes the Appellant as "a very gentle, sensitive  and
    likeable young man".  He is making good progress with  English  and  is
    very keen to find a job.  He has applied for a  Prince's  Trust  Course
    and gaining work experience in a local charity shop.   He  states  that
    the Appellant's mental health difficulties are very apparent to  anyone
    who spends any time with him.  His mood is frequently very low  and  he
    suffers  from  severe  anxiety.   He  can  be  very  agitated.   He  is
    frequently tired as a result  of  nightmares  and  sleeplessness.   His
    memory is very poor.  He forgets appointments for  example.   He  lives
    with his brother on whom he believes he  is  very  dependent  for  both
    emotional and practical support.  He says the Appellant is not  in  his
    opinion a particularly mature person for his age and it would  be  hard
    for him to live alone without any support.  He said  that  one  of  the
    reasons the Appellant has not  been  receiving  ongoing  help  for  his
    psychiatric issues is that following his initial PTSD diagnosis he  had
    some sessions of therapy but then turned 18 and relocated  to  Kent  at
    the same time.  Since then his mental health issues have  been  treated
    only  by  his  GP  who  he  believes  had  recently  referred  him  for
    psychotherapy sessions.

16. There  is  also  a  statement  from  Steve  and  Trudy  Hutchings,  the
    Appellant's former foster carers.  They state that the Appellant  spent
    his first week with them crying and was very withdrawn.  He was  having
    nightmares.  The other children in their care had  heard  him  shouting
    out.  He spoke very little English and it was hard to get  the  correct
    interpreter to be able to understand him.  He was very  keen  to  learn
    and started to go to a  centre  where  he  was  learning  English.   He
    suffered from bad headaches and stomach pains.  On  one  occasion  they
    mentioned the police to him and he went pale.  He told them later  that
    the police in his village would often beat him up and take things  from
    him.  They describe things that he likes to  do.   They  have  kept  in
    touch with him since he went to live with his brother.  They say it was
    obvious from the start that the Appellant was suffering from some  sort
    of trauma and he did not act like other children of his age.  He  would
    become withdrawn and sit with his head in his hands.  They believe that
    he got  a  lot  of  comfort  from  his  religion.   They  describe  the
    difficulties getting him help for his psychological  difficulties.   He
    left their care on 8th June 2012.  They provided  some  photographs  of
    the Appellant some taken on Christmas Day and at Halloween.

17. There is a statement dated 28th July 2014 from Tina  Baker,  a  Leaving
    Care Personal Advisor with North Somerset Council. She  says  that  the
    Appellant has engaged well with David Clifford and that he talks to his
    former foster carers frequently.  He misses them.  He is trying hard to
    build a life for himself in the UK and regards  it  as  home.   He  has
    completed his level 1 in an ESOL course to improve his English  and  is
    keen to move on with level 2.  He wants to work.   He  is  making  real
    efforts to integrate into the community.

18. Ana Garcia, a Consultant Recruitment Social Worker with North  Somerset
    Council says that the Appellant was clear that he wanted to go to  live
    with his brother but he misses his foster carers and   it  took  him  a
    while to adjust.  She describes him as polite and respectful.  She says
    that returning him to Afghanistan would  have  a  severely  detrimental
    impact on him.

19. There is a letter from the Appellant's GP dated 18th July  2014  saying
    that the Appellant was diagnosed in February 2012  with  PTSD.  He  has
    been prescribed fluoxetine.  He  had  recently  been  referred  to  the
    Psychology Service to help his PTSD.

20. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant.

21. At the start of the hearing I asked Miss Pal if she had any comments to
    make about the fact that the Appellant's brother  was  granted  ILR  at
    around the same time the Appellant was being refused asylum.  She  said
    that the Home Office  does not normally do  an  actual  active  review.
    His brother made an application by letter for ILR.  The application was
    considered and granted.  I expressed the opinion  at  that  point  that
    that did not explain why he was granted ILR and it seemed to me  to  be
    reasonable to suppose that someone must have considered all  the  facts
    in the round decided that there would still be a risk to him on  return
    and internal relocation would not be possible.  She said that that  was
    probably not the case.

22. The Appellant adopted his statement made in December 2014.

23. In cross-examination he confirmed that he has had no contact  with  his
    mother and that his brother is trying to contact  their  parents.   The
    Red Cross had said that they would  put  photographs  of  him  and  his
    brother on their website and perhaps their parents could  be  contacted
    that way but on the day they had an appointment with the Red  Cross  no
    interpreter was available and  they  were  told  that  any  action  was
    limited by their failure to get instructions.

24. He said he was having psychotherapy sessions but these had stopped  and
    he is now only seeing his GP.

25. The Appellant's brother adopted his  statement.   I  asked  him  if  he
    thought his brother would be able  to  cope  on  his  own  if  he  were
    returned to Afghanistan.  He said he could not even if he were able  to
    find somewhere to  live.   He  said  his  brother  is  very  upset  and
    depressed about the loss of his family.  He is dealing with  everything
    that has happened to him in his head.  He gets very upset when  he  has
    to talk about Afghanistan.  He is withdrawn and has  a  poor  appetite.
    He doubts whether his brother could cope without him.  There  would  be
    no social support for  him  in  Afghanistan.   He  just  wants  to  put
    everything that happened  in  Afghanistan  behind  him.   He  said  his
    brother's psychotherapy  sessions  have  all  been  completed.   Social
    Services are trying to arrange more.  He has not had contact  with  his
    mother since she left Pakistan.

26. David Clifford adopted the two letters that are in the bundle.  He said
    he and the Appellant are friends.  The Appellant  is  a  very  truthful
    individual.  He does not even tell small lies.  He is shy and  he  will
    not speak out.  He is constantly agitated.  He said the  Appellant  had
    been taken to hospital a couple of  months  ago  with  suspected  heart
    problems but in fact he had had a panic attack.  The anxiety  ebbs  and
    flows and he gets particularly anxious around the time that  a  hearing
    in court is due.  He believes him to be terrified  at  the  thought  of
    having to go back to Afghanistan.  He is taking beta blockers for panic
    attacks and depression.

27. In her submissions Miss Pal said she would  rely  on  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter in particular the comment that it is unlikely  that  the
    Appellant's mother would not be questioned by the police  or  that  she
    would have moved the  family  to  Pakistan  then  back  to  Afghanistan
    without male help.  It is not accepted that the Appellant would  be  at
    real risk because of imputed political opinion.   He  came  to  the  UK
    knowing that his brother was here and moved in with him.  She submitted
    that he is an economic migrant.  He needs  to  show  that  there  is  a
    causal link between his PTSD and events in Afghanistan.  His  brother's
    claim does not assist his.  It is irrelevant.  Paragraph 276ADE(vi) has
    no significance because  there  are  no  obstacles  to  integration  in
    Afghanistan.

28. In his submissions Mr Jafar relied on the fact  that  the  Home  Office
    made no mention at all of his brother's case in the refusal letter.  He
    relied in his submissions on an unreported Upper Tribunal decision JA v
    SSHD, in particular relying on paragraphs discussing the  current  case
    law on Afghanistan and the conditions there.  There was reference to RQ
    (Afghan National Army - Hezbi-e Islami - risk)  Afghanistan  CG  [2008]
    UKAIT 00013 in which it was  held  that  unless  there  are  particular
    reasons it would not be unduly harsh to expect  an  Appellant  with  no
    individual risk factors to relocate to Kabul.  The decision was made on
    11th June 2013 and Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein said that the picture
    that is painted is one where even today the Afghan authorities continue
    to perceive supporters and members of Hizb-i-Islami as  acting  against
    the Government and a threat  to  the  Government's  authority  and  the
    country's security.

29. I have taken account of the paragraphs of that decision relied on by Mr
    Jafar.  He also relied on an expert report  provided  by  Jawad  Hassan
    Zadeh who said that the Appellant would have to live in an inn  because
    he is a single person and the standard of these places is  squalid  and
    unhygienic.  They are essentially mud houses.  If he  has  to  live  in
    such a place it will destroy his slim chance of work.  He says that  if
    the Appellant's past comes to light he is likely to  be  imprisoned  on
    suspicion of aiding and abetting Hizb-i-Islami.

30. The most recent medical report that I have is from Dr Elinor Bradley, a
    specialist doctor with the Maidstone Community Mental Health Team.  She
    saw the Appellant on 4th December  2014.   It  is  not  a  particularly
    illuminating report.  I will set out the last paragraph verbatim:

         "On mental state examination he is well kempt  man  who  was  quite
         engaging.  His speech was difficult to assess as this  was  through
         an interpreter but  it  appeared  fluent  with  mood  euthymic  and
         reactive.   He  described  interrupted  sleep  and  flashbacks  and
         reduced  appetite.   There  were  no  other  somatic  or  cognitive
         symptoms of depression.  There were no  thoughts  of  self-harm  or
         harm to others.  With regards to thought he described flashbacks as
         intrusive images and thoughts of his  own  making  which  made  him
         anxious.  He was concerned about returning to Afghanistan for  fear
         of his life.  There  were  no  delusions  apparent.   He  described
         perceptual abnormalities: a poorly formed internally derived  voice
         which did not cause him distress and did not have the feel of  true
         hallucinations.  His cognition was not assessed.  Insight was  also
         difficult to assess today."

31. She set out a care plan which says that he  should  continue  with  his
    medication increasing the  dose  of  fluoxetine  by  twenty  mgs.   She
    confirms a current diagnosis of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder and says
    he may benefit from talking therapy.

Burden and Standard of Proof

32. The burden is on the Appellant to show with regard to the asylum appeal
    that returning him would expose him  to  a  real  risk  of  an  act  of
    persecution for reasons set out in  Regulation  6  of  The  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006.  With regard to Humanitarian Protection he  would  have  to  show
    substantial grounds for believing that he would face  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm as defined by paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules  or
    face a real risk of a breach of his protected human rights.

My Findings

33. I have given careful consideration to all the evidence put before me in
    this case.

34. The Secretary of State  does  not  accept  the  account  given  by  the
    Appellant and her position is that even if the account  were  true  the
    Appellant could relocate to a different area of Afghanistan.

35. I have taken into account all of the background information relied upon
    and the expert report.  There is a lot of evidence before me  that  the
    Appellant has suffered considerable anxiety and depression.   Miss  Pal
    said that the Appellant has to establish a causal  link  between  those
    symptoms and what happened to him in Afghanistan.  It seems to me  that
    that causal link has  been  established.   Everyone  who  has  provided
    evidence including Mr Clifford and the Appellant's former foster carers
    whose statement I indeed found very helpful have  confirmed  this.   He
    does not like to talk about Afghanistan. He bases his fears  of  return
    on what happened there and it is  these  fears  that  are  causing  his
    distress and anxiety. I make the following findings bearing in mind the
    medical evidence before me.

36. I do not attach any weight to  the  submissions  of  Ms  Pal  that  the
    authorities in Afghanistan would have questioned the Appellant's mother
    and that she would not have been able to get to  Pakistan  on  her  own
    with her children. This has  not  been  established.   The  Appellant's
    account has been consistent.  Given the low  standard  of  proof  I  am
    prepared to accept it.  Having said that he has been in the UK for four
    years and has  never  actively  supported  Hizb-i-Islami.  I  therefore
    accept that he may be at risk in  his  home  area  but  I  do  question
    whether he would be of any interest elsewhere in Afghanistan.  He would
    of course have to register wherever he decides to live. I  accept  that
    some efforts have been made to find his family. The question is whether
    it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to  have  to  relocate   within
    Afghanistan.

37. The Appellant was only 16 years old when he came  to  the  UK  and  his
    foster carers have said how difficult it was for him. I accept that  he
    can be said to be a young man who has had the benefit of  an  education
    in the UK. He is physically healthy. I accept that he would only be one
    of many in Afghanistan suffering from psychological problems, given the
    state of war that has been ongoing and the vast number  of  lives  lost
    and I accept that some treatment  would  be  available.  I  accept  the
    evidence of the expert of  the  practical  difficulties  the  Appellant
    would face in obtaining accommodation and work. He has never worked and
    would have no support from family. I accept  that  he  depends  on  his
    brother a great deal and that prior to living with his brother was with
    foster carers who apparently gave him excellent  care  and  support.  I
    accept and give weight to the fact that he has a family life  with  his
    brother,   as his brother is the only family he currently has.  He  has
    had  little  experience  in  living  on  his  own,  supporting  himself
    financially or looking for work. He has been described as immature  and
    accepts that he is vulnerable.  The evidence is that he is making every
    effort to build up a life in the UK with his brother.

38. The current reports  on  Afghanistan  say  that  there  were  increased
    numbers of civilian casualties in Afghanistan  in  the  first  half  of
    2014.  There is reference to more  civilians  having  been  killed  and
    injured in ground engagements  and  crossfire  between  anti-government
    elements and Afghan national security forces.  The  majority  of  these
    incidents involved improvised explosive devices.   A  17%  increase  in
    civilian deaths and 28% increase in injuries were recorded.   A  report
    in May 2014 by the International Crisis Group  refers  to  the  overall
    trend being one of escalating violence and  insurgent  attacks.   Given
    the Appellant's previous experiences and the way they have affected him
    I accept that it would not be easy for him to  deal  with  the  current
    situation on the ground in Afghanistan and  that  it  would  inevitably
    exacerbate his anxiety.

39.  I turn now to the issue of his brother's status  in  the  UK.  Ms  Pal
    submitted that it is quite irrelevant to the Appellant's case.  I  have
    considered the comments in Ocampo [2006] EWCA Civ 1277 and TK (Georgia)
    [2004] AIT 00149 which are not strictly applicable  as the decisions in
    this case were made not by a Judge but by the Respondent.  A  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal did however  allow  the  Appellant's  brother's
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent so  Devaseelan  has  some
    applicability.  I must accept that one Home Office caseworker may  make
    a different decision to another on the same set of facts and one  Judge
    a decision different to another Judge. I accept that in this  case  the
    view of the Respondent may have been  that  the  general  situation  in
    Afghanistan, including the attitude of the authorities to those imputed
    to be supporters of Hizb-i-Islami has improved  since  the  Appellant's
    brother's appeal was allowed such that a grant of refugee status to the
    Appellant was not justified. Ms Pal conceded that there would have been
    no 'active review' of the Appellant's brother's  refugee  status  which
    arguably is not what is envisaged by the 1951 Refugee Convention. I  go
    only so far as to say that for a young man like the Appellant   it  was
    reasonable   to assume that since the Home Office had on the face of it
    decided that it was not safe or reasonable for his  brother  to  return
    to Afghanistan, it would be equally unsafe and unreasonable for him  to
    do so. It is disappointing that no connection was  apparently  made  by
    the Respondent between the two cases.

40. Having considered all the circumstances in the  round  and  bearing  in
    mind the guidance set out in Januzi v. Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department & Ors [2006] UKHL 5 I find that it would be unduly harsh  to
    expect the Appellant to return to Afghanistan and  relocate  away  from
    his home area where he would face a real risk of persecution on account
    of his imputed political opinion.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 2nd October 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 2nd October 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird
