
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08157/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8 April 2015                      |On 21 April 2015                     |
|Prepared on 14 April 2015            |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                     AD
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bonavero, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Albania  who  entered  the  United
         Kingdom illegally on 28 March 2014. She applied on 7 April 2014 for
         a grant of leave to remain on the basis that  she  was  a  refugee.
         That application was refused on 1 October 2014, and in  consequence
         a removal decision was made in relation to her.

      2. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal  against  those  immigration
         decisions and her appeal was heard on 19 November 2014, and allowed
         by decision of Judge Bircher, promulgated on 12 January 2015.

      3. The  Respondent's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, as drafted, raised two complaints;  (i)  that
         whilst the Judge did have regard to the guidance to be found in  AM
         & BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80, she  had  failed
         to adequately address why her  own  circumstances  meant  that  she
         would be risk upon return, and, (ii) that the Judge failed to  give
         adequate reasons for the finding that the Appellant  suffered  poor
         mental health.

      4. That application was granted by Judge Plumptre on 2 February  2015.
         The Appellant filed no Rule 24 Notice. Neither party  has  formally
         applied for permission to rely upon further  evidence  pursuant  to
         Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008.

      5. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Ground 1

      6. It is accepted by Ms Rackstraw that the  Judge  did  make  specific
         reference to the guidance to be  found  in  AM  &  BM.  Indeed  the
         headnote is set out in the decision in full. It  is  accepted  that
         the Respondent makes no challenge to the findings of  primary  fact
         made  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's   age,   upbringing,   and
         experiences. Thus the argument boils down to the assertion  that  a
         woman of her profile, in the light of that guidance, faces no  risk
         upon return. As both Ms Rackstraw, and the draftsman of the grounds
         accept, that is not the way in which the Upper Tribunal offered its
         guidance; no checklist of factors was offered without  which  there
         would be no risk. Ground 1 is in truth no more than a  disagreement
         with the Judge's conclusion. Whilst another judge  might  not  have
         reached the same conclusion upon the same evidence, that is not the
         test for an error of law.

    Ground 2

      7. The second ground is cast in terms of a criticism of  the  adequacy
         of the reasons offered for the finding that the Appellant's  mental
         health has been affected by her experiences. The  Judge's  approach
         to this was however in my judgement quite simple.  Having  accepted
         that the Appellant's experiences had been as claimed, she  accepted
         (as she  was  perfectly  entitled  to  do)  that  it  was  entirely
         plausible that those experiences would have a negative effect  upon
         her mental health. Not  only  is  there  nothing  wrong  with  that
         reasoning, but it is perfectly clearly set out in the decision;  MK
         (Duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  641.  It  is  moreover
         quite clear that the Judge was not purporting to  go  further,  and
         make  any  specific  finding  of  any  particular   mental   health
         condition.



DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    12 January 2015 contains no error of law in the decision to  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside  and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.


Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 14 April 2015



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 14 April 2015

