
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08118/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2016                   |On 12 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     MB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Kirk - Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
Greenwood
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton & Mr S Whitwell - Senior Presenting
Officers

Anonymity

I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant  to
Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Unless  the
Upper Tribunal or other appropriate Court or Tribunal orders  otherwise,  no
report of any proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall  directly
or indirectly identify the Appellant.  This prohibition applies to,  amongst
others, all parties and their representatives.

                                  DECISION



Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who entered the  United  Kingdom  in
    2013 and claimed asylum on the day of his arrival.  His application was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 11 May 2015 and,  on
    the same date, a decision was made to remove  the  appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  ("FtT").  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wyman heard that appeal on 7 October 2015 and  dismissed
    it on all grounds in a decision promulgated on 29 October 2015.

 3. Subsequently, First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 24 November 2015.

Setting aside FtT's Decision

 4. At a hearing on 25 January 2016 I concluded  that  the  FtT's  decision
    contained an error of law capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal and set  that  decision  aside,  for  the  reasons  attached  at
    Appendix 1 hereto.  I directed that the decision under  appeal  be  re-
    made by the Upper Tribunal.

Re-making of Decision

The Claim

 5. The FtT summarised the appellant's claim thus:

        "11.  The appellant's case as set out  in  his  screening  interview
             dated 5 July 2013, his substantive  interview  dated  6  March
             2015 and his  witness  statement  dated  5  October  2015,  in
             essence is as follows.

         12.  The appellant states that he fears persecution if returned  to
             Iran from the Iranian Government.  This is because he  refused
             to carry out orders during  his  military  service,  following
             which he was detained and tortured.  Furthermore, since coming
             to the United Kingdom he has converted to Christianity.

         13.  The appellant explains that he started his military service on
             8 January 2009.  After his initial basic training, he was sent
             to Kermanshah and performed the role of a  guard.   Kermanshah
             is on the border between Iran and Iraq.  The appellant was  on
             guard duty and was told that if he saw any people  coming,  he
             had to inform his commander, Jalal Narimani.  The  application
             explained  that  in  May  2010,  he  saw  a  group  of  people
             approaching, from the other side of the border.   He  believed
             they were civilians as the group included women and  children.
             However, his commander believed that the group were members of
             the PAJK Party.  The commander ordered the appellant  to  fire
             at them.  The appellant explained he could not do so as  there
             were women and children amongst the group.

         14.  The commander then contacted the military police who  came  to
             take him to prison, as he had disobeyed the orders.

         15.  The appellant was taken initially to Sar Pol E  Zahab  and  he
             was then transferred to  Tehran.   He  was  charged  with  co-
             operating with PJAK Party.

         16.  The appellant was detained for five-six months.  Initially  he
             was taken to the Military Court but then he was taken  to  the
             Revolutionary Court which deals with more serious crimes  such
             as crimes against national security.

         17.  The appellant explained that he was given seven days'  release
             from prison as his mother was unwell.  As a surety, his family
             had to lodge a property deed with the court.  He was  informed
             that if he failed to return to prison after  seven  days,  the
             property would be confiscated.

         18.  During this time in prison, the appellant stated that  he  was
             tortured by being beaten, punched and kicked.  They also  used
             batons and cables.

         19.  Following his 7 day  release  on  compassionate  grounds,  the
             appellant's father found an agent called Fatah.  He  paid  the
             agent 13,000 dollars.  He was taken  initially  to  Ouromiyea.
             He was then taken to a village on the border  of  Iran/Turkey.
             He then spent time in Turkey and Greece, remaining  in  Greece
             for approximately eighteen months.  It was in Greece that  the
             appellant started to attend church, but  he  did  not  convert
             until he came to the United Kingdom.  He came  to  the  United
             Kingdom in June 2013.

         20.  The appellant explained that the property previously owned  by
             his father has now been confiscated.  His  parents  have  also
             received three summonses from the authorities: the  first  two
             summonses were received within one month.  The  third  summons
             was issued 40  days  after  the  second  summons.   The  third
             summons stated that he would be arrested by  the  authorities,
             whenever he is found.

         21.  Furthermore his father's home has been  raided  more  than  30
             times by the authorities,  looking  for  him.   Sometimes  the
             police would arrest his father for questioning.  The raids  on
             the house started  after  the  appellant  did  not  return  to
             detention (at the conclusion of the  period  of  seven  days).
             The  appellant  explains  that  he  has  no  evidence  of  the
             summonses.  If his father had sent them to him in  the  United
             Kingdom, they would have been checked by the post office.  His
             family would therefore be  in  significant  trouble  from  the
             authorities as to why they had sent the documents abroad.

         22.  Since he came to the  United  Kingdom,  he  has  converted  to
             Christianity.  He reads the Bible, in  Farsi.   The  appellant
             confirmed that he is not evangelised in the United Kingdom."

 6. The appellant's case before the FtT can  be  helpfully  separated  into
    five limbs: (i) he is a Christian convert and would, as a  consequence,
    be at risk in Iran; (ii) he  fled  Iran  whilst  on  bail  after  being
    imprisoned for offences allegedly committed whilst undertaking military
    service ("the military service" issue), (iii) he will be at risk at the
    point of return to Iran as a consequence of being required  to  divulge
    the contents of his asylum claim in the  UK  (the  "risk  at  point  of
    return" issue); (iv) his health issues would lead to his removal  being
    in breach of article 3 ECHR; and, (v) his removal would breach  article
    8 ECHR.

 7. In my earlier decision concluding that the FtT erred in law I  recorded
    the position taken by Mr  Kirk  before  me  (on  25  January  2016)  in
    relation to the aforementioned five limbs of the claimant's case in the
    following terms:

         "Clearing the decks

         4. On limb (i) of the appellant's claim the FtT  judge  disbelieved
         the evidence given in this regard and  no  discrete  challenge  has
         been brought before the Upper Tribunal to that conclusion.  Indeed,
         at the hearing today Mr  Kirk  indicated  that  the  appellant  had
         abandoned the Christianity limb of  his  claim  and  would  not  be
         further pursuing it. Mr Kirk further indicated that limb (iv) - the
         health issue - was not discreetly pursued before  the  FtT  and  no
         challenge is brought before the Upper Tribunal in relation  to  it.
         As to the article 8 claim, Mr Kirk once again indicated  that  this
         is not pursued before the Upper Tribunal and further observed  that
         it had not been pursued vigorously before the First-tier Tribunal."

    I also said as follows:

         "Decision

         ...It was agreed that the Upper Tribunal would re-make the decision
         under appeal for itself - the scope  of  such  consideration  being
         limited Refugee Convention, Humanitarian Protection and  Article  3
         ECHR grounds. As indicated above, the appellant has given notice of
         an intention not to pursue the Christian convert, and health  issue
         limbs of his claim."

 8. Despite this Mr Kirk asserted in his skeleton argument for the  hearing
    on 21 October 2016, and again at that  hearing,  that  the  appellant's
    Christian conversion would lead, in part, to him being at risk  at  the
    point of return to Iran. When the aforementioned concession  was  drawn
    Mr Kirk's attention he submitted that it was never the  case  that  the
    appellant had abandoned the 'Christianity' limb, and that he wished  to
    rely upon the fact that he had converted to Christianity (as  found  by
    the FtT) in support of his claim that he would be at risk on arrival in
    Iran (as a consequence of having to divulge this fact  to  the  Iranian
    authorities which, either of itself or  in  combination  with  his  (i)
    illegal exit and (ii) having claimed asylum in the UK, would put him at
    risk of being persecuted).

 9. There are  now,  therefore,  two  potential  discreet  strands  to  the
    appellant's claim:  (1)  he  is  at  risk  of  being  persecuted  as  a
    consequence of his claims to have fled the country whilst on  seven-day
    release from prison  (because  of  his  asserted  misdemeanours  during
    military service), and, in the alternative; (2), he is  at  risk  as  a
    consequence of having left Iran illegally, claimed asylum in the United
    Kingdom and having converted to Christianity.

Burden and standard of Proof

10. It is uncontroversial that the burden of proof rests on  the  appellant
    and that the applicable standard of proof is a low one - i.e. is  there
    a real risk that the appellant  would  suffer  treatment  amounting  to
    persecution upon return to Iran.

Military Service Issue

Evidence

11. I have set out above the claim  put  forward  in  this  regard  by  the
    appellant during the course of his interviews  with  the  Secretary  of
    State and in his witness  statement  of  5  October  2015.   Since  the
    promulgation of the FtT's  decision  the  appellant  has  produced  the
    following additional evidence in support of this limb of his claim:

      a) A witness statement dated 27 July 2016 (which was adopted  in  oral
         evidence before the Upper Tribunal)

         For the most part  the  evidence  contained  therein  mirrors  that
         previously given; however, it is prudent to set out paragraphs 3 to
         6 of this statement in full because they  provided  the  foundation
         for a number of the SSHD's submissions:

           "3.    When guarding the border I  would  be  in  a  watchtower.
             There were a lot of watchtowers  along  the  border,  and  you
             could see from one tower to the  next.   There  was  no  fence
             along this part of the border but it was heavily mined.  There
             would be only one person in a watchtower at a time.  You would
             be on watch for two hours and then rest for three  hours.   My
             duty involved reporting any suspicious activities by  wireless
             or radio  to  the  commander.   The  commander  was  stationed
             further back from us.

           4. If any people approached the border, the rule was that we had
             to ask them to stop three times.  If they did not stop, we had
             to shoot initially into the air and  if  they  still  did  not
             stop, we had to shoot a second time and this time directly  at
             them but below their waist.

           5. On 19th May 2010 (29.02.1389) I  was  on  duty  guarding  the
             border in a  watchtower.   My  Commander,  Warrant  Officer  2
             (Ostovar Dovom Jalal Narimani) came to inspect me and  was  in
             the watchtower with me.  The commanders would come at any time
             to do inspections and would mostly do surprise visits to check
             if you are performing your duty or if you are sleeping  whilst
             on duty.  A group of  people  approached  the  border  and  my
             commander told me to shoot at them.  My commander said that he
             recognised that the people are from PJAK and that I should not
             fire a warning shot and that I should just  fire  directly  at
             them.  PJAK is a group that opposes the Iranian Regime and  is
             under the umbrella of the PKK (Kurdistan  Workers  Party).   I
             refused to shoot at the people because there  were  women  and
             children in the group.  Both men and  women  fight  for  PJAK.
             They usually smuggle goods across the border as well.

           6. ... My commander said 'shoot' and I said  because  there  are
             women and children I will not shoot.  We argued for a bit  and
             then he called the military police.  The military police  then
             came and arrested me...".

      b) The appellant also gave oral evidence before the Upper Tribunal.

         I do not recite the oral evidence at this  stage,  but  do  observe
         that I took the entirety of such evidence into account when  coming
         to my conclusions.

      c) (What purports to be) a copy of a summons issued by the 4th  Branch
         of  the  Court  of  the  Islamic  Revolution   in   Shiraz,   dated
         "03/28/2012".

         It is said that the copy of the summons was sent to  the  appellant
         by his grandfather on 5 January 2016 by way of email.   A  copy  of
         the email is produced.  The translation of the  summons  bears  the
         appellant's name and provides a home address in  Shiraz.   It  then
         reads (in its translated form):

           "Offence:  Cooperation with  the  Anti  revolution  organisation
           called Pejvak and a fugitive soldier.

           Place of Attendance:  the fourth branch  of  the  Court  of  the
           Islamic revolution in Shiraz.

           Date of Attendance:  Monday 14/05/2012. You must attend  on  the
           date specified otherwise the court will carry on  the  trial  in
           your absence.

           Signature of the person who has been summoned:  The head of  the
           fourth branch of the Court of the Islamic revolution in  Shiraz:
           Naseri.

           If you have got a lawyer,  introduce  him  and  if  you  have  a
           witness of the incident, introduce him before  this  appointment
           so that they could be summoned.

           Your absence would result in your arrest and if you don't attend
           at the arranged time, the court will  pass  a  verdict  in  your
           absence.  If you had  an  acceptable  excuse  according  to  the
           paragraph (113) of the civil penal ordinance, present it to  the
           court."

         The author of the translation is not identified.

      d) The following three 'expert' reports have been provided:

         i) A report from a Dr F E Winton BSc, MB.BS, FRC Psych (Consultant
            Psychiatrist), dated 2 May 2016.

             This report runs to nineteen pages. The pertinent  conclusions
             therein are as follows:

              The appellant "qualifies for  the  diagnosis  of  a  moderate
              depressive episode ICD 10 code F32.1";

              The appellant qualifies "for the diagnosis of post  traumatic
              stress disorder ICD 10 code F43.1".

             The following passages from the report are also salient:

             "7.2.1   v) ... It is my opinion that  it  was  experience  of
                   torture which led to the development of his PTSD.

             7.5.1      It  is  my  opinion  that  both   his   psychiatric
                   conditions could impact on his ability to concentrate  on
                   the proceedings and impair his ability to recall  events.
                   This is  because  it  is  recognised  that  these  mental
                   illnesses can impair concentration and memory.

             7.5.2    With regard to depression the main  cause  is  mental
                   fatigue.  This is a core symptom  of  depression  and  is
                   made worse  in  [MB's]  case  by  his  chronic  insomnia.
                   People with depression have reduced motivation  and  this
                   lack of mental energy means that they have to work harder
                   than the average individual in order to focus on a  task.
                   As a result it is more difficult for them  to  apply  the
                   necessary energy to recall events.  This lack  of  mental
                   energy  also  reduces   the   individual's   ability   to
                   concentrate.

             7.5.3    With regard to post traumatic stress disorder  it  is
                   the  hyperarousal/anxiety  which  is  the  mechanism  for
                   impaired memory.  The anxiety leads  to  racing  thoughts
                   which tend to jump around from  topic  to  topic  in  the
                   individual's mind.  Effectively their mind has  a  stream
                   of consciousness which is hard to control  to  the  point
                   whereby it  cannot  be  channelled  into  a  constructive
                   direction.  As a result this jumping from topic to  topic
                   interferes  with  memory  tasks  and  thus  disrupts  the
                   concentration necessary for attending to a task  such  as
                   focusing on questions and recalling events.

             7.5.4    This became clear during the interview I had with him
                   when he tended to wander off  the  point  at  a  tangent.
                   This was obvious in the way he answered questions and was
                   confirmed by the interpreter who at  times  struggled  to
                   get him to answer the question asked.   If  he  found  it
                   difficult to answer in a concise and clear  manner  to  a
                   psychiatrist, then in my opinion it would  be  much  more
                   difficult for him to answer  questions  appropriately  in
                   the more  highly  charged  atmosphere  of  the  Tribunal.
                   There would be so much at stake for him in the hearing as
                   the future of his  life,  according  to  his  perception,
                   would depend upon it.  As a result his tendency to wander
                   off the point and give  inappropriate  answers  would  be
                   significantly raised.

                   ....

             7.5.6    In summary, it  is  almost  inevitable  given  [MB's]
                   current  lack  of  mental  health   that   he   will   be
                   inconsistent when giving evidence.  However, the research
                   makes it quite clear that 'inconsistency  is  the  norm'.
                   This will be particularly the case given that he  suffers
                   from depression and PTSD."

         ii) A report authored by Samim Rashti, dated 22 January 2016,  and
             headed "Authentication Report".

             The author of the report is "a lawyer qualified in  Iran  with
             experience of such documents [summons] at  first  hand".   The
             report  exclusively  considers  the  summons   identified   in
             paragraph 11(c) above.

             It confirms that the Iranian courts were  open  on  the  dates
             featured within the summons; observes that  the  text  of  the
             summons is in the correct format for 2012, and identifies that
             there are  no  grammatical  errors  within  the  summons.   It
             further confirms that both the emblem at the top and the stamp
             in the body of the summons are appropriate for the  respective
             branch for the Revolutionary Court.

             The report identifies (paragraph 20) that in  accordance  with
             Article 69 of the Iranian Law of Civil Procedure, the  summons
             was required to be served on the appellant.  However,  if  the
             appellant was not available then it could be assigned  to  one
             of his servants or family members at the same address.

             In conclusion, the author finds there to be no fault with  the
             document and that it is his/her view  that  it  is  a  genuine
             document. It is said that it was issued by the proper  source,
             the procedure for issuing the summons was correct, and that it
             contains the "main contents of a reliable court summons".

        iii) A report authored by Ms Anna Enayat, an expert "on  the  human
             rights situation in Iran".

             Ms Enayat, who is well known to the Upper  Tribunal,  observes
             that the evidence provided by the appellant in relation to the
             name and activities of the Brigade  he  claims  to  have  been
             assigned to, is accurate to the  best  of  her  knowledge.  In
             particular, he correctly  identifies  where  the  Brigade  was
             stationed (Ms Enayat also providing the additional observation
             that such area is not an important smuggling route) as well as
             the role it fulfils on the Iran/Iraq border.

             In section 2 of her report Ms Enayat sets out details relating
             to PJAK, and in particular its confrontations with the Iranian
             authorities.   She  identifies  a  number  of  incidents  that
             occurred in early May 2010, concluding as a consequence  that:
             "it is plausible that in early May  2010  (the  start  of  the
             fighting season) military officials along the  Kermanshah/Iraq
             borders were on alert for PJAK operatives".

             The  section  of  the  report  that  follows  deals  with  the
             plausibility of the evidence provided by the appellant  as  to
             the legal process he purports to have undergone in  Iran,  and
             can be summarised as follows:

                . It is plausible,  given  the  nature  of  the  accusations
                  against the  appellant,  that  the  military  prosecutor's
                  office would at some stage have transferred  his  case  to
                  the Revolutionary Court;

                . In the Iranian criminal justice system  suspects  are  not
                  charged until the case against them has been  investigated
                  under the supervision of an investigative judge. It is the
                  judge who would then issue a  temporary  detention  order,
                  which may be renewed at bi-monthly intervals;

                . Pursuant to Articles 37 and 38 of the Military Penal Code,
                  if a soldier is deemed to have disobeyed an order to  fire
                  on the enemy, the punishment is a 3 to  15  year  term  of
                  imprisonment;

                . For a person described as a mohareb  [in  armed  rebellion
                  against the state] who could be a sympathiser of an  armed
                  political group, the nature of the punishment would be  at
                  the discretion of the judge and includes a death  sentence
                  or a term of imprisonment;

                . It is common in Iran for a criminal  act  or  incident  to
                  engage more than one jurisdiction within the judiciary.

             In relation to the appellant's evidence that  he  was  allowed
             family visits whilst he was in prison, Ms Enayat concludes  as
             follows, at paragraph 31:

                  "It is in fact plausible that despite the severity of  the
                  accusations against him, MB would have been  able  to  see
                  his family once investigations were complete.  It is  also
                  plausible, as shown by some of the  cases  I  cite  below,
                  that more than a year might have passed  without  a  trial
                  and conclusive ruling in his case."

             As to the appellant obtaining leave from prison, a matter that
             Dr Kakhki also commented in his expert report  (see  Error  of
             Law decision), the following is said:

                  "Prison leave is commonly granted  in  Iran  to  convicted
                  prisoners  or,  in   certain   circumstances   after   the
                  interrogation  period  is  complete,  to  those  who   are
                  awaiting trial and have not been otherwise allowed bail.

                  The type of visit permitted to  a  sick  relative  of  the
                  first degree for a very restricted period is a subcategory
                  of lawful prison leave.

                  The law in effect at the time of MB's release was Articles
                  213-216  of  the  Executive  Regulations  of  the  Prisons
                  20/9/1384=11 December  2005  (which  replaced  regulations
                  issued in 2001).

                  ...

                  To conclude this section: I  note  that  MB's  account  of
                  being allowed a 7-day period of prison leave, on bail,  to
                  visit his sick mother... is consistent with Iranian prison
                  regulations and the laws and practices  governing  release
                  on bail in Iran....".

Submissions

12. Mr Whitwell accepted that if the Tribunal were to find the  appellant's
    account in relation to the military service issue to be truthful,  then
    his appeal must succeed. He accepted that in such  circumstances  there
    would be a real  risk  of  the  appellant  suffering  from  persecutory
    treatment from the Iranian authorities upon return.

13. Mr Whitwell's primary submission, however,  was  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was untruthful. He relied, in support of this assertion,  both
    on matters relayed in the SSHD's decision letter and an additional nine
    features of the appellant's evidence  which,  he  asserted,  served  to
    undermine it credibility.

14. Turning first to the refusal decision, therein the SSHD drew particular
    attention to the following features of the appellant's evidence,  which
    led her to disbelieve the account given:

           . The appellant gave vague, and limited, details about his  role
             and training in the military (although it  was  accepted  that
             the appellant correctly identified one of the weapons used  by
             the Iranian army);

           . The appellant's assertion that  his  family  were  allowed  to
             visit him during his time in prison is inconsistent  with  the
             background information on Iran (which highlights that  Iranian
             prison authorities routinely deny political prisoners  regular
             visits by their loved ones);

           . The fact that the appellant's family were able to  secure  the
             appellant's release from  prison  by  acting  as  sureties  is
             inconsistent with the background information;

           .  The  claim  by  the  appellant  that  his  family  have   not
             experienced any problems with the Iranian authorities for  the
             past 8-9 months (at the time of the interview) is inconsistent
             with his evidence that he is still of interest to the  Iranian
             authorities;

           . The appellant was unable to recall the specific dates  of  his
             release from prison and attendance at Court.

15. At the hearing Mr Whitwell relied upon the following additional  points
    in support of his submission that the appellant had not given  credible
    evidence:

           .  The  appellant's  assertion  to  be  a  genuine  convert   to
             Christianity was not found truthful by the FtT;

           . The appellant has provided inconsistent  evidence  as  to  the
             time of day  the  disagreement  with  his  commanding  officer
             occurred; stating in his original witness  statement  that  it
             had occurred in the  late  afternoon,  but  in  oral  evidence
             stating that he could not recall anything other  than  it  did
             not take place at night;

           . The appellant has provided inconsistent evidence as to whether
             he warned the group of suspected PJAK members prior  to  being
             told to shoot them by his commander.   In  his  first  witness
             statement he indicated that his commander had told him to warn
             the group to stop and if they did not stop then to shoot them.
             In his witness statement of 27 July 2016 he asserted that  his
             commander had told him not  to  fire  a  warning  shot  before
             shooting at the group.  In  oral  evidence  before  the  Upper
             Tribunal the appellant stated that he had warned the group and
             also fired a warning shot;

           . The appellant provided  inconsistent  evidence  regarding  the
             reasons given by his commander for requiring him to  shoot  at
             the group.  In his most recent witness statement the appellant
             asserted that the commander had told him  that  he  recognised
             the people as being from PJAK.  In oral evidence the appellant
             stated that his commander had not told him  why  he  suspected
             the members of the group to be from PJAK;

           . In his oral evidence the appellant stated that he  had  warned
             the group to  stop  and  that  they  had  done  so.   In  such
             circumstances the appellant's account of having disobeyed  his
             commander's  orders  by  not  shooting   at   the   group   is
             inconsistent;

           . The appellant's assertion that he did not know  what  happened
             to the group after they had stopped  is  implausible  -  given
             that he had remained on the watchtower for a few minutes after
             the warning was given;

           . The expert gave evidence that  at  the  time  of  the  claimed
             incident the situation on the Iran/Iraq border was tense  with
             there being a heightened scrutiny on PJAK at  the  time.   The
             appellant did not provide the same evidence, when he could  be
             expected to have done so;

           . The appellant failed to adequately explain why there had  been
             a  delay  of  three  and  a  half  years  between  his  family
             purportedly receiving the summons and a copy of  that  summons
             being sent to the United Kingdom for the consideration of  the
             Secretary of State and the Tribunal;

16. Mr Whitwell further submitted that no weight should  be  placed  on  Dr
    Winton's report, it being asserted it was based on the assumption  that
    the events in Iran had been truthfully recounted by the appellant,  and
    that it was such events which  had  caused  the  deterioration  in  the
    appellant's mental health.

17. In response Mr Kirk submitted that the appellant had given  a  credible
    account of the events which had caused him to flee his homeland.

18. It was accepted that there  were  a  number  of  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's evidence of the events of 19 May, but it was observed  that
    the appellant had explained  in  oral  evidence  that  the  events  had
    happened quickly.  Mr Kirk also took the Tribunal through the  relevant
    passages  of  the  report  from  Dr  Winton  -   asserting   that   the
    inconsistencies and discrepancies which had arisen were fully explained
    by the evidence therein.

19. Attention was also drawn to the appellant's explanation as to  why  the
    summons had not been produced earlier  i.e.  because  his  family  were
    fearful of sending it by post as a consequence of the likelihood of the
    post being opened. It was further observed that  this  explanation  had
    been accepted as being reasonable by the SSHD in her  decision  letter.
    It was the terms of the FtT's decision that was the eventual  triggered
    for the appellant to obtain a copy of the summons via email.

20.  Mr  Kirk  summarised  by  observing  that  the  appellant  is  not   a
    sophisticated  and  well-schooled   individual,   but   that   he   had
    nevertheless produced a complex and unusual account which was  entirely
    consistent with the known circumstances in Iran. This, he submitted, is
    demonstrative of the fact that the appellant was a witness of truth.

Decision and Reasons on Military Service Issue

21. In coming to my conclusion I have considered all of the evidence in the
    round, including that  which  is  not  specifically  mentioned  herein.
    Having done so I am of the conclusion, for the  reasons  which  follow,
    that the appellant has demonstrated the truth of the  evidence  he  has
    given on this issue to the required  lower  standard  and  that,  as  a
    consequence - and in line with the concession made by the  SSHD  -  his
    appeal is to be allowed on the basis  that  his  removal  would  be  in
    breach of the Refugee Convention.

22. I treat as a matter adverse to the appellant the fact that he was found
    by the FtT to lack  credibility  in  his  assertion  to  be  a  genuine
    Christian convert. This finding has not  been  successfully  challenged
    and demonstrates that the appellant is a person who is prepared to  lie
    to the SSHD and the Tribunal in furtherance of his attempts  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom. This I find to be a matter of some significance.
    This does not mean, however, that everything the appellant has said  is
    necessarily tarnished with the same brush, but my consideration of  his
    claim to be at risk as  a  consequence  of  the  events  said  to  have
    occurred on 19 May 2010 must be viewed through the lens of his previous
    attempts to deceive the UK authorities.

23. When looking at the evidence as a whole I agree with Mr Kirk  that  the
    appellant's evidence is entirely plausible, it  being  consistent  with
    events known to occur in Iran. In this regard I  place  weight  on  the
    evidence provided by Ms Enayat (which is also confirmed by the evidence
    of Dr Kakhki).

24. I reject  the  SSHD's  assertions  that  it  is  implausible  that  the
    appellant would have been allowed visitors whilst in detention, or that
    he would have been released for seven days in order to visit  his  sick
    mother. The expert evidence identifies that each is  plausible  in  the
    context of the circumstances put forward by the appellant.

25. More generally, I observe  the  high  degree  coincidence  between  the
    appellant's evidence relating to the Brigade he purportedly served  in,
    its area of operation, his experiences in detention and  the  operation
    of the Court system in Iran with  what,  according  to  Dr  Enayat,  is
    objectively known about such matters. This high degree  of  coincidence
    is matter which carries weight in the appellant's  favour,  although  I
    also bear in mind that it cannot be discounted that the appellant could
    have been aware of all, or some, of such matters even if his account is
    not truthful.

26. I do not accept the SSHD's assertion that the appellant gave vague, and
    limited, details of his military training and that  this  should  weigh
    against him  in  the  overall  credibility  assessment.  The  appellant
    answered, with reasonable particularity, the questions asked of him. If
    the SSHD wanted to test the depth of the appellant's knowledge on  this
    subject she should have asked further  questions  in  relation  to  it,
    either at the interview or during cross-examination. The fact that  she
    did not do so cannot be held against the appellant.

27. Turning to the copy of the summons. The  delay  in  its  production  is
    certainly a  matter  which  weighs  against  the  appellant  when  this
    document is being considered. Although I accept, as did the SSHD,  that
    the appellant would not wish such a document to be sent via the  postal
    system from Iran, there is no satisfactory explanation as to why a copy
    of the document was not sent by email at an earlier juncture.

28. This though is not the only aspect of my considerations relating to the
    summons and, itself, must  also  be  viewed  in  conjunction  with  the
    evidence provided by Samim Rashti - summarised above  -  which,  whilst
    provided only in relation  to  a  copy  of  the  summons  and  nor  the
    original, identifies that the features of the document produced are all
    compatible with a genuine document. I have born in mind, however,  that
    this report does not say anything about the reliability of the contents
    of the document and in particular no observations are  made  about  the
    possibility of documents of this type being obtained,  which  have  all
    the hallmarks of being genuine and reliable but which are not.

29. Mr Whitwell put at the  centre  of  submissions  discrepancies  by  the
    appellant in his description of the events which took place on  the  19
    May 2010, and in particular those which were said to have  occurred  on
    the watchtower.

30. That there were such discrepancies is not a matter of dispute.  In  his
    evidence the explains these by asserting that these events  took  place
    over a very short period of time in a chaotic and heated environment  -
    the inference being that as  a  consequence  his  recollection  of  the
    minutia might not be complete or entirely accurate. This in my view  is
    a plausible explanation for the discrepancies, but clearly not the only
    explanation. Another explanation may  be  that  the  appellant  is  not
    telling the truth. A further explanation is  proffered  in  the  report
    from Dr Winton, which identifies the appellant as suffering  from  PTSD
    and depression - conditions which, it is said, can lead to inconsistent
    recall of events.

31. Mr Whitwell invites the  Tribunal  to  attach  no  weight  Dr  Winton's
    evidence, as consequence of  it  being  founded,  it  is  said,  on  an
    assumption that the appellant was telling the truth in relation to  the
    events which it is claimed occurred in Iran.

32. Dr Winton is clearly qualified both to pronounce upon  the  appellant's
    mental health condition, and the consequences thereof. The diagnosis is
    not, as claimed, founded on the truth of the appellant's evidence,  but
    rather  looking  at  the  appellant's  symptoms  against  the  criteria
    identified in the International Classification of  Diseases  -  in  the
    context of the evidence given. There is nothing before me  which  casts
    doubt  on  the  accuracy  of  Dr  Winton's  diagnosis  or  as  to   the
    consequences thereof. I do, however, attach no weight on one aspect  of
    the evidence provided - the conclusion at paragraph 7.1.2(v)  that  the
    appellant's PTSD was caused by his  experience  of  torture.  Absent  a
    careful, and evidenced, analysis ruling out other possible causes,  the
    highest this could rationally be put  this  is  that  the  torture  the
    appellant claimed to have received was capable of  causing  the  mental
    health condition he now suffers from.

33. The fact remains, however,  that  there  were  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's recollection of the events of  19  May  2010,  and  I  have
    weighed them in the round  with  all  the  other  evidence  before  me,
    including the aforementioned explanations for those inconsistencies.

34. Having taken  into  account  all  of  the  evidence  and  the  parties'
    submissions, I am prepared to conclude that, to the lower standard, the
    appellant has told the truth the events which led him to flee Iran. For
    the most part the appellant gave credible and  consistent  evidence  in
    relation to those events, and his evidence is plausible when viewed  in
    the context of the circumstances  in  Iran.  I  attach  little  adverse
    wright to the discrepancies in the appellant's account. These relate to
    the minutia of the circumstances on the watchtower and must  be  viewed
    in the context of the timeframe over, and circumstances  within,  which
    they occurred, as well as the appellant's current mental state.

35. In summary, I accept that the appellant undertook military  service  as
    claimed, disobeyed a commanding officer's order to shoot at a group  of
    people approaching  the  Iranian  border,  was  subsequently  arrested,
    detained, tortured and  was  then  released  on  compassionate  grounds
    before the judicial  process  was  complete.  I  also  accept  that  he
    subsequently fled  the  country  instead  of  surrendering  himself  as
    required and that, as a consequence, a summons has been issued for  his
    arrest.

36. If the appellant is returned to Iran, there is a real risk he  will  be
    detained at the airport and thereafter subject to persecutory treatment
    in detention. The SSHD accepts that such persecution would be based  on
    a political opinion imputed to the appellant as a  consequence  of  his
    refusal to shoot as persons who were believed to be PJAK operatives.

37. The appellant therefore succeeds on Refugee Convention  grounds.  As  a
    consequence, his appeal brought on Humanitarian Protection grounds must
    be dismissed. It follows from  the  appeal  being  allowed  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds that it must also  be  allowed  on  Article  3  ECHR
    grounds.

38. In such circumstances I need not deal  with  the  second  limb  of  the
    appellant's claim.





Notice of Decision

For reasons given in Appendix 1 hereto  the  decision  of  the  FtT  is  set
aside.

Upon re-making the decision under appeal I allow it  on  Refugee  Convention
and Article 3 ECHR grounds.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

                                 Appendix 1

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS
                     (Delivered orally 25 January 2016)

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who entered the  United  Kingdom  in
    2013 and claimed asylum on the day as his  arrival.   This  application
    was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 11 May 2015 and,
    on the same date, a decision was made to remove the appellant from  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision to the  FtT.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wyman heard that appeal on 7 October 2015 and dismissed it on all
    grounds in a decision  promulgated  on  29  October  2015.   FtT  Judge
    Cruthers granted the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in a decision of 24  November  2014.  Thus  the  matter  comes
    before me.

Appellant's case before FtT

 3. The appellant's case before the FtT was founded on five limbs:  (i)  he
    is a Christian convert and would, as a consequence, be at risk in Iran;
    (ii) he fled Iran whilst on bail after being  imprisoned  for  offences
    allegedly committed whilst undertaking military service ("the  military
    service" issue), (iii) he will be at risk at the  point  of  return  to
    Iran as a consequence of being required to divulge the contents of  his
    asylum claim in the UK (the "risk at point of return" issue); (iv)  his
    health issues would lead to his removal being in breach  of  article  3
    ECHR; and, (v) his removal would breach article 8 ECHR.

Clearing the decks

 4. On limb (i) of the appellant's claim  the  FtT  judge  disbelieved  the
    evidence given in this  regard  and  no  discrete  challenge  has  been
    brought before the Upper Tribunal to that conclusion.  Indeed,  at  the
    hearing today Mr Kirk indicated that the appellant  had  abandoned  the
    Christianity limb of his claim and would not be further pursuing it. Mr
    Kirk further indicated that limb (iv) - the  health  issue  -  was  not
    discreetly pursued before the FtT and no challenge  is  brought  before
    the Upper Tribunal in relation to it.   As to the article 8  claim,  Mr
    Kirk once again indicated that this is not  pursued  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal and further observed that it had not been  pursued  vigorously
    before the FtT.

Discussion on whether the FtT erred of law

 5. The focal points of the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  the
    'military service issue' and the 'risk at point of return' issue.

Military Service issue

 6. The appellant's claim before the FtT on the military service issue  was
    described as follows in the FtT's decision:

         "13. The appellant explains that he started his military service on
             8 January 2009.  After his  basic  training  he  was  sent  to
             Kermanshah and performed the role of a guard.   Kermanshah  is
             on the border between Iran and Iraq.   The  appellant  was  on
             guard duty and was told that if he saw any people  coming,  he
             had to inform his commander.  The appellant explained that  in
             May 2010 he saw a group of people approaching from  the  other
             side of the border.  He believed that they were  civilians  as
             the group included women and children.  However his  commander
             believed that the group were members of the PAJK  Party.   The
             commander  ordered  the  appellant  to  fire  at  them.    The
             appellant did not do so because there were women and  children
             amongst the group."

         14.  The commander then contacted the military police who  came  to
             take the appellant to prison because he had disobeyed orders.

         ...

         16.  The appellant was detained for five-six months.  Initially  he
             was taken to Military Court but  he  was  then  taken  to  the
             Revolutionary Court... .

         17.  The appellant explained that he was given seven days'  release
             from prison, as his mother  was  unwell.   As  a  surety,  his
             family had to lodge a property deed with the  court.   He  was
             informed that if he failed to return  to  prison  after  seven
             days, the property would be confiscated.

         19.  Following his 7 day release... the appellant's father found an
             agent..."

     The appellant then fled the country and came to  the  United  Kingdom.
    Since his arrival his "parents have received three summonses  from  the
    authorities..." [20] "...and his father's home  has  been  raided  more
    than thirty times by the authorities looking for him." [21]

 7. The FtT did not accept the truth of the evidence given by the appellant
    on this issue, providing six discrete reasons for  so  concluding;  set
    out in paragraphs 107 - 115 of its decision. There is  an  equal  split
    between the number of reasons subject to challenge in this appeal,  and
    those which remain unchallenged.

 8. The reasons and conclusion found in paragraph 107 of the FtT's decision
    fall within the former category and need, therefore, to be the  subject
    of my consideration. In paragraph 107 the FtT states:

         "...[t]he appellant stated that his commander told him to shoot the
         group of people which he refused to  do.   The  appellant  has  not
         explained as to why his commander would order him to shoot directly
         at a  group  of  (potentially)  civilians  without  giving  them  a
         warning.   Nor  has  he  explained  why  his  commander   was   not
         reprimanded as he ordered the appellant to shoot, in  contradiction
         of the standard procedures."

 9. In my view it  was  plainly  irrational  of  the  FtT  to  require  the
    appellant, in the circumstances of the instant  claim,  to  provide  an
    explanation for his commander's actions, or indeed  why  the  commander
    was not reprimanded. If the appellant's account is to be believed there
    was no opportunity for him to  seek  explanation  from  his  commander;
    indeed, he was the subject of arrest and detention at  his  commander's
    behest and consequently even if such an opportunity  did  arise  it  is
    difficult to foresee the  commander  complying  with  any  request  for
    explanation made to him by the appellant. It is worthy  of  observation
    that the FtT dies not disclose in its decision  how  it  contended  the
    appellant could, or should, have come by the information identified  in
    paragraph 107.   In such circumstances any evidence the appellant could
    give on this issue would necessarily be nothing more than speculation.

10. The second challenge brought to the FtT's conclusions on  the  military
    service issue revolves around the reasoning  deployed  by  the  FtT  in
    latter stages of paragraph 113 of its decision:

         "The appellant has stated that he was released as  his  mother  has
         been ill and suffering from MS, but no medical evidence  whatsoever
         has been provided relating to his  mother's  illness,  despite  the
         fact that these documents clearly would not be difficult to provide
         should they exist.  He has also failed to provide any evidence that
         the Iranian government allows individuals to be released, even  for
         just a week, due to the ill-health of a family  member."  (emphasis
         added)

11. The appellant's criticism of the emphasised sentence is well made in my
    conclusion.  The Secretary of State accepted, in paragraph  16  of  her
    Reasons for Refusal Letter, that the  manner  in  which  the  appellant
    claimed his release was  secured  is  consistent  with  the  background
    information relating to Iran.

12. There was, in addition, expert opinion before the Tribunal in the  form
    of a lengthy report pertaining to the circumstances in Iran authored by
    Dr Heyayati-Kakhki. At page 16 of this report the  expert  opines  that
    the appellant's account of being released for a short period so that he
    could visit an ill family member is plausible.

13. The FtT's conclusion is in direct contradiction to  the  aforementioned
    evidence. In such circumstances  it  is  beyond  dispute  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the FtT to engage with the report and provide clear  and
    cogent reasons for departing from the evidence contained therein.   The
    FtT's decision discloses no such engagement or reasoning process.

14. The final aspect of the challenge to the FtT's  credibility  assessment
    relates to paragraph 114 of its decision:

         "The appellant claimed that  he  was  beaten  and  tortured  whilst
         interrogated, but has not provided any medical  report  whatsoever.
         If he was beaten as claimed, even though the arrest  was  in  2012,
         there would still be  marks  on  his  body  that  could  have  been
         witnessed by a GP or the Medical Foundation for Victims of Torture.
          Yet no medical evidence whatsoever has been provided."

15. This conclusion has to  be  set  in  the  context  of  the  appellant's
    testimony that he had no marks or injuries on  his  body.  If  this  is
    correct it provides an unassailable explanation as to why the appellant
    did not produce medical evidence relating to 'marks on his body'.

16. Underpinning FtT's conclusion in paragraph 114 of its  decision  is  an
    impermissible  infringement  on  procedural  fairness.  There  was   no
    evidence before the  FtT,  save  for  the  appellant's,  going  to  the
    question of whether the appellant would have marks on his body  at  the
    time he entered the UK as a consequence the type of  ill  treatment  he
    allegedly suffered whilst in detention in Iran.  In order to found  its
    conclusion, the FtT must have either (a) used its own expert knowledge,
    which it does not identify in its decision and did not disclose to  the
    parties, (b)  obtained  and  relied  upon  other  expert  evidence  not
    referred in its decision or identified to the  parties,  or  (c)  taken
    judicial notice of  the  fact  that  the  type  of  ill  treatment  the
    appellant claims to have suffered from would always lead to their being
    marks on the recipient's body. Each of these three possible  approaches
    plainly admits of an error by the FtT.

17. Complaints in relation to  the  former  two  possibilities  require  no
    further explanation. The complaint in regard to the  third  possibility
    i.e. the taking of  judicial  notice,  is  less  obvious  but  no  less
    justifiable.  In order for judicial notice of a fact to be taken,  that
    fact must be so notorious or well known that it  cannot  reasonably  be
    doubted. In the instant scenario that is obviously not the  case  given
    the number discreet factors which must  feed  into  the  assessment  of
    whether a 'mark' would be left on the body of a recipient of  the  sort
    of ill treatment allegedly suffered by the appellant. In any event,  if
    the FtT did intend to take judicial notice of such a matter it ought to
    have put the appellant on notice of this.

18. Reading the FtT's decision as a whole in my conclusion  the  errors  of
    law therein, which I have identified above, are  capable  of  affecting
    the outcome of its assessment of the appellant's  credibility  and  the
    outcome of appeal. That is not to say that it is  inevitable  that  the
    appellant has given a credible account of the events which  he  asserts
    led him to flee his homeland, but rather that the FtT's  assessment  of
    the truth of his evidence relating to the military service issue cannot
    stand. For this reason alone, the FtT's decision must be set aside.

Risk at point of return issue

19. For the sake of completeness, I go  on  and  deal  with  the  challenge
    brought to the FtT's consideration of the fifth limb of the appellant's
    claim i.e. the risk at the point of return issue.   This  limb  of  the
    appellant's claim relates directly to evidence given by the  expert  to
    the effect that the  appellant  would  be  returned  to  Iran  using  a
    temporary travel document, which would lead to him being the subject of
    rigorous questioning at the point of return.  He would be  required  to
    divulge the nature of the account he had given to the UK authorities in
    pursuance of his asylum application, and the fact that he had  provided
    such an account to the UK authorities, whether credible or  not,  would
    be sufficient to lead to his ill-treatment by the Iranian authorities.

20. The FtT failed to engage with this limb of the appellant's claim, which
    of itself constitutes a discreet error  in  its  decision.  I  observe,
    however,  that  the  expert's  conclusions  appear  to  be  founded  on
    information which is now four  or  five  years  old  and  there  is  no
    indication that the expert has given consideration to the relevance  of
    the absence of recent evidence in this regard. Given my findings on the
    first ground of appeal I do not need to determine whether  the  failure
    of the FtT to deal with  the  'risk  at  point  of  return  issue'  was
    material to the outcome of the appeal. This will  be  a  matter  to  be
    considered at the next stage of these proceedings.

Decision

For the reasons set out above I set aside the decision of the FtT.

It was agreed that the Upper  Tribunal  would  re-make  the  decision  under
appeal for itself - the scope of such consideration  being  limited  Refugee
Convention,  Humanitarian  Protection  and  Article  3  ECHR   grounds.   As
indicated above, the appellant has given  notice  of  an  intention  not  to
pursue the Christian convert, and health issue limbs of his claim.

The hearing of the appeal is adjourned so as  to  enable  the  appellant  to
obtain further evidence.

