
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/08885/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination Promulgated       |
|On December 11, 2014            |On December 15, 2014            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                            MR MAMADOU SALIOU BAH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chaudhury (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born April  25,  1993,  is  a  citizen  of  Guinea.  The
    appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on June 2, 2013 on
    a flight from Guinea with the assistance of an agent. He claimed asylum
    on June 4, 2013. His application was refused by the respondent on  July
    5, 2013 and on September 9, 2013 a decision was taken to remove him  as
    an illegal entrant from the United Kingdom by way of  directions  under
    paragraphs 8-10 of schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  September  23,
    2013 and on March 3, 2014 Judge of the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Chambers
    (hereinafter referred to  as  the  "FtTJ")  heard  his  appeal  and  in
    determination promulgated on March 7, 2014 he refused  his  claims  for
    asylum and associated claims.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on March 22, 2014 and  on  April
    11, 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cox extended  time  and  gave
    permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds that the  FtTJ
    may have erred in the way he dealt with material evidence.

 4. The matter came before me on the  above  date  and  on  that  date  the
    appellant was in attendance.

PRELIMINARY FINDING

 5. Mr McVeety accepted that the FtTJ erred in paragraph [33] with the date
    of the newspaper as it appeared he considered the claim  on  the  basis
    the report was dated May 2014 when in fact it  was  2013.  However,  he
    indicated he would be submitting this did  not  amount  to  a  material
    error.

ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Chaudhury adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted:

      a. In paragraph [33] the FtTJ had the wrong date  for  the  newspaper.
         The FtTJ thought the paper was dated May 2014 when in  fact  it  is
         May 2013. The FtTJ made adverse findings against the appellant  and
         this amounted to an error in law.


      b. The appellant made clear in his witness statement at paragraphs [3]
         to [5] that he was with an agent and did  exactly  what  the  agent
         said. He did not speak to the immigration officer. The FtTJ  failed
         to have regard to this in paragraphs [36] and [37]  where  he  made
         adverse findings against the appellant and made no reference to his
         account. This amounted to a  material  error  as  it  went  to  the
         assessment of credibility.


      c. The FtTJ's approach to the expert  report  of  Mr  Ticky  Monekosso
         contained a material error. The FtTJ wrongly found that the  expert
         had stated that his opinion on the whole of the  appellant's  claim
         was "non-conclusive" whereas it was  confined  to  the  appellant's
         business. The FtTJ failed to have regard to the  expert's  findings
         at pages 10, 26, 33 and 34 of the report.


 7. Mr McVeety submitted there was no material error because:

      a. Whilst the FtTJ had the wrong date in  paragraph  [33]  his  actual
         finding about the photograph was still a valid  point  and  in  any
         event the  erroneous  finding  on  the  date  did  not  infect  the
         remaining findings in the determination  as  he  had  already  made
         findings undermining the claim.


      b. There was no factual inaccuracy in what he said in paragraph  [37].
         He was entitled to find the immigration  officer  would  have  made
         enquiries when the appellant presented his passport.


      c. The FtTJ was entitled to make the findings he  did  on  the  expert
         report. The expert claimed to know about  Guinea  but  despite  his
         research he found nothing about his father despite the  appellant's
         claim his father was high profile. The expert provided a report  on
         the basis the appellant's account was  credible  whereas  the  FtTJ
         started from the premise nothing was known  about  the  appellant's
         father because the expert found nothing conclusive about  him.  The
         expert's findings are based on an assumption by him  the  appellant
         was telling the truth and as the FtTJ rejected his  claims  he  was
         entitled to reject the conclusions. In addition, the expert accepts
         there was no evidence that  failed  asylum  seekers  had  been  ill
         treated or would be at risk.


 8. I reserved my decision.

ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

 9. In any application concerning  an  error  in  law  the  party  that  is
    applying has to show not only that the FtTJ has made an error but  that
    the error was material. Mr McVeety's  submission  to  me  is  two  fold
    namely  that  whilst  the  FtTJ  erred  with  regard  to  the  date  of
    publication of the newspaper that did  not  detract  from  the  overall
    negative findings on credibility. Mr Chaudhury  has  highlighted  three
    areas where he submits the FtTJ materially erred.

10. Mr Chaudhury submitted the FtTJ  had  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
    expert's evidence. The FtTJ considered this report at  paragraphs  [24]
    to [29] and noted the  expert  was  particularly  well  versed  in  the
    Guinean situation through twenty-seven years work as a  journalist  and
    researcher.  Key to the appellant's claim was the role of  his  father.
    He claimed his father was a close friend  and  associate  of  the  UFDG
    leader and he provided finances for the party and in return he received
    political favours. The expert, Mr Monekosso, provided a forty-four page
    report  although  his  consideration  of  the  appellant's  claim  only
    commences at page 9. He made clear his brief was to consider the recent
    changes in the  context  of  Guinea  and  to  comment  on  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk from his family's involvement with the UDFG,
    his Fullani ethnicity and the fact he  claimed  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom after travelling with a false document.

11. The FtTJ summarised what he had to consider in paragraph  [28]  of  his
    determination when he stated, "... Much therefore  turns  upon  what  I
    make of the appellant's account concerning what happened to his  family
    members and importantly, his documents."

12. On page [10] of his report he wrote, "I  tried  to  investigate  on  Mr
    Mamadou Saliou Bah's father and  his  business  in  Guinea  however  my
    investigations on his father's name are therefore non-conclusive as his
    name .... is a common name in Guinea".  The expert  could  not  confirm
    anything the appellant claimed about his father and  the  FtTJ  further
    noted he had not been provided with either the newspaper article or the
    arrest warrant despite having an expertise in documents.

13. The expert concluded that his account of entering on a  "red  passport"
    was plausible but the FtTJ was unimpressed with the  expert's  evidence
    as he concluded in paragraph [32], "the appellant's immigration history
    does not suggest he is telling the truth about his  circumstances  both
    at the time of the applications to visit and at the time he came to the
    UK and was 'received" at least as an asylum seeker".

14. The FtTJ noted the expert accepted he had not found any recent case  of
    a failed asylum seeker who had been ill treated due to that  fact.  The
    expert found this  appellant  would  suffer  problems  because  of  his
    father's activities and it therefore follows that if the FtTJ  rejected
    this claim then the appellant's appeal would have no foundation.

15. It is clear from the FtTJ's determination he did reject the  claim  and
    he gave his reasons for doing so. The expert's report  would  therefore
    carry little weight and of course he had not been asked to  comment  on
    two important pieces of evidence namely the newspaper  and  the  arrest
    warrant. He clearly gave reasons for rejecting  the  account  and  that
    left him with a problem  concerning  the  expert's  report.  Where  the
    expert's report is based on the account being credible then  little  or
    no weight can be attached to the expert's conclusions. In rejecting the
    expert's evidence he did not simply reject the report but he considered
    the report and the evidence and  ultimately  rejected  the  claim.  His
    finding on the report was open  to  him  and  I  am  satisfied  he  did
    consider the report's full conclusions.  There  was  no  error  in  his
    approach to the report.

16. The next area of concern, raised by Mr Chaudhury, surrounded the FtTJ's
    finding in paragraph [33] of his determination. The  newspaper  finding
    is one of a number of findings the FtTJ made when  he  was  considering
    the appellant's claim. He made two findings about this article:

      a. The article described what happened to the appellant's  father  and
         it lacked credibility it would appear in a newspaper eleven  months
         after he had left the country.
      b. The appellant produced the same photograph that that was  contained
         in the newspaper and this suggested the article was something  that
         the appellant had written up.


17. Mr McVeety accepted the FtTJ had incorrectly dated this article because
    the newspaper was dated May 2013 whereas  the  FtTJ  suggested  it  was
    dated May 2014. If this had been the  only  reason  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim  then  Mr  Chaudhury's  submission  would  have  some
    weight. However, by the time the FtTJ considered this piece of evidence
    he had already made a number of findings about the appellant's claim in
    paragraphs [24] to [32]. He had considered the evidence and had  regard
    to the report so far as it was relevant to his findings at that point.

18. Mr McVeety's point about the existence of the photograph was  a  matter
    the FtTJ also referred to. The FtTJ felt the  report  was  self-serving
    not merely because he erroneously though the report was  dated  a  year
    later than it actually was  but  also  because  the  newspaper  used  a
    photograph that the appellant himself had. These were  the  reasons  he
    concluded the report was self-serving but even though he erred  on  the
    date of the paper his other finding remains good as of course does  his
    finding about how much weight to attach to the document bearing in mind
    the expert witness had not viewed it.

19. I therefore find that  whilst  there  was  an  error  on  the  date  it
    ultimately was not material because of his other negative findings.

20. The final issue related to the appellant's witness statement  and  what
    happened at immigration control. Mr Chaudhury submitted the FtTJ failed
    to consider  the  appellant's  witness  statement.  However,  the  FtTJ
    clearly had the bundle of documents including the statement because  at
    paragraph [5] he referred to the fact the appellant travelled  with  an
    agent and was provided  with  a  false  passport.  The  expert  witness
    claimed to be an expert on affairs in Guinea but he is not an expert on
    UK Border Agency practices. The FtTJ rejected his claim to have entered
    on a false passport and based on the other negative findings  this  was
    open to him.

21. I am satisfied that all the findings made were  matters  open  to  him.
    Whilst there was an error on the date  I  am  satisfied  this  was  not
    material.


Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error.  I
    uphold the original decision.
23. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    such order was made in the First-tier and I see no reason to make  such
    an order now.


Signed:     Dated: December 15, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT

There was no application for a fee award and I uphold the original fee
award decision.


Signed:     Dated: December 15, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

