
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08228/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the Papers at Field House         |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th September 2013                          |On 9th October 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                 yun er lin
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of China born on 16th September 1987.    She
    claimed to have left China on 17th July 2008 and travelled to  Malaysia
    before travelling to the UK on 18th August 2008.  She entered  using  a
    passport  that did not belong to her and claimed asylum on  29th  April
    2009.   She was refused on 4th September 2012.  Her  subsequent  appeal
    was dismissed on 9th October 2012 by Judge Fox



 2. The Appellant says that she was arrested and detained for two months in
    October 2007 following a dispute about compensation for land which  the
    government wanted to acquire.  She was released  with  her  father  and
    other villagers on 14th December 2007.  From then until 10th June  2008
    she was a part of the Hai Men Committee in charge  of  going  to  other
    villages informing them of what  had  happened  and  asking  for  their
    support.  On that date the government came  to  the  village  to  start
    building an expressway.  There was a fight between  the  villagers  and
    the police and the Appellant's father was arrested. He was sentenced to
    five years' imprisonment. The Appellant ran away first to Malaysia  and
    then to the UK.   Whilst here she has  had  two  children  but  is  not
    married to their father.

 3. The judge found that the Appellant's father and  other  villagers  were
    arrested for either breaching the peace or potentially causing a breach
    of the peace.  He said that if the matters happened  as  the  Appellant
    described, then all that would happen is  that  the  authorities  would
    want to talk to her and she should answer to various charges which  may
    be put to her.  That was no more than a criminal investigation  with  a
    potential prosecution and does not amount to persecution.

 4. He was satisfied from the cumulative discrepancies and  inconsistencies
    that the incidents described by the  Appellant  did  not  happen.   The
    later claim for asylum nearly nine months after her arrival  without  a
    satisfactory explanation undermined the credibility  of  her  claim  to
    have come to the UK to escape persecution.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal against his decision  on  the
    grounds that the judge had taken no account of the pressure brought  to
    bear on villagers  to  accept  the  compensation  offered  and  it  was
    insufficient  for  the  judge  to  indicate  that  the  Appellant   was
    maltreated without any consideration of whether the treatment meted out
    to her was persecutory in  nature.   Her  evidence  was  that  she  was
    severely beaten and interrogated. Her father is still  in  prison  more
    than four years after the incident, having  committed  no  crime  which
    legitimises the Appellant's fear of placing trust in the authorities in
    China. Moreover the judge referred to discrepancies and inconsistencies
    but failed to set out exactly what they were.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Nicholson  on  14th  November
    2012 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

 7. On 4th December 2012 the Respondent served a  reply  stating  that  the
    judge clearly found the Appellant  to  be  lacking  in  credibility,  a
    conclusion which was reasoned and sustainable. He also  considered  the
    alternative position.  Firstly,  the  Appellant's  case  was  that  her
    father was an important person in the  village  and  his  position  and
    profile were significantly different from hers and, secondly, there was
    no evidence as to what charges he faced.  The  grounds  were  simply  a
    disagreement with the findings of fact.

 8. With the grounds were served directions inviting the Appellant to  file
    with the Upper Tribunal a  skeleton  argument  or  written  submissions
    setting out all lines of argument pursued both as regards  reasons  why
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside  and
    whether the Appellant wanted the case to be dealt with at  the  hearing
    or decided on the papers without an oral  hearing.  The  Appellant  was
    put on  notice  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  consider  everything
    received by it in response to the directions including any  submissions
    upon the need to have an oral hearing before  deciding  under  Rule  34
    whether it is necessary to have an oral  hearing of any aspect  of  the
    appeal. A failure by a party to comply with any of these directions may
    lead the Upper Tribunal to proceed on the basis that nothing or nothing
    further is to be said or advanced  in  support  of  that  party's  case
    before the Upper Tribunal.

 9. There was no response  from  the  Appellant  to  the  directions.   The
    Respondent requested an oral hearing.

10. On 17th January 2013 I sent out further  directions  stating  that  the
    Upper Tribunal would proceed on the basis that neither party wished  to
    say anything further and I proposed to determine the appeal  without  a
    hearing and would proceed to do  so  subject  to  any  request  to  the
    contrary received by 4 p.m. on the fifth working day following the date
    upon which the directions are sent to the parties.

11. Again there was no response from the Appellant's  representatives  save
    for a letter received on 15th April 2013 asking about the  progress  of
    this appeal.

12. Under Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 the
    Upper Tribunal may make any decision without a hearing having regard to
    any view expressed by a party when deciding whether to hold  a  hearing
    to consider any matter and the form of any such hearing.

13. I am satisfied, having regard to the issues in this appeal that  it  is
    appropriate to deal with this matter without a hearing.  The  Appellant
    has been given two opportunities to provide any  further  documentation
    upon which she wishes to rely and has decided not to do so.

Findings and Conclusions

14. It is clear that the judge dealt with this matter in  the  alternative,
    namely that he did not believe that the Appellant's account  of  events
    prior to her leaving China was true but even if they  were,  she  would
    face prosecution and not persecution.  He did not  believe  that  there
    was any warrant issued for her arrest  because  the  Appellant  was  in
    close contact with her mother who could  have obtained a  copy  of  the
    document and had not done so.  Furthermore, she failed to claim  asylum
    until nine months after her arrival in the UK and  had  travelled  here
    via a safe country, Malaysia, where she had spent two  months  but  had
    not made any claim.  Even on her own account after she was released  on
    14th December 2007, she had no further problems  with  the  authorities
    before she left China on 17th July 2008 travelling  to  Malaysia  where
    she remained for one month. It was open to the judge to find  that  the
    lack of any confirmatory evidence which could  have  reasonably  easily
    been obtained, and the substantial delay  in  the  claim  significantly
    undermined the credibility of the Appellant's account.

15. In any event, the  fact that her father  remains  in  prison  does  not
    affect the Appellant's position.  He had a significant role within  the
    village whereas on her account all she did was to  take  minutes  of  a
    meeting of the village committee and  accompanied  other  villagers  to
    Hangzhou to protest against the land acquisition.  The judge found that
    the fact that she was allowed to go to other villages to  gain  support
    would have been known to the authorities who took no steps  to  prevent
    her.  It was most unlikely that they had any interest  in  her  but  if
    they did she should answer any charges that may be put to her.

16. The Appellant has had two children whilst being in the UK but  she  has
    not put forward any claim on that basis to be  at  risk  on  return  to
    China.  Nevertheless this was a matter which was considered by both the
    Respondent and the judge but no challenge has been made to this  aspect
    of his decision.  Neither was there any challenge  made  on  Article  8
    grounds.

Decision

17. The original judge did not  err  in  law.  his  decision  stands.   The
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date 9th October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
