
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA082932015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th May 2016                              |On 16th June 2016             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     BIA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 1. In a decision promulgated on 23rd March 2016, which is appended hereto,
    I decided that the decision made by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Telford
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    fell into error in that the judge had failed to deal with  the  country
    guidance case of AA (Article 15(c)) [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC).   I  decided
    that this amounted to a material error in this case.  I  preserved  the
    judge's findings of fact and set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in relation to the issue as  to  whether  the  Appellant
    could be returned to Iraq in light of the guidance in AA.  I  adjourned
    the hearing so that the Respondent could carry out checks as to whether
    the Appellant could be pre-cleared for a return to  the  Iraqi  Kurdish
    Region (IKR).

 2. I further found that the judge erred in his assessment of Article 8  of
    the European Convention of Human Rights in that he failed  to  consider
    the fact that the Appellant's daughter is a British citizen or that the
    Appellant's removal to Iraq would lead  to  separation  of  the  family
    unit.  I therefore also set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision in
    relation to Article 8 to be remade at the resumed hearing.

 3. At the resumed hearing on 10th May 2016 I heard oral evidence from  the
    Appellant and her partner who  adopted  their  witness  statements.   I
    heard submissions from  Mr  Kotas  and  Mr  Smith  and  I  reserved  my
    decision.

 4. Mr Kotas advised the Tribunal that, despite chasing up the issue within
    the Home Office, he had not obtained any evidence  that  the  Appellant
    had been  granted  pre-clearance  for  entry  to  the  IKR.   Mr  Smyth
    indicated at the outset that it was accepted that there was no risk  to
    the Appellant upon return to Erbil in the IKR  but  he  maintained  the
    Appellant's case that there was a risk that her return to Baghdad would
    amount to a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR.

Discussion and conclusions

Asylum

 5. Mr Kotas accepted that there  was  no  evidence  in  relation  to  pre-
    clearance checks.  However he  submitted  that  such  checks  were  not
    necessary.  He submitted  that  the  Appellant  stated  in  her  asylum
    interview (B2 of the Respondent's bundle) that she was from  Erbil  and
    that it was  therefore  necessary  to  look  at  returns  to  IKR.   He
    submitted that the head note in AA stated at paragraph 17;

          "17.    The Respondent will only return P (an Iraqi  national)  to
         the IKR if P originates from the IKR and P's identity has been pre-
         cleared with the IKR authorities.  The authorities in  the  IKR  do
         not require P to have an expired or current passport or  a  laissez
         passer."

    However he submitted that it  was  necessary  to  look  at  the  entire
    decision in AA and he submitted that the issue of pre-clearance appears
    twice in the determination at paragraphs 81 and 150.  Paragraph  81  of
    the determination states;

         "81. Returns from the UK to the IKR take place  on  EU  letters.  A
         person not originally from the IKR would  not  be  returned  there.
         Returnees are pre-cleared with the IKR  authorities.   Identity  is
         assured in advance."

    At paragraph 150 the Tribunal in AA said

         "150.    The Respondent states that  she  will  only  return  Iraqi
         nationals to either Baghdad or to the  IKR.   The  Respondent  also
         identified that she will only return a person to the  IKR  if  that
         person is from the IKR and such person  has  been  pre-cleared  for
         return by the IKR authorities."

    Mr Kotas submitted that this is an operational issue for the  Secretary
    of State.  He referred to the Home Office guidance dated  15th  January
    2016  entitled  "Enforcing  Removals  using  EU  Letters  and   Chicago
    Convention Letters" which gives information at page 7 about a  European
    Union letter which it states is a locally produced travel document used
    for removal purposes.  It states that there are  no  formal  agreements
    about the use of an EU Letter and a country's willingness to accept the
    return of their nationals on an EU Letter may change at  any  time.  Mr
    Kotas submitted that as this is an operational issue there is therefore
    no real issue in this case in relation to pre-clearance.

 6. Mr Smyth submitted that this was not simply an operational issue as the
    region of return is relevant to the risk assessment. He relied  on  the
    case of HH (Somalia)  and  Others  V  SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  426  and
    submitted that the route of return is to be considered as part  of  the
    risk assessment as  a  whole.   He  submitted  that  the  Appellant  is
    entitled to know where she is to be removed to. He noted that there are
    as yet no removal directions  in  place.  He  submitted  that  if  this
    protection appeal is  dismissed  the  Appellant  could  be  removed  to
    Baghdad without further recourse to the Tribunal.  He accepted that  it
    is likely that the Appellant could obtain a CSID  card  from  her  home
    area.  He accepted that if there was evidence  from  the  Secretary  of
    State that the Appellant had been pre-cleared for return to the IKR  he
    would have had to abandon the protection claim.  He submitted that  the
    EU letter forms part of the Secretary of State's  operational  measures
    in relation to the mechanics of removal but this did not  detract  from
    the finding in AA that people from the IKR had to  be  pre-cleared  for
    return there.  Whilst the mechanics of removal is an operational  issue
    he submitted that there was no basis to support  a  finding  that  this
    Appellant has been or will be pre-cleared for return to  the  IKR.   He
    submitted that the Home Office had not sought an adjournment,  nor  had
    they produced any evidence of contact with the IKR authorities and that
    in these circumstances removal could take place to Baghdad.

 7. Mr Smyth submitted that a number of factors  taken  cumulatively  meant
    that there is a real risk of destitution if the Appellant  were  to  be
    returned to Baghdad.  The Appellant is  a  lone  woman  without  family
    support who speaks Kurdish  and  who  has  never  previously  lived  in
    Baghdad.  He submitted that the risk of destitution in Baghdad  amounts
    to a risk of serious harm in breach of Article 3.   In  his  submission
    these factors would  seriously  impact  on  her  chances  of  obtaining
    accommodation and employment and would amount to a breach of Article 3.

 8. In response Mr Kotas submitted that AA was  expressed  in  relation  to
    Article 3 and that paragraph 5 of the head note states;

         "5.  Return of former residents to the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be  to  Baghdad.   The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or to a laissez passer."

    He submitted that this makes clear that there  is  no  doubt  that  the
    Appellant will be returned to the IKR  and  there  is  no  question  of
    return to Baghdad.

 9. In response Mr Smyth submitted that return to the IKR is contingent  on
    the Appellant being pre-cleared and if she is not pre-cleared  applying
    AA she will not be returnable to Erbil and the only alternative is  her
    return  to  Baghdad.   He  reiterated  his  submission  that   if   the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed the Appellant could be removed to  Iraq
    anywhere and it is not open to the Secretary of State to  say  at  this
    hearing that she would not be removed to  Baghdad  without  any  proper
    undertaking to that effect.

10. It is accepted in the Reasons for Refusal letter that the appellant  is
    from  the  IKR.  The  Reasons  for  Refusal  letter  assesses  internal
    relocation in terms of the asylum claim as  being  internal  relocation
    within the IKR. No assessment is made of Baghdad as a suitable internal
    relocation venue. I accept  Mr  Kotas'  indication  that  there  is  no
    question of returning the Appellant  to  Baghdad.  It  is  accepted  on
    behalf of the Appellant that there is  no  risk  to  the  Appellant  on
    return to the IKR.  It is clear from the decision  in  AA  that,  as  a
    former resident of the IKR, the Appellant ought to be  returned  there.
    It is also clear from the decision in AA that the Appellant can only be
    returned there if her  identity  has  been  pre-cleared  with  the  IKR
    authorities, as set out in paragraphs 81 and 150 of  the  decision  and
    paragraph 17 of the head note.

11. What is not clear from the decision in AA is whether, if a person  from
    the IKR cannot be pre-cleared and returned to  the  IKR,  consideration
    would be  given  to  returning  them  to  Baghdad.   However  Mr  Kotas
    indicated that the Appellant would not be returned to Baghdad as she is
    not from there. I must accept that this is an undertaking given by  him
    in good faith. I therefore make the decision in relation to this matter
    on the basis that the appellant will only be returned to the IKR if she
    has been pre-cleared and that there is no proposal  to  return  her  to
    Baghdad or elsewhere in Iraq. In these circumstances and  in  light  of
    the concession made on the Appellant's behalf I am satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has not made out this part of her appeal.

Article 8

12. Mr Kotas submitted  that  the  preserved  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are that the Appellant made a fabricated  asylum  account  and
    twice entered the UK illegally and that her husband  was  complicit  in
    these  actions.  Therefore  the  Appellant   circumvented   immigration
    control. He accepted that this case turns on the child who is a British
    citizen.  However he submitted that the Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09
    point is distinct from any issue of the best  interest  of  the  child.
    Zambrano does apply here and he referred to page 55 of the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions (IDIs) on Family Migration of August 2015  and
    submitted that it would  not  be  unreasonable  to  force  the  British
    citizen child to leave the UK in the circumstances.  He submitted  that
    in this case it would be a matter of choice as the child  could  remain
    with her father and would not therefore be forced to leave the European
    Union.

13. As to the wider question as to whether it is reasonable for  the  child
    to leave the UK he submitted that  Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act
    states that the issue  of  reasonableness  applies  to  all  qualifying
    children  including  British   citizen   children   therefore   British
    citizenship is not a trump card, it is an issue of  choice  and  it  is
    reasonable for the child to leave the UK in this  case.   He  submitted
    that the IDIs are consistent with this  approach.   He  submitted  that
    this child is very young, has no private life and would be adaptable if
    the family go to Iraq which is reasonable  in  the  circumstances.   It
    would be in the best interests of the child to go  to  Erbil  with  her
    parents.

14. Mr Kotas submitted that the findings in paragraph 26 of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision  still  stand  which  are  that  the  child's  best
    interests are with her mother in Iraq and the wider family  there.   He
    submitted that there is nothing in  the  recent  witness  statement  to
    indicate that there are any insurmountable obstacles  to  returning  to
    Iraq and he submitted that the burden is on the Appellant  in  relation
    to this issue.  He submitted that there is no evidence as to any health
    concerns in relation  to  the  child  or  the  parents.   There  is  no
    information that the requirements of Appendix FM  have  been  met.   He
    submitted that it is reasonable to expect the family to continue  their
    family life in Iraq. In terms of  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  he
    submitted that the Appellant's partner is in  receipt  of  working  tax
    credits.

15. Mr Smyth accepted that the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  financial
    requirements of Appendix FM but relied on Exception 1 which  poses  the
    question as to whether it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant's
    daughter to leave the UK.  He submitted that there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship between the Appellant  and  her  child
    and the child is a British citizen and he submitted that the answer  to
    the question could only be that it is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
    British citizen child to leave the  UK,  to  forego  all  the  benefits
    including the language and access to education or for her to remain  in
    the UK without her mother.

16. Mr Smyth relied on page 55 of the IDIs where it states;

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU regardless of the  age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice's  judgment
         in Zambrano."

    It goes on to say

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer." (11.2.3)

    The guidance states that in such cases it will usually  be  appropriate
    to grant leave to the parent or primary carer to enable them to  remain
    the UK with the child provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship.  It states that it may be
    appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the conduct of the parent or
    primary carer gives rise to considerations of such weight as to justify
    separation if the child could otherwise stay  with  another  parent  or
    alternative primary carer in the UK or the  EU  and  the  circumstances
    envisaged could cover among other things criminality  or  a  very  poor
    immigration history.  The guidance states that in  considering  whether
    refusal may be appropriate the decision maker must consider the  impact
    on the child of any separation.

17.  Mr Smyth submitted that in this case the asylum claim was rejected but
    the circumstances were not as negative as  those  in  the  case  of  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.  He submitted that  the  child  is  an
    innocent victim here.  He submitted that the guidance does not  say  it
    would be reasonable for the child to stay  in  the  UK  with  just  her
    father absent the additional considerations.  He further submitted that
    the best interests of  the  child  must  be  considered  and  the  best
    interests of the child must be to be with her mother.

18. Although Mr Kotas submitted that the finding of the judge at  paragraph
    26 have been preserved I note that this is a finding in relation to the
    best interests of the child and that  I  have  set  aside  the  judge's
    findings in relation to Article 8.   I  cannot  therefore  accept  that
    paragraph 26 is a finding which has to be preserved.

19. I therefore consider the issue of Article 8 and  the  right  to  family
    life.  It was conceded by Mr Smyth that the Appellant cannot  meet  the
    financial requirements of Appendix FM.  He submitted that EX.1 applies.
     However EX.1 is not a standalone provision and Mr Smyth did not detail
    how the Appellant meets the relevant  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  for
    leave to remain as a partner or parent.

20. Ex 1 provides for exceptions to certain  eligibility  requirements  for
    leave to remain as a partner or parent where;

         "EX.1. This paragraph applies if

            (a)(i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
      relationship with a child who-

            (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of 18
            years when the applicant was first granted leave on the basis
            that this paragraph applied;

            (bb) is in the UK;

            (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK continuously
            for at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
            application ; and

         (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         UK; or

         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
         life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or
         would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their
         partner."

21. I accept on the basis of the evidence before me and the fact  that  the
    couple have a child together that the Appellant and her partner, who is
    a British citizen, are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  There
    was no submission made that there are insurmountable obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's family life with her partner continuing outside the UK.

22. The Appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM in relation to parents as she and her partner live together
    and the child lives with them both. As stated  above  Ex  1  is  not  a
    standalone provision.

23. I therefore consider the appeal under Article 8 as there are compelling
    reasons to do so as the child is a British citizen. In considering  the
    appeal under Article 8 I follow the guidance given by Lord Bingham in R
    v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. I accept that the Appellant, her
    partner and their child have established a family life in  the  UK.  As
    the Appellant's partner and child are British nationals and her partner
    said in his witness statement that he does not want to go back to  live
    in Iraq, I accept that the  decision  to  remove  the  appellant  would
    amount to an interference with that family  life.  I  accept  that  the
    interference will have consequences of such gravity as  potentially  to
    engage the operation of Article 8. As it  is  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules such interference would be  in  accordance  with  the
    law. That brings me to proportionality.

24. In assessing proportionality I take account of the  best  interests  of
    the child. I accept that the best interests of the child must be to  be
    with both parents. There is no evidence to the contrary before  me.  It
    is not in dispute that the child is a British citizen; she is therefore
    entitled to reside in the UK and enjoy the benefits of living  here.  I
    accept that the child's father is a British citizen who has resided  in
    the UK for 14 years and that he does not wish to return  to  Iraq.  The
    child is not yet one year old and will have  a  strong  bond  with  her
    mother. Therefore if the child returned with the Appellant she would be
    separated from her father. In these circumstances I accept that  it  is
    in the child's best interests to remain with both parents in the UK.

25. In assessing proportionality I  take  account  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. I also
    take account of the adverse findings made by the First-tier Tribunal in
    relation to the circumstances of her asylum claim. I take  account  too
    of the provisions of section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. I note that the maintenance of  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest.  I  note  that  the  appellant  gave
    evidence through an interpreter and it is not  clear  whether  she  can
    speak English. I note that the Appellant's partner  is  in  receipt  of
    Working Child Tax Credits and Child Benefit and, although supported  by
    her partner, she is not therefore  financially  independent.  I  attach
    little weight to any private life established  whilst  the  Appellant's
    immigration status was precarious.

26. I have considered the guidance  set  out  in  the  IDIs.  I  have  also
    considered section 117B (6) in the context of the decision of the Upper
    Tribunal in Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015]  UKUT  00674
    (IAC).  In  considering  whether  it  is  reasonable  to   expect   the
    Appellant's child to  leave  the  UK  I  take  into  account  her  best
    interests as assessed above. I take into account that she is a  British
    citizen and that if she goes to  Iraq  with  her  mother  she  will  be
    leaving the EU. I take into account that the  Appellant's  father  said
    that he does not want to return to Iraq and therefore if the  Appellant
    and the child return the child will be separated from her father.

27. On the basis of all of the evidence before me I find  that  it  is  not
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. I therefore  take  into
    account section 117B (6) as indicating that the  public  interest  does
    not require removal in these circumstances.

28. The respondent has not the respondent  has  not  established  that  the
    decision to remove the Appellant is proportionate to her right to enjoy
    private and family life in the UK.

Notice of Decision

I dismiss the appeal under Article 3.

I allow the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Signed                              Date: 15 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 15 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

APPENDIX- Error of Law Decision
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08293/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th March 2016                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     BIA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, Kesar & Co Solicitors (Dover)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


29. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 15th May  2015  to
    refuse her application for asylum in the United Kingdom and  to  refuse
    her application for leave to remain on the basis of  her  private  life
    and family life in  the  United  Kingdom.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Telford dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds and the
    Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

30. In summary the Appellant's case is that she is at risk  of  persecution
    in Kurdistan in Iraq.  She claims to have married a British citizen  in
    Iraq in March or April 2014 and claims that her husband returned to the
    United Kingdom in June 2014 and that one week later her father took her
    back to their home and threatened and beat her.  She  claims  that  her
    maternal uncle arranged for her to leave Iraq.

31. There were a number of Grounds of Appeal but First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Ford who granted permission to appeal considered that  only  Grounds  3
    and 4 were arguable.

32. At the hearing before me Mr Smith submitted that, as Judge Ford had not
    formally refused permission in relation to  these  grounds  of  appeal,
    Grounds 1 and 2 could still be argued.   Ground  1  contends  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made an irrational finding that the Appellant
    had used deception in her screening interview  and  Ground  2  contends
    that the judge erred in failing to make adequately reasoned findings of
    fact in relation to the Appellant's claimed marriage.

33. I indicated at the hearing that I considered  that  these  two  grounds
    were not made out.  I have considered  the  content  of  the  screening
    interview and I am satisfied that the judge's conclusion at  paragraphs
    3 and 14 that the Appellant had lied in  her  screening  interview  was
    open to him on the basis of the screening interview record.

34. Ground 2 contends that the judge erred, in particular at paragraph  25,
    in concluding that he was unable to make out  a  number  of  key  facts
    claimed to exist by the Appellant  including  whether  she  married  in
    Iraq, when she married in Iraq, and whether her parents  knew  or  were
    involved in that Iraqi marriage.  I am satisfied that the judge did not
    materially err in relation to these issues as I am satisfied that it is
    clear that that the judge was saying here that the  Appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof upon her to establish to the appropriate
    standard that she had married, when she had married and the position of
    her parents in relation to that marriage.

35. It is contended in Ground 3 that the judge should have  had  regard  to
    the country guidance case of AA (Article 15(c)) [2015] UKUT  544  (IAC)
    which was promulgated between the date of the hearing and the  date  of
    the decision. In that case the Tribunal noted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State would only return an individual to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR)
    if that person had been cleared for return to  the  IKR.  The  Tribunal
    further identified factors which should be  considered  in  determining
    whether it would be unduly harsh for a person to  relocate  to  Baghdad
    City. It is contended that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    identify whether the Appellant could be returned to the IKR or  whether
    she would have to be returned to  Baghdad.  It  is  contended  that  an
    assessment is required as to whether the Appellant could travel to  her
    home area or relocate in accordance with the guidance given in the case
    of AA.

36. Mr Kotas accepted that the judge  had  made  an  error  in  failing  to
    consider the decision in AA but submitted that that was not a  material
    error.  Mr Smith submitted that it was indeed a material error  because
    the Appellant is from the IKR and that this is significant in  applying
    the guidance in AA as the Appellant would have to be pre-cleared by the
    IKR authorities for return there.  He submitted that if  the  Appellant
    cannot be pre-cleared she would have to be returned to Baghdad and that
    her personal circumstances have to be considered in  assessing  whether
    her relocation there is reasonable. In response Mr Kotas submitted that
    the  Appellant's  solicitors  should  also  have  been  aware  of   the
    promulgation of AA after the  date  of  the  hearing  and  should  have
    alerted the judge.

37. I have considered the submissions in relation to AA and I note that the
    Tribunal issued guidance on when  return  to  Iraq  is  feasible,  what
    documentation is required for return and noted that  the  Secretary  of
    State will only return a person to the IKR if  that  person  originates
    from the IKR and his/her identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
    authorities.  The Tribunal also concluded that a list of seven  factors
    are  likely  to  be  relevant  in  assessing  whether   it   would   be
    unreasonable/unduly  harsh  for  the  person  to  relocate  to  Baghdad
    including whether the person is a lone female.

38. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the guidance issued in AA is
    capable of influencing the outcome in this case. The guidance in AA was
    issued before the judge issued a decision in this appeal.  Whether  the
    judge should have been aware of the case or either  party  should  have
    advised him does not change the fact that the issues  in  the  guidance
    were not taken into account in reaching this decision.  I  accept  that
    the failure to consider the guidance in AA does amount  to  a  material
    error in this case. In light of my decision in relation  to  Grounds  1
    and 2 I preserve the Judge's findings of fact. I set aside his decision
    in relation to the Appellant's returnability in light of  the  guidance
    in AA. I agree with Mr Kotas's submission that the Respondent should be
    given time to carry out checks as to whether the Appellant could be pre-
    cleared for return to the IKR.  I therefore adjourned  the  hearing  so
    that those checks could take place.

39. It is  contended  in  Ground  4  that  the  judge  undertook  a  flawed
    assessment of Article 8 in that he failed to consider the fact that the
    Appellant's daughter is a  British  citizen  or  that  the  Appellant's
    removal to Iraq would lead to separation of the  family  unit.  At  the
    outset of the hearing before me Mr Kotas accepted  that  Ground  4  was
    made out as the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to undertake a  proper
    assessment of the best interests of the child taking into  account  the
    fact that the child is a British citizen. This concession was  properly
    made.  Although the judge did consider Article 8 in accordance with the
    steps set out in R v SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  it  is
    apparent from consideration of paragraphs 36 and  37  of  his  decision
    that he did not give any consideration to the fact that the child is  a
    British citizen.  He failed to consider the guidance given by Lady Hale
    in  ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2011]
    UKSC and that given by the  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MK
    (Section 55 - Tribunal options) [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC).

40. In these circumstances I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in relation to Article 8  and  I  adjourn  the  appeal  to  be
    reconvened to make the decision on that basis.

Directions

 1. The resumed hearing in this appeal is to take place on 10th May 2016.

 2. The parties are directed to lodge all relevant documents to  be  relied
    upon at the resumed hearing no later  than  fourteen  days  before  the
    resumed hearing.


Signed                              Date: 23 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

