
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08319/2013
     AA/08320/2013
     AA/08322/2013
     AA/08323/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 September 2014                             |On 11 November 2014           |
|                                                |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

              mr Neil A R Jayalath Arachchige (first appellant)
                   mrs Uduwe V C Perera (second appellant)
            miss Nimashi C Jayalath Arachchige (third appellant)
            master Ashen C Jayalath Archchige (fourth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr W Aghayere, Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs P Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  a  visa  as  a  dependent
    partner of the second appellant (then a Tier 4 Student).  After he  had
    been living in the  United  Kingdom  for  about  eighteen  months,  the
    appellant claimed asylum.  His application was refused and  a  decision
    taken by the respondent to  remove  him  by  way  of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   The
    first appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Omotosho) which, in a determination  dated  29  January
    2014, dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  I shall hereafter refer  to
    the first appellant as "the appellant"; the other appellants, his  wife
    and children, are dependants on his appeal.

 2. Judge Omotosho rejected the appellant's credibility as a witness.   She
    found that his asylum claim had been  a  "complete  fabrication"  [51].
    She found that the appellant was not of adverse  interest  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities because of his perceived political opinion.

 3. There are several grounds of appeal,  but  only  one  ground  that  was
    actively pursued at the hearing before me at Bradford  on  2  September
    2014.  The other grounds are without merit.   Those  grounds  variously
    amount to little more than disagreement with the  judge's  findings  on
    the evidence and challenge what was clearly a  typographical  error  at
    [39] as to the date of  the  appellant's  screening  interview.   These
    grounds are also dependent upon the veracity of an arrest  warrant  and
    other documents produced by  the  appellant  in  evidence  which  Judge
    Omotosho rejected as unreliable.

 4. Indeed, it is the judge's treatment of the  documents  that  forms  the
    subject of the remaining ground of appeal.   I  granted  permission  in
    this appeal in the following terms:

         "The judge states at [46] that 'the original court notices, warrant
         or message form have not been produced before me'.  The grounds [2]
         assert that the original documents were before the judge.  The fact
         that, in the same paragraph in  which  she  found  that  she  could
         attach no weight to  the  appellant's  documents,  the  judge  drew
         attention to the fact that she had not  seen  the  originals  would
         indicate that it is at least arguable that her finding was based on
         a false premise.  All the grounds may be argued."

 5. At [46]-[49], the judge considered the documentary evidence pursuant to
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.  She was aware that she had to assess
    the documentary evidence "after looking at  all  the  evidence  in  the
    round".  Having done so, she placed no reliance on a  letter  from  the
    Sri Lankan lawyer, a letter from the police in Sri Lanka, court notices
    and an arrest warrant.  She recorded at [46] that "the  original  court
    notices, warrant or message form have not  been  produced  before  me".
    The appellant asserts the original documents  were  before  the  judge.
    Mrs Pettersen did not challenge that  assertion.   I  accept  that  the
    judge has erred by stating that the original documents were not  before
    her.  However, that is not the end of the matter.  The judge went on to
    provide a detailed analysis of the various documents and to give cogent
    and clear reasons as to why  she  did  not  accept  their  contents  as
    reliable.  Most significantly, the judge's analysis  of  the  documents
    deals with inconsistent  information  contained  within  them  and  the
    failure of the appellant in his own oral and written evidence  to  make
    any reference to details of important relevance to his  case  contained
    in the documents.  For example, at [49]  by  reference  to  the  arrest
    warrant, the judge noted  that  there  had  been  "no  mention  by  the
    appellant that his employee was granted bail and absconded".  The judge
    noted that the official reference numbers on the  documents  were  also
    not consistent.  The  letter  from  the  Sri  Lankan  lawyer  was,  she
    considered "written in poor English (grammatical and spelling mistakes)
    and  essentially  reiterates  what  the  information  provided  by  the
    appellant's mother-in-law" had stated.  She regarded that letter as  "a
    self-serving statement".

 6. None of the concerns raised by the judge regarding the documents  arise
    from  the  nature  of  the  documents  themselves;  as  Mrs   Pettersen
    submitted, the problems with this  evidence  identified  by  the  judge
    would apply equally to original documents as to  copies.   The  judge's
    incorrect observation that she did  not  have  sight  of  the  original
    documents was no more than that; it did not in any way lead  her  to  a
    finding that the contents of the documents were unreliable.

 7. In the circumstances, I find that the judge  did  not  err  in  law  as
    asserted in the grounds or at all.  She wrongly recorded that  she  had
    not seen the original documents but that observation was of no material
    importance to the outcome of the appeal.


NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 5 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


