
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08100/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2017                   |On 30 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms K. Tobin, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. By way of a decision promulgated on 10 October 2016 (a copy of which
      is appended to this decision) I set aside the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal ("FtT"). I now remake the decision of the FtT.

   2. It is accepted (and a preserved finding from the FtT) that the
      appellant, who is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 5 April 1983, was a
      member of the LTTE who was subjected to torture and brutal treatment
      whilst in Sri Lanka.

   3. For the reasons given in my decision promulgated on 10 October 2016,
      the appellant does not have an objectively well founded fear of
      persecution or ill treatment from either the state or non-state actors
      in Sri Lanka. Accordingly he cannot succeed in his asylum claim.

   4. However, the appellant claims that, as a consequence of his
      experiences in Sri Lanka, he suffers from post traumatic stress
      disorder ("PTSD") and depression and that there is a significant
      likelihood he will commit suicide if returned to Sri Lanka. The issue
      in this appeal, therefore, is whether removing the appellant to Sri
      Lanka is contrary to the UK's obligation under Article 3 of the ECHR
      because of the risk that upon being returned, or in transit, he will
      commit suicide.

   5. The evidence before me about the appellant's risk of suicide comprises
      of three letters from treating doctors (one dated 3 November 2016 and
      the others both dated 12 July 2016) and an expert report by Dr Chiedu
      Obuaya obtained through the Helen Bamber Association.  The conclusion
      of Dr Obuaya is categorical and unambiguous. He states that the
      appellant is convinced he would be at great risk of serious physical
      harm by the authorities if returned to Sri Lanka. He comments that
      regardless of whether these fears are well founded, they are, in his
      view, genuinely held. Dr Obuaya states that this fear may be a barrier
      to the appellant accessing help in Sri Lanka.

   6. Dr Obuaya diagnoses the appellant as having PTSD and Partially Treated
      Severe Depressive Episode without psychotic features. He states that
      these conditions and his observations are in keeping with and the
      result of the trauma suffered in Sri Lanka. He states he finds the
      appellant plausible. On the issue of suicide, Dr Obuaya states that
      the appellant has a moderate risk of attempting suicide in the short
      time but that:

         "The risk of suicide or serious self inflicted harm would, in my
         view, increase even further to a high level upon hearing that he
         would definitely be returned to Sri Lanka, during the transit there
         and once he was back there. In all circumstances, it is in my
         opinion less likely that he would be able to take stock of his
         situation and make a considered decision in an environment he
         regards to be full of danger".


   7. The respondent has not produced any alternative evidence. She has not
      sought to nominate a different expert or to secure agreement as to a
      joint psychiatric examination.

   8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Tobin and Mr Clarke. No
      oral evidence was given.

   9. Ms Tobin contended that Dr Obuaya's report demonstrates the severity
      of the appellant's condition. She argued that his situation is
      analogous to the third appellant in GJ and others (post-civil war:
      returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) who was unable to
      succeed in his asylum claim but, because of his suicide risk and the
      findings in that case about the paucity of mental health provision in
      Sri Lanka, prevailed under Article 3 ECHR.

  10. Mr Clarke noted that the appellant had not disclosed a full set of his
      GP records and this impedes assessment of the circumstances. He
      commented on the letter of 12 July 2016 which referred to his family
      being a protective factor. The appellant's family live in Sri Lanka
      and therefore the 'protection' will exist upon return. Mr Clarke
      argued that, looking at the evidence as a whole, this is not a case
      where the high threshold required for an Article 3 claim is met.

  11. It is well established that the rights protected by Article 3 can be
      engaged where there is a risk that a person who is removed from the UK
      will, upon return, commit suicide. A six part test was set out in J v
      SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 which can be summarised as follows:


         (1) The ill-treatment relied upon must attain a minimum level of
         severity.
         (2) The appellant must show a causal link between the act or
         threatened act of removal or expulsion and the inhuman treatment
         relied on as violating the applicant's article 3 rights.
         (3) In the context of a foreign case, the Article 3 threshold is
         particularly high simply because it is a foreign case. And it is
         even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment is not the direct
         or indirect responsibility of the public authorities of the
         receiving state, but results from some naturally occurring illness,
         whether physical or mental.
         (4) An article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a suicide case;
         (5) Where the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
         state upon which the risk of suicide is said to be based is not
         objectively well-founded, that will tend to weigh against there
         being a real risk that the removal will be in breach of Article 3.
         (6) The decision maker must have regard to whether the removing
         and/or the receiving state has effective mechanisms to reduce the
         risk of suicide. If there are effective mechanisms, that too will
         weigh heavily against an applicant's claim that removal will
         violate his or her Article 3 rights.


  12. This is supplemented by the finding of Sedley LJ in Y and another (Sri
      Lanka) v Home Office [2009] EWCA Civ 362 that:

         "...what may nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any
         genuine fear which the appellant may establish, albeit without an
         objective foundation, is such as to create a risk of suicide if
         there is an enforced return".

  13. Although Mr Clarke has sought to throw some doubt on Dr Obuaya's
      report, there has been no challenge to his expertise or competence. It
      would have been preferable had Dr Obuaya seen, and had regard to, the
      appellant's GP records, but even without these, it is apparent that
      the report is internally consistent, logical and based on a recognised
      methodology. In the absence of an alternative report or good reasons
      for discounting Dr Obuaya's reasoning or analysis, I accept his
      conclusions.

  14. Accordingly, in light of Dr Obuaya's report, I find that the appellant
      continues to be traumatised by his experiences in Sri Lanka, fears
      that he will face serious harm upon return (even though that fear is
      not well founded) and that there is a real risk that he will commit
      suicide once in Sri Lanka unless he is able to access care and
      treatment.

  15. The lack of availability of mental health treatment in Sri Lanka was
      considered in GJ, where it was stated:

         "The evidence is that there are only 25 working psychiatrists in
         the whole of Sri Lanka. Although there are some mental health
         facilities in Sri Lanka, at paragraph 4 of the April 2012 UKBA
         Operational Guidance Note on Sri Lanka, it records an observation
         by Basic Needs that "money that is spent on mental health only
         really goes to the large mental health institutions in capital
         cities, which are inaccessible and do not provide appropriate care
         for mentally ill people"

  16. Given the severity of the appellant's mental illness and the risk of
      suicide as reported by Dr Obuaya, as well as the lack of professional
      support that will be available to him in Sri Lanka (and his reluctance
      to access any such support even if it were available), I am satisfied,
      having regard to the Court of Appeal judgments in Y and in J, that
      returning the appellant to Sri Lanka would breach the UK's obligations
      under Article 3 ECHR.

Decision

A. The appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of his
asylum and humanitarian protection claim is dismissed.

B.  The appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of his
human rights claim under Article 3 of the ECHR is allowed.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 27 January 2017               |

