
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08446/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 July 2016                       |On 8 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTE UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                   A A S O
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale instructed by Migrant Legal Project,
Cardiff
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Libya. He appealed under section 82  (1)
    of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  against  the
    Respondent's  decision  of  3  October  2014  to  refuse  him   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and against the decision that removal would not
    breach his rights under the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).
     His appeal was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Solly  in  a
    decision  promulgated  on  21  November  2015.  The  Appellant   sought
    permission to appeal that decision and permission was  granted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on renewal. In granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge
    Gill found it arguable that the Judge may have erred in the approach to
    the evidence of Dr Battersby and may have misapprehended the  evidence.
    Permission was granted on all grounds.

    The Grounds

 2. Ground 1 asserts that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  follow  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note 2 2010, Child,  Vulnerable  adult  and
    sensitive appellant guidance, having been alerted  to  the  Appellant's
    diagnosis of moderate PTSD and survivors guilt. Ground 2  asserts  that
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to fully consider the psychiatric report
    of Dr Battersby. Ground 3 asserts that the First-tier Tribunal erred by
    determining the issue of credibility a priori and used that as a  basis
    to discount Dr Battersby's report. Ground 4 asserts that the First-tier
    Tribunal erred by discounting the Appellant's account to  Dr  Battersby
    that he had worked in a prison when this was not materially  challenged
    in any way in live evidence. Ground  5  contends  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  fell  into  error  by  appearing  to  reject  Dr  Battersby's
    diagnosis of PTSD, survivor's guilt and high risk of suicide. Ground  6
    asserts that the First-tier Tribunal erred in concluding  that  because
    the Appellant survived away from Benghazi for two years prior to coming
    to the UK in 2013 it would be safe for him to return  there  currently.
    Ground 7 contends that the First-tier Tribunal was  wrong  to  conclude
    that the Appellant encountered no problems  before  leaving  Libya  and
    Ground 8 argues that the First-tier Tribunal erred by  concluding  that
    the documents the Appellant served could not  relied  on  because  they
    were self-serving.

    The Rule 24 Response

 3. The Respondent opposed the Appellant's appeal and  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal directed itself appropriately. It is contended that
    the Judge properly considered the medical report  in  relation  to  the
    credibility issues and highlighted the  obvious  discrepancies  between
    what the Appellant said in the report and the failure to  mention  that
    he had been detained.

    The Hearing

 4. Mr Neale relied on  his  skeleton  argument  and  on  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal. He added that the preponderance  of  the  grounds
    related to the medical report. The Judge had catalogued everything  she
    saw as an inconsistency and the approach disclosed several errors.  The
    expert's report was supposed to  be  considered  in  order  to  address
    credibility. She had dismissed it in part because she did not find  the
    Appellant credible. It was compliant with the Istanbul Protocol and  it
    was clear that Dr Battersby had carried out independent support for his
    account. That should have given rise to treating him  as  a  vulnerable
    witness. She addressed his ability to recall, PTSD relating  to  trauma
    and events surrounding that. Had the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed
    herself properly  that  would  clearly  have  made  a  difference.  The
    inconsistencies as to details  in  the  Appellant's  account  could  be
    explained by PTSD. At E16 of Dr Battersby's report was a  reference  to
    detention. There was a single phrase in  error  in  the  report  of  Dr
    Battersby and that was not a sufficient  basis  for  throwing  out  the
    whole report. The report set out the Appellant's account in  depth.  It
    set out his demeanour, his presentation and body language  and  reasons
    why he had PTSD. Mr Neale was not saying  the  Judge  would  have  been
    obliged to make a  positive  credibility  but  it  could  have  made  a
    difference. The medical evidence could have made a  difference  to  the
    way she considered inconsistences. To an extent all  the  grounds  were
    interlinked. He invited me to find an error of law on that basis.

 5. Ground 6 concerned the findings on the country  situation.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal was invited to make up to date findings on the  situation
    in Benghazi. It was still incumbent on her to  make  a  finding  as  to
    Article 15 (c).  AT and others considered events up to 2013. Two  rival
    governments emerged and the country descended deeper  into  civil  war.
    The evidence before  Judge  Solley  made  clear  that  there  had  been
    shelling and arms fire in populated areas in Benghazi. A large part  of
    the city's infrastructure was reduced to rubble. At  paragraph  39  she
    had not deal with that issue and glossed it over. She  had  before  her
    the UNHCR Report  from  2014  indicating  that  returns  should  cease.
    Reasons needed to be given for not following this. It was not just  the
    UNHCR's view. There were other  reports  from  humanitarian  and  other
    organisations. This influenced judge's views on internal relocation. At
    paragraph 43 to 46 she had not dealt with the conditions  of  IDPs.  He
    would be joining the ranks of the  internally  displaced.  He  did  not
    argue that she was obliged to find that there was  an  article  15  (c)
    risk but she was bound to apply the test in Elgafaji v Staatssecretaris
    van Justitie [2009] ECR 1-921.  If  she  erred  in  her  assessment  of
    credibility she could have found  risk  and  then  would  have  had  to
    consider internal relocation and then come back to country evidence.

 6. Ground 7 concerned the misstatement of the contents of the  Appellant's
    evidence. This bolstered the submission on relocation.  Ground  8  also
    concerned credibility  and  dealt  with  Libyan  documents.  Dr  George
    concluded that they were genuine and the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    have regard to them as she concluded they were self-serving.  That  was
    not a good reason.  The  Appellant  did  not  explain  how  his  friend
    obtained the documents. It was not clear why she thought he would  have
    knowledge or why he was asked. It was not a point that was in  evidence
    and not a sufficient reason for rejecting  these  documents.  Ground  4
    concerned RR (Challenging evidence) Sri Lanka  [2010]  UKUT  274  (IAC)
    which dealt with how the Respondent should approach  cross-examination.
    That was not followed in this case. The Judge drew an adverse inference
    with regard to a discrepancy that was not put or challenged and in  the
    R24 response it had not been sought to suggest that  the  grounds  were
    factually incorrect. It  was  unfair  to  take  this  point  after  the
    hearing. The overwhelming strong points were in relation to the medical
    evidence and the country evidence.

 7. Mr Richards submitted that there was no material error of  law  in  the
    First-tier Judge's decision. She had concluded a  thorough  examination
    of the evidence and came to conclusions properly open to her. It really
    did not matter where she placed her consideration  of  the  psychiatric
    evidence because she rejected that evidence. It had no material benefit
    to the Appellant. She rejected the evidence for extremely good reasons.
    The Battersby's report made a key finding at  E16  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle where she said in terms that the  Appellant's  presentation  was
    highly consistent with someone who had described events  in  detention.
    He had never claimed to be in detention. It was  an  extraordinary  and
    glaring discrepancy in the evidence.  The  grounds  said  that  it  was
    either a mistake or she was referring to the period the Appellant spent
    working in a prison. That could not possibly be a plausible explanation
    for an expert saying in the  clearest  terms  he  experienced  this  in
    detention. It was capable only of one meaning and the Judge was  wholly
    justified in taking the view that this undermined the Battersby  report
    and for the Judge to give no weight to Dr Battersby's conclusions. Once
    that conclusion was reached it was entirely open to the Judge to embark
    on her analysis as a whole and to conclude that the evidence as a whole
    was not credible to the  appropriate  standard  of  proof.  As  to  the
    argument on  whether  the  Judge  should  have  departed  from  country
    guidance case law she properly directed herself as to the weight to  be
    given to country guidance case law and did clearly take account of  the
    background evidence which was produced on behalf of the  Appellant.  In
    paragraph 34 she referred to the background evidence produced and noted
    laconically that it was clear that Libya was an unfortunate country. AT
    and others (Article 15 c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318 was
    found to be binding. She concluded that there was no  generalised  risk
    on return and it was  worth  noting  that  she  did  consider  internal
    relocation at paragraph 41 concluding it was available. He asked me  to
    find that the Judge had properly considered the whole of  the  evidence
    and there was no material legal  error  in  the  conclusions  that  she
    reached or in the way that she reached them.

 8. In reply Mr Neale said that it was not just the structure and the order
    but the approach which infected the substance of the  conclusions.  She
    made findings on credibility and then went on to  dismiss  the  medical
    report. In SA v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1302 and Mibanga  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  367  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal said that it was the wrong way around. It was wrong to say  that
    these two words 'in detention' were enough to dismiss the report.   The
    report could not be dismissed on the basis of these two words. She  had
    not engaged with the reasoning. If she thought that  the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD  had  been  undermined  she  should  have  said  so.  In  ordinary
    circumstances country guidance should be followed but it was  incumbent
    on the Judge to make findings on up to date evidence  on  Benghazi.  He
    asked for the case to be remitted to be heard de novo with no  findings
    preserved.

    Discussion and Findings

 9. A number of the grounds relate  to  the  treatment  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of the medical evidence of Dr Battersby and I  therefore  deal
    with them together. The Appellant relied on a psychiatric report by  Dr
    A Battersby, Consultant General Adult Psychiatrist. She interviewed the
    Appellant on 7 November 2015 for two  hours  and  prepared  a  23  page
    report in compliance with  the  Istanbul  Protocol.  She  set  out  the
    background information  provided  by  the  Migrant  Legal  Project  and
    confirmed that she had read his screening interview, asylum  interview,
    statement, the reasons for refusal letter (RFRL) and  medical  letters.
    She set out his family history, his personal history, his past  medical
    and psychiatric history (he had already been diagnosed with PTSD  by  a
    psychiatrist), his medication, habits, social  history,  relationships,
    occupational history and then analysed his mental health. She concluded
    that he suffered from moderate PTSD. She analysed his mental  state  by
    reference to ICD-10 (International Classification of Disease - 10).

10. Her opinion regarding his ability to  give  evidence,  the  cogency  of
    evidence and risk of re-traumatisation is at E19 of  the  report  where
    she states the following:

         "(The Appellant) has a reasonable level of pre-morbid intellect. He
         is able to understand the Tribunal processes. The  cogency  of  his
         evidence is likely to be reduced by his  continued  PTSD  symptoms.
         Memory and recall are impaired in PTSD. This  will  impair  cogency
         and consistency of evidence when discussing traumatic events.  (The
         Appellant) is overwhelmingly guilty at what  has  happened  to  his
         brothers.

         In my opinion, (the Appellant) is able to respond normally  to  the
         Tribunal processes for most  subjects.  My  concern  would  be  the
         episodes  of  his  interview  where  he  was  really  difficult  to
         understand/follow his story. I have considered whether the slightly
         different dialect of the interpreter may have been  a  factor,  but
         after due consideration, this does not explain the  extent  of  his
         behaviour. For significant time periods  he  would  start  and  not
         finish sentences and I could not make sense of his account. I  have
         considered whether this could be a psychotic  process  but  I  find
         this  unlikely.  On  balance,  in  my  opinion,  the  most   likely
         explanation is that a combination of his PTSD and survivor's  guilt
         result in him becoming very distracted by  thoughts/images  in  his
         head that result in incomplete sentences and  non-sequential  story
         lines. At these times, he would often stare and appear  distressed.
         Prior to my interview, I had spoken with his legal  representative,
         Mr Shepherd, who had also observed this  odd  behaviour.  At  these
         times,  (the  Appellant)  is  unlikely  to  be  able  to  take   in
         information, process it and respond  appropriately.  Robust  cross-
         examination whilst in this state is likely to be  unproductive  and
         possibly re-traumatising. He may need to have a break and calm down
         before re-commencing. It  is  difficult  to  predict  how  he  will
         respond at Tribunal but given that these behaviours  have  occurred
         in less stressful settings it is more likely that they will  occur.
         In my opinion, they are far more likely to be related to his mental
         state than  trying  to  be  obstructive  or  disrespectful  to  the
         Tribunal process."

11. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with Dr Battersby's report  at  paragraph
    20 and 40 to 42 of the decision. The approach taken by the Judge is  to
    list the "defects"  or  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  evidence
    (paragraphs 15 to 39), find that he is not  credible  and  then,  after
    these findings have been made, find that the inconsistencies cannot  be
    explained by the medical evidence (paragraphs 40 to  42).  The  Judge's
    findings are as follows:

         "40. For the appellant it is submitted that any inconsistencies  in
         his evidence can be explained by taking into account the report  of
         Dr Battersby concluded that he suffers from moderate PTSD  as  well
         as survivor's guilt. She further indicates that he is at high  risk
         of suicide should he be returned to Libya.

         41.  Dr Battersby indicates that his account is  highly  consistent
         of his account of being in detention (page E16)  however  the  Home
         Office Presenting Officer has advised me that the appellant has not
         been detained in the UK and  the  Appellant  gives  no  account  of
         having been detained in Libya. She also records the account of  the
         appellant working in prison which appears nowhere else.

         42.  I consider that these  inconsistencies  concerning  detention,
         working in a prison, no history of witnesses the  life  threatening
         events of the death and abduction of his brother, cast considerable
         doubt on the medical opinion in this case.  Given  my  findings  on
         credibility and these issues I do not accept the expert opinion  of
         Dr Battersby. Having rejected this opinion I cannot accept the view
         that inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence  are  due  to  his
         mental health."

12. It is clear from reading Dr Battersby's report that she  did  not  take
    the Appellant's account at face value. She carried out a  critical  and
    objective analysis of the symptoms displayed and applied the  framework
    of the Istanbul Protocol. Her reasons for  finding  that  his  clinical
    presentation was highly consistent with  the  events  he  claimed  that
    occurred  were  well-reasoned.  The  First-tier  tribunal   found,   at
    paragraph 41 and 42 that there were differences between the Appellant's
    account elsewhere and the account  given  to  Dr  Battersby.  The  main
    reason, however,  for  rejecting  the  report  of  the  expert  was  Dr
    Battersby's conclusion  at  E16  where  she  stated  "therefore  in  my
    opinion, (the  Appellant's)  presentation  is  highly  consistent  with
    someone who has experienced the events he describes in detention".   It
    is the Respondent's case that the Judge was right  to  find  that  this
    undermined the conclusions in  the  report.  I  do  not  agree.  It  is
    entirely self-evident when read as a whole that Dr Battersby knew  that
    the Appellant did not ever allege that he  had  been  detained.  It  is
    clear from her exposition of his narrative that he never said that  and
    she it is also clear from the body of her reasoning in relation to  his
    material history that she did not evaluate his case on the basis of  an
    account  that  he  had  been  detained.  I  conclude  that  it  was  an
    unfortunate error and certainly not a reason for  rejecting  a  medical
    opinion that was well-reasoned and from  a  suitably  qualified  expert
    whose methodology and approach was unimpeachable and not criticised.  I
    find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in disregarding the evidence of
    Dr Battersby for this reason. Adequate reasons were not given.

13. In light of Dr Battersby's conclusions at E19 in relation to the effect
    of the Appellant's  PTSD  on  his  ability  to  give  evidence  it  was
    incumbent on the First-tier Tribunal to consider whether the  Appellant
    was a vulnerable witness for the  purpose  of  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance  Note  No  2  2010,  Child,  Vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant guidance. According to  footnote  2  of  that  Guidance  some
    adults are  vulnerable  because  they  are  suffering  from  PTSD.  The
    guidance requires, at paragraphs 14 and 15 that the evidence is  to  be
    considered allowing for possible different degrees of understanding  by
    witnesses. Where there are clear discrepancies in the oral evidence the
    Tribunal  is  enjoined  to  consider  the  extent  in  which  the  age,
    vulnerability or sensitivity of the witnesses are an  element  of  that
    discrepancy or lack of clarity.  The requirement to apply this guidance
    is confirmed in JL  (medical  reports-credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT
    00145.

14. In failing to apply this  guidance  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no
    finding on whether the Appellant was a vulnerable witness. I have found
    that the reason given for rejecting Dr Battersby's medical opinion  was
    flawed. The First-tier tribunal should have made a finding  on  whether
    or not the Appellant was a vulnerable witness and what effect this  had
    on his credibility.

15. I find that the First-tier Tribunal also erred in its approach  to  the
    medical evidence in making findings in relation  to  credibility  first
    and then using that as a reason to reject the report  of  Dr  Battersby
    and its diagnosis. In  Mibanga  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Mr Justice Wilson  stated  at  paragraph
    24:

         "What the fact-finder does at his peril is to reach a conclusion by
         reference only to the appellant's  evidence  and  then,  if  it  be
         negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be  shifted  by  the
         expert evidence.  Mr Tam has  drawn  the  court's  attention  to  a
         decision of the tribunal dated 5 November 2004, namely  HE  (DRC  -
         Credibility and Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321  in  which,
         in paragraph 22, it said:

             "Where the report  is  specifically  relied  on  as  a  factor
             relevant to credibility, the Adjudicator should deal  with  it
             as an integral part of the findings on credibility rather than
             just as an add-on, which does not undermine the conclusions to
             which he would otherwise come."

16. It is clear from paragraphs 40 to 42 that  the  Tribunal  adopted  this
    erroneous approach.  The errors in relation to the medical evidence are
    such that the findings in relation to credibility cannot  stand.  These
    findings in turn effected  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusions  in
    relation  to  the  documentation  the  Appellant  relied  on  and   the
    assessment  of  risk  against   the   background   evidence.   In   the
    circumstances and in accordance with  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Upper-Tier Tribunal,  the  extent  of  the  judicial  fact
    finding is such that the decision in the appeal should be remade in the
    First-tier Tribunal.



Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  with  no
findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
