
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08154/2014
     AA/08360/2014
     AA/08361/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2016                           |On 1 November 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                             Mr Dirgham [A] (1)
                              Mr Hisham [H] (2)
                              Mrs Asma [K] (3)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The present appeal came before me on  17  March  2016.   Following  the
    hearing I decided that although the Immigration Judge had been entitled
    to reject the appellant's account of events there were  errors  in  his
    decision which  appeared  material  to  the  outcome.   Accordingly,  I
    directed a further hearing to be listed for two hours  following  which
    it was to be decided whether the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    could be allowed to stand.  I directed the filing of  further  evidence
    including the provision of updated objective material  in  relation  to
    the state of Libya.

2.   The case was re-listed before me on 29 July 2016 at Bradford.

3.   Both parties attended represented as above.

The Hearing

4.   At the hearing Mr Hussain said that the  key  issue  was  the  risk  on
    return.  I was referred to a lengthy report from Alan George consisting
    of 81 pages.  This was dated 14 July 2016.   However,  he  pointed  out
    that the version of the report in the bundle lodged with  the  Tribunal
    did not follow the same format as  the  version  he  relied  upon.   Mr
    Hussain is said to be sending a fresh version through  as  of  today  I
    have not received it.

5.   At the hearing Mr [A] confirmed the contents  of  his  updated  witness
    statement which he adopted.  Nevertheless,  he  stood  by  the  refusal
    letter but had nothing to add.  He described Dr George has having  done
    a "thorough job" and did not dispute the security situation in Libya as
    outlined by that expert.

6.   Mr Hussain submitted that his client being from Sirte could not  safely
    return there.  Paragraph 42 of Dr  George's  amended  report  indicates
    that internal security in Libya is largely in  the  hands  of  militia.
    Apparently, where road blocks occur, snap decisions will be made  which
    can be a matter of life or death.  There is a lack of  police  presence
    and the situation in Libya crosses the threshold  required  by  Article
    15(c) of the Council Directive 2004/83/EC (Qualification Directive)  in
    that there was:

         "A serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person  by
         reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or
         internal armed conflict."

7.   Dr George believed that  the  situation  in  Libya  crossed  this  high
    threshold.

8.   There was extreme insecurity both in the north and the south  of  Libya
    where more than a million children were unable to go to school  due  to
    bombing and other violent activity.  Several scenarios are presented by
    Dr George at paragraph 96 of his report and at paragraph 97  Dr  George
    stated that he expected a deterioration in the  then  current  security
    situation.  At paragraphs 98 to 107 he gives a general overview of  the
    situation, describing it as  extremely  bleak.   At  paragraph  108  he
    describes the individual circumstances of the appellant, including  the
    fact that he is from Sirte and a former member of  the  Gaddafi  tribe.
    At paragraph 109, it was accepted, the  expert  had  strayed  into  the
    assessment of credibility by suggesting that  the  appellant's  account
    was plausible.  However, Mr Hussain submitted, the expert was  entitled
    to comment on documents he had  seen.   Those  documents  include  some
    provided by the appellant's father.  The indiscriminate nature  of  the
    violence in Libya was such  as  to  prevent  the  appellant  travelling
    freely in that country.  As he was  from  the  same  tribe  as  Colonel
    Gaddafi it was impractical for  him  to  relocate.   A  simple  factual
    scenario was that the appellant could be stopped at a road block, where
    it is likely he would be recognised for his tribal links.   This  would
    be enough to put him at risk.  I was particularly referred to paragraph
    128 which dealt with the prospects of internal relocation.  The general
    risk was summarised at paragraph 136.  Internal security was poor  (see
    paragraph 138 of Dr George's report). I was invited to find that it was
    unduly harsh to return  the  appellant  and  expect  him  to  relocate.
    Pulling all these threads together, it was submitted that the appellant
    would clearly be at risk on return.

9.   I was also referred to the country guidance report  published  in  June
    2016(?).  It was suggested that there was a strong element of Daesh/IS.
     There were also restrictions on travel and it was impossible to ignore
    the culture of  impunity  which  existed  in  Libya.   The  risks  were
    tangible.  There was an arbitrary treatment of civilians (see paragraph
    8.16).  In summary, the country  guidance  supported  broadly  what  Dr
    George had said and indicated that safe  return  was  impossible.   The
    15(c) risk was substantial and I was invited to find  the  appellant  a
    refugee because of his ethnicity or membership of a  particular  social
    group.  Alternatively, I was invited to find that the respondent  would
    be in breach of  his  obligations  under  Articles  2-3  of  the  ECHR.
    Finally, I was invited to find that Article 15(c) of the  Qualification
    Directive was engaged/paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.

10.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision  as  to  the  ultimate
    disposal of this appeal.

Discussion

11.  The principal issue  in  the  appeal  relates  to  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's, and his family's, risk on return.  The appellant relies in
    large  part  on  the  report  by  Alan  George  dated  14  July   2016.
    Unfortunately, the version supplied to the Tribunal did not  match  the
    version to which Mr Hussain referred but the contents of  the  original
    version which I have seem to be in line with other evidence about Libya
    and I am not aware of any material changes since it  was  prepared,  or
    certainly no significant improvements in the state of that country.   I
    have been able to glean the material points arising  from  that  report
    and summarise the more important ones below.

12.  As Mr Diwncyz accepted, Dr George appears to have been thorough in  his
    analysis of the situation the appellant and his family  would  face  in
    Libya if they were returned there as at the date of the  hearing.   The
    more  important  details  were  summarised  by  Mr   Hussain   in   his
    submissions.  They include:

    (1)  The lack of any effective internal security with  militias  taking
         the role of the police (referred to at paragraph 42 of Dr  George's
         report).  If you are stopped at one of the de facto checkpoints set
         up by these militias it is possible for that  person  to  be  shot,
         simply because he fails to answer a question in a  particular  way.
         The  lack  of  police  presence  represents  a  serious  threat  to
         individual security.


    (2)   Paragraphs  46  and  64  of  the  report  highlight  the  extreme
         insecurity in certain parts of  the  country.   There  is  a  large
         amount of internal displacement with many children unable to go  to
         school.  There are soon to be a million children who do not  go  to
         school.  It was submitted that there were several  "15C  scenarios"
         operating within the country.


    (3)   In  addition  there  were  several  factors  in  the  appellant's
         individual case: he is from  Sirte  and  from  the  Gaddafi  tribe.
         These factors alone made it very difficult for  the  appellant  and
         his family to travel  within  Libya.  Sirte  itself  seems  to  be,
         effectively, under the control of IS. Were the  appellant  and  his
         family to move to another part of Libya they  would  be  likely  to
         encounter a road block at which he may well be asked who he is  and
         what tribe he is from.  The fact that he was from the Gaddafi tribe
         would be enough to put him at risk.  Were this to occur he would be
         likely to be subject to arbitrary ill-treatment.

13.  In summary, the safe return of the appellant and his  family  to  Libya
    was not possible and the ingredient for a risk  sufficient  to  satisfy
    the requirements of Regulation 15C appeared to be met.   The  appellant
    therefore qualified for humanitarian protection under 339C - 15C of the
    Qualification Directive. In addition, he admitted that that it would be
    unduly harsh to return the appellant and his  family  to  Libya,  which
    would be contrary   to the Refugee  Convention  because  the  appellant
    would be at risk of persecution for a Convention reason or reasons. The
    appellant  belonged  to  a  particular  social  group  (ethnicity   and
    membership of the  Gaddafi  tribe).  Finally,  it  was  submitted  that
    Articles 2-3 of the ECHR were engaged in that the appellant would  face
    inhuman or degrading treatment, possibly death, if he were returned  to
    Libya.

Conclusions

14.  I have reached the following conclusions  based  on  the  evidence  and
    submissions presented before the Tribunal:

    (1)  Sirte from which the appellant and his family come,  was,  at  the
         date of the hearing, an Islamic State stronghold (see  the  Country
         Information Report at Q.3.15-16 - dated June 2016).


    (2)  The internal security situation in Libya is not improving.   There
         are very high  levels  of  violence  in  certain  parts,  including
         Benghazi, Denna and Sirte.  These areas are  areas  were  there  is
         indiscriminate violence to qualify within  Regulation  15C  of  the
         Qualification Directive.


    (3)  Other areas in Libya, such as rural areas, are safer but it is not
         necessarily possible to travel to those areas  given  the  numerous
         road blocks and controlled  by  militias.   Alan  George  paints  a
         chaotic picture and describes the random nature of acts of violence
         perpetrated by members of these militia.   Any  confrontation  with
         one of these groups is likely  to  result  in  violence.   They  of
         course  include  Islamic  State,  which  is  well-known   for   its
         brutality.


    (4)  Even if the generalised state of violence were not established, it
         is necessary in each case  to  consider  an  individual's  personal
         circumstances to ascertain whether he would be personally  at  risk
         (see COIR at 2.3.18). For the reasons already given  the  appellant
         would be at risk by reason of his membership of the Ghaddafi  tribe
         and other associations more fully outlined in  Dr  George's  report
         (see, for example, his conclusions at paragraphs 135-140).


    (5)  There is a climate of impunity which makes it  impossible  for  an
         individual to call on the resources  of  the  state  due  to  their
         fragmented nature and lack of coherent forces of law and  order  in
         Libya.  If one happens to be in an area controlled by  one  of  the
         militia groups referred to one has little prospect  of  calling  on
         the state for any degree of protection.  If one finds oneself in an
         area controlled, for example, by ISIS, they are the police.  Crimes
         include beheadings, abductions and disappearances.   Large  numbers
         of people appear to have gone missing.  Staggering levels of  abuse
         and violence are present in some areas.

15.  Given the circumstances I have concluded that the  appellant  qualifies
    under the Refugee Convention because of his membership of a  particular
    social group, alternatively, that Article 3 of the ECHR is  engaged  by
    these circumstances, which  give  rise  to  a  serious  risk  that  the
    appellant, and by extension, the appellant's family would face  a  real
    risk  of  suffering  inhuman  and   degrading   treatment   in   Libya.
    Alternatively, there is a generalised state of insecurity  such  as  to
    give rise to a need for  international  humanitarian  protection  under
    Regulation 15C of the Qualification Directive.

Notice of Decision

16.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the  following
    decision of the Upper Tribunal is substituted.

17.  I allow the appeal under the Refugee Convention.

18.  I allow the appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR.

19.  I find that the  appellant  qualifies  for  international  humanitarian
    protection.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as no fee was payable in this case.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


