
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08862/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8 May 2017                       |On 19 May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                                     D T
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                                                                  Respondent
                   THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms S Iqbal of Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant it is a national of Sri  Lanka  this  born  on  [  ]  1991,
   appealed against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Blackwell
   promulgated on 28 July 2016. Permission to appeal was  initially  refused
   by Upper Tribunal Judge Deans on 23 August  2016  and  granted  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Blum on 26 September 2016 stating that it is arguable that
   the Judge gave insufficiently clear reasons for why the appellant's claim
   never to have been moved during her detention and her claim not  to  have
   been charged or brought before a court, would undermine the evidence that
   she may have been detained at a secret camp. The permission Judge further
   noted that it  was  also  not  entirely  clear  why  he  found  that  the
   appellant's camp was "undoubtedly" part of the  "Manik  farm"  and  given
   that was one of the core findings which supported the Judges rejection of
   the  appellant's  account,  the   Judge's   conclusions   were   arguably
   insufficiently reasoned.


2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in his decision stated the following  which
   I summarise. He found that credibility of  the  appellant  to  be  a  key
   factor four her claim for international protection in this  country.  The
   assessment of credibility/into account the  medical  evidence.  Dr  Robin
   Lawrence provided a psychiatrist report dated 12 December  2014  and  his
   diagnosis is that the appellant is suffering from depression and PTSD and
   is on medication. Dr  Rowlands  gave  consideration  as  to  whether  the
   account by the appellant is, in effect, manufactured  or  whether  it  is
   genuine and Dr Rowlands  opinion  was  that  the  account  given  by  the
   appellant is accurate.


3. The Judge noted that Dr Lawrence did  not  find  that  the  suicide  risk
   should be categorised other than as low.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the
   appellant is suffering from PTSD but did not accept  that  it  was  as  a
   result of her detention and torture and said it could have  occurred  due
   to the general country situation of Sri Lanka.


4. In respect of the documentation provided  by  the  appellant,  the  Judge
   applied the guidance given in the case of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT  439
   to the documents and found them not to be credible.


5. The documents were a police letter dated 23 March 2015  and  an  Internet
   article dated 30 March 2015. In respect of the first document, the  Judge
   noted that the document was in pristine  condition  and  noted  that  the
   paper in which the notary information was  written  would  appear  to  be
   genuine but could not  discount  that  the  sheet  of  paper  itself  was
   obtained in order for specific wording to be added thereto other than  by
   a police officer. The Judge's concerns about the second  document  of  30
   March 2015, were much stronger. He noted that the extracted  article  has
   some phrases  in  English  although  the  article  has  been  written  in
   Singhalese. He also found  that  the  credibility  of  the  document  was
   further compromised because the copyright date for the article is  stated
   as 2014 although the article was posted on 30 March 2015. The Judge noted
   that the appellant's ability to raise sufficient funds to buy a  passport
   and enlist the services of an agent to arrange her flights via Japan,  it
   cannot be discounted that there would have been funds for  the  provision
   of further false documents or articles to  be  obtained  to  support  the
   appellant's appeal.


6. The Judge noted that the appellant claims that  she  was  detained  in  a
   camp for a period of three years. Although it is accepted that there were
   detention camps but  they  were  officially  closed  during  the  end  of
   September 2012 and hostilities ended in 2009, this  claim  detention  was
   not consistent with the appellant's account  that  she  remained  in  the
   camp, until her escape in 2014.


7. The Judge noted  that  the  appellant  has  not  provided  any  objective
   evidence to confirm that that she was detained and the camp where she was
   detained, remained open either beyond the general closure of other  camps
   in 2014 or that the particular camp remained as  a  detention  centre  or
   former prison for particular individuals of Tamil  ethnicity.  It  is  of
   some significance that other than the initial act of  claimed  detention,
   the appellant did not assert that she had ever been arrested or that  she
   had faced any formal charge or summons  before  any  court  or  Tribunal,
   whether formal or informal. Therefore, no reason can be found for why the
   appellant would  have  been  detained  in  one  of  the  camps  when  the
   authorities had closed such establishments in September 2012.  Therefore,
   the appellant's account that she escaped from the camp, by paying a bribe
   it is strongly doubted.


8. The  critical  aspect  of  the  appellant's  evidence  in  assessing  her
   credibility is the claim that she was released from the camp in  February
   2014. The country guidance case, including that submitted  on  behalf  of
   the appellant the Bangla Chettilulam camp was undoubtedly a part of  what
   was termed "Manik farm".


9. The Human Rights Watch World Report 2013 makes  clear  that  Manik  Farm,
   included the Bangla Chettilulam camp, closed in September 2012. This is a
   very reliable source and  the  information  accords  with  other  country
   information which states  that  nationwide  such  camps  were  closed  in
   September 2012.


10. The appellant was very clear  in  her  evidence  that  she  never  moved
   during the whole period of her detention  from  2011  to  February  2014.
   Mention was made of secret camps  which  may  have  continued  after  the
   general closure of camps on of September 2014. This cannot be  applicable
   to the circumstances of the appellant because of  her  own  evidence  she
   remained throughout her detention  in  Bangla  Chettilulam  camp.  In  Dr
   Smiths report he categorically stated  that  he  was  not  aware  of  the
   existence of Bangla Chettilulam camp during  the  period  of  2012  until
   February 2014.


11. It cannot be ruled  out  that  the  appellant's  diagnosis  of  PTSD  is
   attributable to the conditions during the civil war in Sri Lanka.  It  is
   not accepted that the appellant has told  the  truth  and  it  cannot  be
   believed that any of the stated episodes of  mistreatment  occurred.  Her
   entire claim has been fabricated and the supporting documents  have  been
   generated as was her false Sri Lankan passport.  The  appellant  came  to
   this country looking for a better life and is not a genuine refugee.


12. Weight is given to the screening interview but it is extraordinary  that
   the appellant would not have mentioned what was later to become the  main
   feature of her claim that she was detained. The  appellant  made  a  very
   expensive journey to this country in the company of an agent. She  has  a
   sister who attended boarding school. It would appear that this family who
   were able to access financial resources which, for a Tamil family in  Sri
   Lanka, was probably a very significant sum.

13. The grounds of appeals are as follows. It is quite  clear  that  despite
   the Judge concluding that the screening interview should be treated  with
   caution, especially taking into account the appellant's  explanations  of
   the omissions at paragraph 49-50 of the decision  failed  to  accord  the
   appellant with either the relevant benefit of doubt, given her  traumatic
   experiences and/or he has failed to treat the  screening  interview  with
   caution. Instead it would appear that the Judge  was  influenced  by  the
   omissions in the appellant's answers, in particular  failing  to  mention
   her arrest/detention. The Judge erred in his approach and fairly  weighed
   these matters against the appellant.

14. In respect of the detention camps the Judge acknowledges that  even  the
   expert, Dr Smith, was unable to  confirm  the  existence  of  the  Bangla
   Chettilulam camp and neither does the background material disclose a camp
   with this name.  This  is  not  surprising  because  background  evidence
   submitted highlighted the continuing use of secret camps beyond September
   2012. This therefore corroborates the appellant's evidence to  the  lower
   standard of proof applicable that she was held until February 2014 in the
   Bangla Chettilulam camp, which may well have been the secret  camp  sites
   that was still operating post-closure of the  named  camps  in  September
   2012. This is especially so, in light of the fact that the camp  has  not
   been specifically located,  in  the  background  materials.  The  Judge's
   assumption that the particular camp is part of the Manik farm camp is not
   only unfair but also unreasonable. The operation of secret camps  by  the
   Sri Lankan authorities is well documented and therefore it  is  plausible
   that the appellant was held at a secret camp.

15.  In  respect  of  the  medical  evidence  the   appellant   produced   a
   psychiatrist report dated 12 December 2014 from Dr Robin Lawrence and she
   also  presented  evidence  that  she  was  receiving  assistance  from  a
   psychotherapist given her traumatic experiences and is suffering PTSD, as
   a consequence. The Judge accepts at paragraph 408 of  the  decision  that
   the appellant was suffering from PTSD but rejected that it was due to her
   experiences at a secret camp in Sri Lanka.

16. The Judge's approach to the report is completely inconsistent  with  the
   guidance given in the case of Mibanga [2005] EWCA  Civ  367  that  states
   that an individual's account of torture and fear of persecution should be
   considered as part of the entirety of  the  evidence  to  be  taken  into
   account on the issue of  credibility.  The  torture  that  the  appellant
   claimed she suffered at the  hands  of  the  authorities  includes  rape,
   sexual assault,  beatings  and  the  forced  abortion  from  a  pregnancy
   resulting from the rate. The expert report concluded that the appellant's
   state of mind is consistent with the ill treatment she suffered.

17. While the Judge correctly  stated  that  it  is  a  matter  for  him  to
   determine whether the appellant's account is accurate, his  approach  has
   shown a lack of understanding in relation to the expert evidence and  the
   role it plays in relation to the credibility of the appellant's  account.
   The Judge has considered the medical report in a  vacuum  such  that  his
   approach highlights a material error.

18. The Judge's rejection  of  the  appellant's  claim  is  based  upon  the
   premise that the appellant's account of being held until  February  2014,
   cannot be true, given background evidence that demonstrates that all  IDP
   camps closed in September 2012. However, the Judge failed to  accord  the
   appellant with the benefit of doubt given the detailed  evidence  of  the
   brutal torture she was subject to, taken together with  the  evidence  of
   camps operating beyond 4 September 2012. The Judge's approach is not fair
   and has failed to exercise the most anxious scrutiny to the low  standard
   of proof applicable in relation to the appellant's claim.

19. At the hearing, I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
   there is an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   Decision as to whether there is an error of law

20. I have given anxious scrutiny to the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge and  have  taken  into  account  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
   submissions made at the hearing. The grounds of  appeal  argue  that  the
   Judge did not gave the appellant the benefit of the doubt  that  she  was
   detained at Bangla  Chettilulam  camp  which  was  a  secret  camp  which
   operated after the closure of all camps in Sri Lanka in 2012. The Grounds
   also argued that the Judge further erred when the Judge accepted that the
   Bangla Chettilulam camp was part of the Manik farm without any background
   evidence to substantiate his assumption. The Judge also fell  into  error
   by relying on the omission at her screening interview where she  did  not
   mention that she had been detained in Sri Lanka.

21. It was accepted that the main issue in this appeal was  the  credibility
   of the appellant which in turn went to the credibility of her claim  that
   she was detained and tortured in a  secret  camp  in  Sri  Lanka  because
   everything flows from her claim that she was detained.  The  Judge  found
   that the appellant's claim that she was detained and tortured  at  Bangla
   Chettilulam camp had been fabricated by her and that she was an  economic
   refugee.

22. The complaint against the  Judge  is  that  he  found  that  the  Bangla
   Chettilulam camp was undoubtedly a part of what was termed "Manik  farm".
   Mr Smith's in his expert report stated that it is likely that the  Bangla
   Chettilulam camp was part of the  Manik  farm.  The  Judge  said  it  was
   "undoubtedly" a part of the Manik farm. (Emphasis mine). The  Judge  also
   relied on Human Rights Watch report that it was part of the  Manik  camp.
   The Judge may have overstated the certainty that it was part of the Manik
   camp but there was evidence upon which  he  made  this  finding.  In  any
   event, I do not find it a material error of law because the main issue in
   this appeal is the credibility of  the  appellant  and  whether  she  was
   detained until 2014.

23. The Judge took into account that even the  expert,  Mr  Smith,  did  not
   know about this secret camp where the  appellant  claimed  that  she  was
   detained. He however did state that there were secret camps in Sri  Lanka
   which held people beyond 2012, when other  camps  had  closed.  The  only
   evidence that this camp existed was the appellant's evidence.  The  Judge
   correctly stated that there was no objective  evidence  before  him  that
   such a camp existed. Indeed, even the  expert  did  not  know  about  its
   existence as of 2017 when information  about  secret  camps  became  well
   documented as was stated in the grounds of appeal.

24. The appellant's evidence is that she was never a member of the LTTE  and
   did not assist them in any way and never came to  the  attention  of  the
   authorities. The Judge was right to find it is not be credible for her to
   be arrested and taken straight to a secret camp and held beyond 2012 when
   she had nothing to do with the LTTE. Mr Smith in his report  states  that
   only those who had links to the LTTE were kept in secret camps  when  all
   the camps were closed in 2012. The appellant has never had any  links  to
   the LTTE and therefore it was found not credible that the appellant would
   be detained even after all the camps were closed, given  her  non-profile
   as an LTTE supporter. Background evidence states that  the  secret  camps
   were for people with connections with the LTTE who the authorities  found
   were still dangerous to the State. It  must  have  become  clear  to  the
   authorities after her interrogation she did not have anything to do  with
   the LTTE. The Judge was entitled to take this evidence  into  account  in
   finding that the appellant was not credible.

25. The Judge took into account the expert report in  which  it  was  stated
   that the appellant's PTSD is consistent (emphasis mine) with the  torture
   that she claims to have suffered while in detention. The Judge found that
   her PTSD could have happened due to the general country situation in  Sri
   Lanka which traumatised a lot of people. The Judge  was  entitled  to  so
   find because the medical report did not rule out the possibility that the
   appellant's PTSD could not have happened in the manner suggested  by  the
   Judge. There is no perversity to this reasoning.

26. In respect of the screening interview Judge was entitled  to  take  into
   account a pivotal omission in her screening interview where she  made  no
   mention that she had been detained in Sri Lanka in a secret  camp,  which
   subsequently became the main plank  of  her  asylum  claim.  A  Judge  is
   entitled to take into account the omission  of  the  main  plank  of  the
   asylum claim, at the first available  opportunity.  The  Judge  was  also
   entitled to find that it was extraordinary that the appellant  would  not
   mention her detention at a secret camp at her screening  interview  which
   then became pivotal to her claim for asylum. The Judge gave  himself  the
   proper direction and said that this omission was considered in the  round
   and not in isolation. There is no misdirection in law  or  fact  in  this
   conclusion.


27. The Judge relied on the guidance in the case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]
   UKIAT 439 in respect of the two documents provided by the appellant.  The
   Judge did not find the documents credible for cogent  reasons.  He  found
   that the police letter dated 23 March 2015 was  in  "pristine  condition"
   and stated, "the paper in which the notary information was written  would
   appear itself to be genuine although I cannot discount that the sheet  of
   paper itself was obtained in order  for  specific  wording  to  be  added
   thereto other than by a police officer". The Judge gave credible  reasons
   for not relying on  this  document  and  for  not  finding  the  document
   credible.


28. The Judge found that the second document which was an  Internet  article
   dated 30 March 2015 was also not credible for stronger  reasons.  He  was
   entitled to find that the article in which the majority of the text is in
   Singhalese, would have phrases in English. The Judge also noted that  the
   article claims to have been written on 30 March 2015  but  the  copyright
   date for the article  is  stated  as  2014  which  is  also  clearly  not
   credible.


29. The Judge was of the view that given the appellant's  ability  to  raise
   sufficient funds to buy a false passport, to provide funds for  an  agent
   to accompany her, including flights via Japan, it  cannot  be  discounted
   that there would have been funds  for  the  provision  of  further  false
   documents or articles. The Judge was entitled to find the  appellant  who
   provided documents which were clearly not  credible,  also  goes  to  her
   credibility and to the credibility of her claim.


30. The Judge considered the entirety of the evidence  for  his  conclusions
   that the appellant is not credible and nor is  her  claim  credible.  The
   grounds of appeal are no more than a quarrel with the  decision  and  are
   without merit.


31. I have no difficulty in understanding the decision and the  reasons  why
   the Judge came to the conclusion that he did. The judge  found  that  the
   appellant had manufactured her  entire  evidence  and  that  she  was  an
   economic refugee. No other differently constituted Tribunal would reach a
   different conclusion, on the evidence in this appeal.

32. There is no material error in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge. I therefore uphold the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
   dismiss the appellant's appeal.


DECISION

Appeal dismissed



      Dated this 15th day of May 2017

Signed by

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Mrs S Chana









