
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08824/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 February 2016                   |On 9 March 2016                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M M A
                       (temporary anonymity direction)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Nigel Bramble
For the respondent:    Russell Wilcox, counsel instructed by Emazon
Solicitors




                            DECISION AND REASONS


    This is a Home Office appeal against  the  decision  of  Judge  Michael
    Hanley, sitting at Harmondsworth  on  13  November  2015,  allowing  an
    asylum appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh born in 1984.


2.   The appellant claimed that he faced a Convention risk  as  a  converted
    Christian, married to a Muslim girl, on his return to Bangladesh on the
    basis of what had happened when he returned there in 2013, having  been
    converted to Christianity in this country.  The appellant says  he  was
    unaware that his family knew about that,  and  the  judge  allowed  his
    appeal on the basis of evidence of emails and telephone  calls  he  had
    received from his family while he was in Dacca, which were vouched for,
    so far as they could be, by a lady called Miss Rosemary Whipp, who is a
    lay reader in the church where he was baptized in this country.   There
    was no issue on Miss Whipp's evidence and, entirely reasonably  on  the
    part of the Presenting Officer and the judge, she  was  not  called  to
    confirm the statement which she had signed on 23 October last year.

3.   Although the judge describes what Miss Whipp says as corroborating  the
    appellant's evidence, in fact everything she says  is  about  material,
    whether statements or e-mails, which came from the  appellant  himself.
    However, the salient point on this part of the case is that there is no
    evidence, at least no evidence referred to by the judge, to  show  that
    the appellant's family were actually aware of his whereabouts in Dacca.
     Dacca, it is agreed, is a city of nearly 7,000,000 people,  and  there
    was obviously more to be said  on  the  general  question  of  internal
    flight than could reasonably be decided simply on the basis of  the  e-
    mails.

4.   It is accepted both that  the  appellant  had  genuinely  converted  to
    Christianity and that he entered into a marriage  in  Bangladesh  on  6
    January 2014 and that the appellant would be at risk from his family in
    his home area. However that leaves open  two  questions:  first,  could
    they find him in Dacca or  in  one  of  the  Christian  communities  in
    Bangladesh which are mentioned in his answer to  question  167  of  his
    interview?  If the appellant's family would have been reasonably likely
    to find him in any of those  places,  then  he  might  be  entitled  to
    protection on that basis; but that is not a question  which  the  judge
    could properly treat as  resolved  simply  by  the  electronic  contact
    between him and them, which ceased after he had changed his number.

5.   The other question is whether the appellant as a Christian  married  to
    a Muslim girl would be at risk in Bangladesh generally.  That  question
    which can only be properly answered by dealing with the questions posed
    by the Supreme Court at paragraph 82  of  HJ  (Iran)  &  HT  (Cameroon)
    [2010] UKSC 31.  That decision is only referred to by the judge at  the
    end of paragraph 47,  and  only  on  the  well-known  principle,  which
    appears elsewhere, that no-one is required  to  conceal  his  religious
    beliefs in order to avoid persecution.
6.   There was a good deal more in paragraph 82 of HJ (Iran) that needed  to
    be dealt with, and that will have to be done in a fresh hearing in  the
    First-tier Tribunal before another judge.

Appeal
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge Hanley
Anonymity extended till further order by hearing judge

                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)

