
[pic]
|Upper Tribunal                        | Appeal Number AA.08010.2012   |
|Immigration and Asylum Chamber        |                               |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:   North Shields
On:         Tuesday 20th August 2013
                                   Before

                                Judge Aitken
                       Deputy Chamber President (HESC)


                                   Between


                                   Mr A A


                            (Anonymity Direction)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Mr R Solomon
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                                  Decision

1. This is a resumed  hearing  remaking  the  decision  of  the  First  Tier
   Tribunal limited to an assessment of whether the appellant may have  left
   Eritrea illegally and thus be at risk on return. Following a  hearing  on
   16th May 2013 I found as follows:



      "1. This matter appeared before me following the grant  of  permission
      to appeal by First Tier Tribunal judge Bird on 2nd  November  2012  in
      the following terms:


      "1.    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cope dismissed the  appeal  of
      the appellant, a citizen  of  Eritrea  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent asking to remove him from the United Kingdom.


      2.     The  appellant  seeks  permission  to   appeal   against   this
      determination on the grounds  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
      account the relevant background evidence submitted  by  the  appellant
      and fell into error by saying that this document had not  been  placed
      before him (the Canadian IRB Report dated July 1999).  It  is  alleged
      that during  the  oral  submissions  the  appellant's  representatives
      specially addressed this issue and referred the judge to the  document
      attached to the  skeleton  argument  produced  at  the  start  of  the
      hearing.


      3.    The  judge  considered  the  question  of  draft  evasion  from
      paragraph 26 onwards.  The judge noted that  the  appellant's  account
      that he had been able to avoid military service could not be  accepted
      because his other siblings had to undertake it when  they  became  18.
      The appellant's evidence that he was able to obtain an exemption  from
      military service was not accepted by the judge for the reasons that he
      gave in paragraphs 24 to 48.  It is arguable that the judge failed  to
      take into account of the  relevant  evidence  that  was  produced.  At
      paragraph 49 he records as follows:


                 "The appellant says that such an exemption  was  available
                 during the 1990s and relies on a report from the  Canadian
                 Immigration   and   Refugee   Board   from   July    1999.
                 Unfortunately I have not been  provided  with  a  copy  of
                 this report" (Emphasis mine).

      At paragraph 51 the judge notes as follows:


                 "Mr Solomon suggested in his oral submissions that  whilst
                 they  may  reflect  the  current  position   following   a
                 clampdown from  2001  onwards,  historically  it  was  not
                 true.  So this may or may not be the  case,  it  does  not
                 explain  how  the  appellant  could  be  regarded  as   or
                 apparently believed himself as having an exemption on such
                 basis for the next eleven years."


      4.    The judge's conclusion on this crucial part of  the  appellant's
      evidence failed to take into account the objective evidence  that  was
      produced at the hearing and is attached to the skeleton  argument.  In
      failing to consider the report from the Immigration Refugee  Board  of
      Canada dated 1 July 1999  it  is  arguable  that  the  judge  made  an
      Arguable error of law in the conclusion that he came to.


      5.    Ground 4 alleges that the judge made an arguable error of law in
      failing to determine the risk to the appellant as  a  perceived  draft
      evader/ deserter and made no findings or consideration of the risk  to
      the appellant of being both a perceived draft evader and  someone  who
      exited the country illegally.


      6.          It is arguable that the judge failed to take into  account
      the risk to the appellant for these two factors. An arguable error  of
      law has arisen in this omission (paragraph 66 of  the  determination).
      The judge gives no reasons for not accepting that  the  appellant  had
      evaded or been exempt from  military  service  or  that  he  had  left
      illegally."


2.   I am obliged to Mr Martin and Mr Kingham for their concise and  helpful
submissions. Mr Martin took two points. Firstly that at paragraph 49 of  the
determination the Tribunal judge recorded this  "Unfortunately  I  have  not
been provided with a copy of this report" Whereas a copy was appended  to  a
skeleton argument which the judge had referred to several  times,  this  was
plainly an error which went to the assessment  of  credibility.  Mr  Kingham
accepted that the report was  before  the  judge  but  argued  that  in  the
context of all of the evidence and findings it was not significant.


3.   I too had some difficulty in locating the report, since it covers  only
around a single page, it is clear that it  was  in  the  papers  before  the
judge. It is not however significant and in that sense does  not  give  rise
to an error of law which  may  have  influenced  or  affected  the  decision
because it relates to the position of national  service  in  1999,  and  the
judge at paragraph 51 makes it plain that even if he accepted  the  position
stated within the report in 1999 it would not affect his decision because  a
larger problem of credibility for the appellant was  the  ability  to  avoid
serving for the next 11 years rather than whether  some  form  of  exemption
for military service in 1999 was possibly available.

4.   Mr Martins second point was that the judge had  fallen  into  error  in
assuming that having  rejected  the  appellant's  account  as  being  wholly
fabricated the assessment of risk on return  was  over.  Mr  Kingham  argued
that there had been a comprehensive rejection  of  the  appellant's  account
for good reasons and the appellant had failed to discharge the  burden  upon
him of establishing he was at risk.

5. The judge recorded this at paragraphs 68 to 70:

      "68 The Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  in  MA  (which  was  largely
confirmed   by the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper  Tribunal  in
MO)   effectively endorsed  previous  decisions  of  the  Tribunal  and  the
immigration      Appeal Tribunal which had decided that absent  of  specific
aggravating      features such as illegal exit from  Eritrea  or  acceptance
of events or behaviour       which could  give  rise  to  a  specific  well-
founded fear of persecution under  the    1951  Refugee  Convention,  people
returned to Eritrea  as  failed  asylum     seekers  were  not  at  risk  of
persecutory ill-treatment from the Eritrean  authorities.

      69. In the light of the background evidence adduced before me  and  of
      the case law, there is nothing then which leads me  to  consider  that
      the Appellant would be at risk of adverse attention from the  Eritrean
      authorities.  I am not satisfied that he  has  shown  me  that  it  is
      reasonably likely that he evaded national  service  or  deserted  from
      Sawa military training camp, or that he left Eritrea illegally  as  he
      has claimed.


      70 Consequently then I do not consider that the Appellant would be  of
      any interest to the Eritrean authorities on the basis that he  himself
      has claimed.  He may well have a generalised reluctance to  return  to
      Eritrea but this is not the same as a subjective fear  of  persecutory
      ill-treatment for a 1951 Refugee Convention ground."


6. In fact at paragraph 116 of MO (Illegal exit  -risk  on  return)  Eritrea
[2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC) the Tribunal recorded this:

       "116.  The  general  position  concerning   illegal   exit   remains,
therefore, as    expressed in MA, namely that illegal exit by  a  person  of
or approaching draft   age and not medically  unfit  cannot  be  assumed  if
they had been found wholly   incredible. However, if such a person is  found
to have left Eritrea on or after  August/September  2008,  it  may  be  that
inferences can be drawn from      uncontentious personal  data  recorded  on
an appellant as to their level of       education or  their  skills  profile
as to whether legal exit was feasible."

7.    The Upper Tribunal ha  gone  further  in  paragraph  115  to  give  an
example of the way in which material needed to be examined:

      "115. We appreciate that in  the  context  of  a  case  in  which  the
decision-maker    has  found  a   claimant/appellant   wholly   lacking   in
credibility (save in relation  to   sex  and  perhaps  age  and/or  date  of
departure from Eritrea and health), it is    difficult to see any basis  for
finding conclusively that they would not  fall within    one  of  the  above
two   categories   (highly   trusted   government   officials   and    their
families or those who are themselves members of the  military  or  political
leadership; members of ministerial staff recommended by  the  department  to
attend studies abroad). But at least in a range of cases  the  evidence  may
be    such as to make it clear that the claimant  concerned,  albeit  wholly
or  largely   lacking  in  credibility,  could  not  have  any  links   with
government officials or the  regime's inner circle and  could  not  have  an
education or  skills  profile  making  it    likely  they  have  been  civil
servants or have an educational bent (e.g. if they       are found  to  come
from a rural part of Eritrea and have had no  secondary    schooling).  What
may be involved here sometimes is clearer recognition by      the  decision-
maker that when finding a claimant wholly incredible they are not   in  fact
meaning that they lack credibility in every  conceivable  particular,  since
they may in fact accept, for example, that they are from a rural  background
      and lack education."

8.   It is therefore necessary  to  further  examine  the  evidence  already
present, as to age, background and educational attainment and to  draw  what
conclusions are proper from that (if any) in  considering  risk  on  return.
There is no reason to disturb the general findings but there is an error  of
law in that the judge did not go on to perform the extra  scrutiny  required
for risk on return.

9.   It is not clear what of the appellant's background is accepted  by  the
Secretary of State, who has indicated in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
that no part of the  account  is  accepted,  but  specifically  accepts  the
nationality of the appellant because of  his  ability  to  answer  questions
about Eritrean life in Tigrinyan, and at paragraph 23 notes the  appellant's
ties to Saudi Arabia and Dubai, indicating that at least some  part  of  his
claimed background may be accepted. It seems likely that some evidence  will
be needed as to the appellant's background before he became 18 and  eligible
for conscription, and that will be dealt with by way  of  directions  for  a
hearing in the Upper Tribunal to remake the  decision  limited  to  risk  on
return on the facts as found by judge Cope  and  any  further  facts  as  to
background.

10.    In those circumstances there is a material error of law which
necessitates the decision being remade."

2. On 20th August the hearing resumed before me  the  appellant  represented
by Mr R Solomon, the Respondent by Mr C Dewison. The Home Office  served  no
additional material as to the appellant's background, although  a  photocopy
of the appellant's ID card in what I assume to  be  Tigrinyan  was  produced
without translation, I have taken that document into account with  the  rest
of the evidence,  he  had  previously  explained  its  provenance  as  being
supplied by his uncle from Asmara whilst he was in Sudan.

3. The appellant relied upon his interview and statement of  15th  September
2012 in evidence. He claimed to have  dropped  out  of  school  in  grade  8
whilst attending the Cuba High School in Jeddah, following that he  returned
with his family in 1993 to Eritrea, he worked as a  barber  and  smallholder
with his family, in a village named Adi-Woderki  near  a  town  called  Adi-
Quala.

I note here that  in  his  statement  he  indicated  that  he  gave  up  his
education in Eritrea because of his family responsibilities (at paragraph  5
of his statement), but his clear evidence before me was that he gave up  his
education "dropped out" before the family left  Saudi  Arabia  in  1993  and
before his father's death. The account  given  about  when  he  stopped  his
education before me was also the account given in interview. This  adversely
affects his credibility.

4. The appellant was vague when asked at the hearing about the  location  of
his home where he claimed to have lived between  1993  and  2012,  around  9
years. He was unable to give any indication of  how  far  away  the  capital
Asmara was, it is shown as around 50 miles on maps, nor could  he  give  any
indication by means of how long it would take to travel there or indeed  any
indication at  all.  He  explained  this  as  being  because  he  had  never
travelled to Asmara. In interview he had claimed that he had visited  Asmara
from his village with his uncle and the journey took  about  4  hours,  that
distance or time is itself plausible, he was asked  a  number  of  questions
about that visit in interview, that he should now have  no  memory  of  that
adversely affects his credibility.

5. In interview he was asked what was next to the administration  office  in
Adi Quala, this was a town 4 kilometres away which he said in  interview  he
visited every Friday for prayers, it adversely affects his credibility  that
he was unable to give such detail. He was able to draw a  rough  sketch  map
which corresponded to the area, however when pressed on such details as  the
names of churches or the name of a stream that ran nearby, he was unable  to
recall them.

6. Whilst the appellant did answer more  questions  correctly  than  he  was
unable to answer, however knowledge of a village and  small  town  in  which
one has spent 9 years would in ordinary circumstances  lead  to  very  great
familiarity with the buildings and features  such  as  streams  nearby.  One
would expect a far greater familiarity than  the  appellant  has  shown  for
someone who has lived in a village as he has described.

7. Considering all of the evidence including of course the finding by  First
Tier Tribunal judge Cope that the appellant's account was not credible,  and
considering his evidence before me I too find that  the  appellant  has  not
established that he left Eritrea illegally. There appears to be  no  dispute
that he was born in Saudi Arabia when his parents fled fighting in  Eritrea,
and that he is Eritrean, given all of the  circumstances  it  has  not  been
established that the appellant left Eritrea illegally, since I am unable  to
find on the evidence that there is a serious risk  that  the  appellant  was
resident in Eritrea between 1993 and 2012.

8. At paragraph 39 of MO the Tribunal  records  the  evidence  of  Professor
Kibreab

"Asked what he thought would happen to the children of people who  had  fled
Eritrea during the war of independence if  they  went  back  having  claimed
asylum in the UK, Professor Kibreab said that may not be an issue for  them,
but they would be required to do military service if within  the  stipulated
age ranges".

9. In those circumstances the appellant would not be at risk  on  return  to
Eritrea.


                                  Decision


The decision is remade by the Upper Tribunal.

The appeal is dismissed on Asylum Grounds, Humanitarian Protections and
Human Rights Grounds.





                                                                       [pic]
                                                                Judge Aitken
                                             Deputy Chamber President (HESC)
                                                    Monday, 2 September 2013
