
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08837/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th April 2016                            |On 28th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                    [M K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  In a  decision  promulgated  on
    14th December 2015, her appeal against refusal of  a  protection  claim
    and a human rights claim was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Kelly ("the
    judge").  The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds,
    concluding that the decision under appeal was not  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and that it was  incompatible
    with  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  under  the   Human   Rights
    Convention.  There is no challenge to the judge's conclusion  that  the
    appeal fell to be allowed in these terms.

2.   The  judge  also  concluded,  however,  that  the  appellant's  Refugee
    Convention grounds of appeal were not made out and dismissed the appeal
    in this context.  In doing so,  he  took  into  account  the  grant  of
    discretionary leave to the appellant for a period  of  two  years  from
    October 2015 and assessed risk on return to Nigeria as at the  date  of
    expiry of that leave.  In other words, rather than taking the  date  of
    assessment as the date  of  the  hearing  on  30th  November  2015,  he
    considered whether the evidence showed that the appellant would  be  at
    risk on return in October 2017.

3.   The judge's reasoning on this aspect is contained in paragraphs 46  and
    47 of the decision.  He noted that the appellant's appeal rights  arose
    under the 2002 Act, as amended by the Immigration  Act  2014  and  that
    there was no removal decision as such (and no prospect of  removal  for
    at least two years).

4.   In grounds in support of an application for permission  to  appeal,  it
    was contended that the judge was obliged to assess risk as at the  date
    of the hearing and that he erred in failing to do so and  in  assessing
    risk as it might arise in the future.

5.   Permission to appeal was refused by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  who
    found that the decision was adequately  reasoned.   An  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge granted permission on 10th February 2016, on  the  basis  that  a
    protection claim should be assessed as at the date of the hearing.

6.   In a rule 24 response from the Secretary of State later that month,  it
    was accepted that the judge erred in law in assessing risk  as  at  the
    date of expiry of the appellant's discretionary  leave.   The  critical
    issue was whether the error was material, so as to render the  decision
    unsustainable.  The author of the rule 24 response declined to  form  a
    concluded view but stated that the judge's findings of  fact  suggested
    that the risk of re-trafficking was likely to be so  small  that  there
    was no real risk on return, assessed as at the date of the hearing  and
    so the error was not material.

7.   In directions made on an uncertain date, the parties were advised  that
    the hearing would  be  confined  to  deciding  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision should be set aside for legal error.

Submissions on Error of Law

8.   Ms Robinson relied on her skeleton  argument.   Before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal there were four important strands to  the  evidence  regarding
    the risk that the appellant faced of being re-trafficked.

9.   The first was the report of Ms Stepnitz.  The decision showed that  the
    judge gave this little weight for two reasons.  The first was that  the
    risk had fallen away to an extent because the appellant was  now  older
    than when trafficked and the circumstances of her being  trafficked  in
    the past were fact specific.  The second was that  there  was  no  gang
    involved, the appellant having suffered ill-treatment at the  hands  of
    family members.  However, as was clear from paragraph 119 of the report
    (tab D of the appellant's bundle at page 65), many of the risk  factors
    were not resolved, notwithstanding the appellant's current age.   There
    was a lack of work experience and family support and the appellant  was
    at risk of being exploited in the light of her likely desire  to  leave
    Nigeria if she were returned there.  Ms Stepnitz  was  clear  that  the
    appellant was more vulnerable to trafficking, having  already  suffered
    that fate.  Although the judge did consider her report, he did not give
    it the weight it deserved and disregarded it wrongly.

10.  The second strand was the IOM report (tab E at pages 69 and 70).   This
    showed that  the  younger  a  person  was  when  trafficked,  the  more
    vulnerable he or she was to  re-trafficking.   This  evidence  was  not
    taken into account by the judge.

11.   The  third  strand  was  the  report  from  Dr  Thomas,  the  clinical
    psychologist.   He  prepared  two  reports  in   all,   examining   the
    appellant's  vulnerability  to   further   exploitation.    The   judge
    disregarded  the  substance  of  the  reports  precisely  because   the
    appellant had two years leave to remain.   He  found  that  her  health
    would improve so that the current  assessment  was  not  relevant.   Dr
    Thomas' view was that the appellant had  some  insight  into  what  had
    happened but insufficient to act as a  protective  mechanism.   At  her
    age, she was still at risk and still vulnerable at the time of the more
    recent report (tab A at page 45).

12.  Fourthly, the country expert assessed the appellant as still  being  at
    risk (tab A at pages 21 and 22).

13.  In all four  strands,  the  assessments  were  made  in  the  light  of
    circumstances as they  were  at  the  time  of  the  appeal  and,  more
    particularly, the hearing.  The judge focussed his own  assessment  two
    years hence, with the result that there was no proper  engagement  with
    the evidence bearing on risk at the correct date.

14.  Mr Tarlow relied on  the  rule  24  response  and  on  the  refusal  of
    permission by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  overall  conclusion
    was one the judge was entitled to  reach  and  there  was  no  material
    error.

15.  The representatives agreed that if the decision fell to be  set  aside,
    as containing legal error, the appropriate venue for the remaking of it
    should be the First-tier Tribunal.  Substantial fact-finding  would  be
    required and an assessment of the evidence bearing on  the  appellant's
    circumstances as at the date of the remaking of the decision.


Conclusion on Error of Law

16.  I am grateful to the representatives  for  their  careful  submissions.
    Both sides agreed that the judge erred  in  relation  to  the  date  of
    assessment.  The grounds of  appeal  available  under  section  84,  as
    amended by the 2014 Act, are similar in some respects to  some  of  the
    grounds available under section 84 as it  was  before  amendment.   For
    example, the current section 84(1)(a) is similar  to  the  old  section
    84(1)(g) and enables an appellant to argue  that  hypothetical  removal
    from the United Kingdom at the present time would result in a breach of
    the Refugee Convention or would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.  In this context, the author of the  application
    for permission to appeal mentioned the decision of the AIT in LQ [2008]
    UKAIT 00005 and there is also the well-known authority of JM  (Liberia)
    [2006] EWCA Civ 142.  Although the Upper Tribunal adopted  a  different
    approach in Amirteymour  [2015]  UKUT  446,  that  case  concerned  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and has no direct
    bearing on the present appeal.

17.  The judge's decision to consider risk on return as it might be  in  the
    autumn of 2017 inevitably involved a degree of speculation.  An example
    is the concluding sentence of paragraph 49 of  the  decision  where  he
    made an assumption that  the  appellant  will  receive  the  specialist
    support recommend by Dr Thomas over the course of the next  two  years.
    It is clear from Dr Thomas' reports, as noted at paragraph  47  of  the
    decision,  that  the  appellant's  prospects  for  recovery  are  good,
    provided she receives such support.  The judge concluded at the end  of
    that paragraph that there was no real risk  that  the  appellant  would
    commit suicide "as  a  result  of  her  putative  removal".   What  was
    required, however, was  an  assessment  of  the  evidence  showing  the
    appellant's circumstances as they were in  November  2015.    The  good
    prospects of recovery in the future were a factor of negligible or very
    modest weight.

18.  The approach taken is  further  illustrated  by  paragraph  48  of  the
    decision,  where  the  judge  found  that  the   appellant   "will   be
    considerably less psychologically vulnerable ... by  the  time  of  her
    putative removal than she is at the present time."  This shows that the
    assessment of risk was, again,  based  on  the  likelihood  of  reduced
    vulnerability  in  two  years  time,  rather   than   the   appellant's
    circumstances as they were as at the date of the hearing.

19.  In summary, the judge's approach was inconsistent with  guidance  given
    in LQ and JM (Liberia).  Material evidence bearing on risk, as  at  the
    date of hearing, was not given due weight.  The decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal must be set aside and remade.

20.  After careful consideration, I agree with the representatives that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  is  the  appropriate  venue,  in  view   of   the
    substantial fact-finding that  will  be  required.   The  issue  to  be
    decided is the protection claim.  The judge's  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal on human rights grounds remains intact.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and shall be remade  at
Bradford before a judge other than First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly.   The
issue to be decided is the appellant's protection claim  (and  any  directly
related human  rights  claim  based  on  risk  on  return  rather  than  the
appellant's circumstances in the United Kingdom).


Anonymity

The judge made no anonymity direction and  there  has  been  no  application
before me.  I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


