

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number AA/08510/2014

                                                          AA/08111/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 28th May 2015                                    On 9th June 2015


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                               NUSRAT RAFIQUE
                                                             First Appellant
                                     And

                               RAFIQUE SHAIKH
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity direction not made

Representation
For the Appellant: Ms D Morroh (Counsel, instructed by Shehzad Law Chambers
Ltd)
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by Nusrat Rafique and Rafique Shaikh against the
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mather who dismissed the
   Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision refusing the
   Appellants' applications to remain in the UK as refugees and under
   article 8.

2. The Appellants' immigration history and the basis of their claim is set
   out in the Tribunal papers and summarised in the First-tier Tribunal
   decision, there is no need to repeat all the information in this
   decision. The First Appellant entered the UK as the dependent of a Tier 4
   migrant on the 31st of May 2011 the other Appellants are her children.

3. The Appellants' asylum claim was rejected and there is no appeal against
   that decision. The Second Appellant's claims to remain in the UK were
   rejected for the reasons given in the decision at paragraphs 31 to 36.
   The Judge found that there was no arguable case to consider the
   Appellants circumstances under article 8 outside the rules but did so in
   the alternative and found that their removal would be proportionate.

4. The Grounds of Appeal asserted that the Second Appellant is settled in
   the UK and in education. They assert that she and her younger brother are
   settled in their education and do not wish to leave the UK and that the
   Judge had not properly considered their position.

5. Permission was granted by Judge Denson on the 19th of January 2015. He
   did so on the basis that no consideration had been given to section 55 of
   the 2009 or the case of EV (Philippines) & ors [2014] EWCA Civ 874.
   Permission was limited to the Appellants limited to article 8 and ECHR.

6. At the hearing the Appellants' counsel renewed an application for an
   adjournment. This was on the basis that her instructing solicitors had
   only recently been instructed by the Appellants and they had not received
   the Respondent's bundle. The application was refused as the Appellants
   had had ample time to prepare and would have had the paperwork to pass on
   to the representatives. The submissions are set out in the Record of
   Proceedings and referred to where relevant below.

7. The Judge did not mention section 55 of the 2009 Act but that is not
   itself an error. The important question is whether the Judge gave
   substantive consideration to the relevant issues and came to a decision
   that is sustainable and in accordance with the relevant law having
   applied the facts. It is clear from the decision that the Judge had
   regard to all of the relevant facts and considered them in context.

8. The Appellant were admitted to the UK on a temporary basis with no
   expectation of being permitted to remain on any other basis. The
   breakdown of the First Appellant's marriage is regrettable but not a
   matter for the Secretary of State except that it explains how the present
   situation arose. The Appellants have remained without leave have pursued
   educational opportunities but have had no expectation of being permitted
   to do so or to be permitted to complete any course.

9. The case of Patel [2013] UKSC 72 makes it clear that a desire to
   continue with education is not itself a protected right and it would only
   be in very limited circumstances that a person would be permitted to
   remain in the UK to complete a course that had been started and which may
   be the culmination of a protracted period of study at a high level
   nearing its conclusion. That is not the position here for either the
   Second Appellant or her brother.

10. Neither of the Appellants nor the Second Appellant's brother could meet
   the requirements of the Immigration Rules. They have not been here for 7
   years and came on a temporary basis. Much of the evidence relating to
   their circumstances in Pakistan was rejected and it had been found that
   they could be expected to return there.

11. The Appellants are not assisted by the case of EV (Philippines) which,
   in line with the case of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74, indicates that the
   removal of those in the UK without leave is disproportionate in only a
   small number of cases and in limited circumstances. The Appellants have
   no independent right to remain in the UK and no right to receive
   education or any other state provided advantages.

12. There is nothing unusual about their circumstances and nothing that
   would suggest that article 8 was engaged independently of the rules, as
   the Judge found, or that would make their removal disproportionate if
   article 8 were to be considered independently. In any event the
   Immigration Rules still form the backdrop for the assessment of the
   proportionality of the removal of the Appellants. The Appellant were not
   in a situation that was not contemplated by the rules, they could not
   meet the rules.

13. In summary the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows that the Judge
   considered all the relevant facts and applied the relevant law. It is not
   an error that specific cases or statutes were not listed, the principles
   were applied. The decision contained no error of law and the decision of
   the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
direction.

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeals I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 4th June 2015


