

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08501/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London               |     Decision & Reason         |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 27 October 2015                         |     On 12 November 2015       |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     MMR
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, instructed by Brighton Housing Trust
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity and confidentiality

 1. This appeal was subject to an anonymity  direction  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal because of the nature of the appeal and it is  appropriate  to
    make a similar order in the Upper Tribunal under Procedure  Rule  14(1)
    to prohibit the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to  lead
    members of the public to identify the appellant.   To  give  effect  to
    this order the appellant is to be referred to as MMR.

 2. In addition, the Tribunal directs under rules 14(2) to 14(8) that  this
    decision and reasons statement should not be disclosed to the appellant
    but  should  as  per  his  agreement  be  sent  only   to   his   legal
    representatives and the Home Office  because  it  contains  information
    about his sister which is to remain confidential.   This  decision  and
    reasons statement can only be  disclosed  to  the  appellant  with  the
    relevant information redacted.

Background

 3. The appellant  was  born  on  1  January  1995  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.

 4. He arrived in the UK on  21  October  2009  and  claimed  asylum.   His
    application  was  refused  on  18  December  2009  but  as  he  was  an
    unaccompanied asylum seeking child he was granted  discretionary  leave
    to remain in accordance with published policies until 1 July 2012.

 5. Shortly before that leave expired he made a further  claim  for  asylum
    but on 22 September 2014 the Home Office made a  decision  refusing  to
    vary leave and to remove the appellant by way of directions.

 6. The appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  but  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge C M Phillips in a  decision  and
    reasons statement promulgated on 9 February 2015.  The appellant sought
    permission to appeal against that  decision  and  such  permission  was
    granted on 16 March 2015.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds address six issues.

 8. The first argument is that the judge failed to understand the relevance
    of his sister's refugee status to his appeal because: (i)  it  supports
    the appellant's claim that  his  family  was  targeted  by  militia  in
    Afghanistan, and (ii) the appellant enjoys family life in the  UK  with
    his sister and her children.  The appellant  further  argues  that  the
    judge erred in finding that his sister's account was not credible given
    the medical and other supporting evidence.

 9. The second argument is related to the first insofar as it refers  to  a
    Social Service's letter which supported the  account  provided  by  the
    appellant's sister.

10. The third and fourth grounds argue that the judge erred in her approach
    to the family tracing duty on the Home Office  and  the  inference  she
    drew from the failure of the appellant's sister to engage with  tracing
    through the Red Cross.

11. The fifth argument challenges the judge's finding that  discounted  the
    entirety of the expert report of Peter Marsden on the  basis  that  the
    accounts were not credible when a large part of  that  report  examined
    whether the appellant face a real risk on return even if  his  accounts
    were not true.  The judge had no basis on which to reject  those  parts
    of the expert evidence.

12. The final argument suggests that the judge failed to  engage  with  the
    appellant's private and family life rights because the  judge  did  not
    properly examine the relationship between the appellant, his sister and
    his sister's children.

Ms Easty's submissions

13. Ms Easty relied on these grounds.  She added in relation to  the  first
    ground that the judge  had  not  made  clear  findings  regarding  what
    happened to the appellant's sister.  The ground focused on whether  the
    judge should have inferred from the grant of refugee  status  that  the
    account provided by the appellant's sister had  been  accepted  by  the
    Home Office.

14. Ms Easty  acknowledged  that  there  was  some  confusion  as  to  what
    concession was made by Ms Foot who was the appellant's advocate  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Easty recognised the fact that Ms Foot had
    settled the grounds of appeal and had not raised a concern  as  to  how
    Judge Phillips dealt with the concession.  Ms  Easty,  however,  argues
    that the decision and reasons statement showed the judge  was  confused
    and this undermined the findings.

15. Ms Easty took me first to paragraph 21  of  the  decision  and  reasons
    statement where it would appear that Ms Foot conceded that the sister's
    case  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  appellant's  case,  but  in  her
    submissions, which are recorded at paragraphs 42, Ms Foot  specifically
    argues that the appellant relies on the sister's case.   The  confusion
    in the record could only mean that the judge was confused and therefore
    her findings in paragraphs 70 to 75 were not sound because she did  not
    understand the case advanced by the appellant.

16. Those findings, Ms Easty submitted,  were  further  undermined  by  the
    failure of the judge to have regard to the West Sussex  County  Council
    Social Services letter of 6 May 2010 that confirmed  that  safeguarding
    issues relating to the appellant and his sister had been raised at that
    time because the appellant's sister had been threatened in the UK by  a
    relative of her fianc�.  In context this letter  added  weight  to  the
    truthfulness of the sister's account and therefore to  the  appellant's
    claim that his family  had  been  targeted  by  militia,  which  was  a
    relevant factor to consider when assessing risk on return.

17. Turning to the tracing issue, Ms Easty acknowledged that grounds  three
    and four were not particularly strong but argued  that  the  judge  had
    erred at paragraph  97  by  drawing  a  negative  inference  about  the
    credibility of the appellant's sister because she had refused to engage
    with  the  family  tracing  scheme  offered  by  the  Red   Cross.    I
    acknowledged that it was well  known  to  judges  that  the  Red  Cross
    advised those seeking to trace their family members of potential  risks
    that tracing itself might pose to family  members  and  that  a  person
    should not embark on such a course if it might put relatives at risk.

18. With regard to the expert report, Ms Easty identified the fact that  Mr
    Marsden had divided his report into what risks the appellant might face
    in Afghanistan were his accounts to be believed and what risks he might
    face even if his accounts were not believed.  Ms Easty  submitted  that
    the judge erred by discounting the  expert  evidence  in  its  entirety
    simply because she had found the appellant's accounts untrue.  Ms Easty
    said the judge had made no findings relating to the risk of recruitment
    to the Taliban or the risk of indiscriminate violence even though  such
    issues were specifically  addressed  by  Mr  Marsden  in  a  way  which
    suggested it would be necessary to depart from  the  country  guideline
    cases of the Upper Tribunal.

19. The final ground of appeal related to whether Judge Phillips had proper
    regard to the nature of the relationship between the appellant and  his
    sister.  The  judge  concluded  in  paragraphs  103  to  109  that  the
    relationship did not amount to  family  life  but  that  was  based  on
    Kugathas.  Ms Easty  reminded  me  that  the  proper  approach  to  the
    assessment of family life between adult siblings was  set  out  in  see
    Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal  [2012]  UKUT  160
    (IAC) and therefore the judge's conclusions were unsustainable.

Mr Avery's submissions

20. In response, Mr Avery reminded me of the rule 24 response submitted  on
    25 March 2015 and argued that there were no errors in the decision  and
    reasons statement.

21. With regard to the first issue, it  was  clear  that  Ms  Foot  gave  a
    concession that the sister's case was  immaterial  to  the  appellant's
    appeal.  The judge had no reason to go behind that concession.  In  any
    event, the judge had made her own finding of the appellant's sister and
    found she was not credible (see paragraph 88).  That finding  was  open
    to her given the limitations of the sister's evidence.  It should  also
    be recalled that the judge found the appellant's  own  evidence  to  be
    suspect (see paragraphs 79 to 86) and it was in that context  that  the
    case had to be viewed.

22. In respect of the Social Services letter, in light  of  the  concession
    and the limited information contained in that letter,  it  was  unclear
    what the judge was supposed to do with the letter.  In any event, it is
    clear from paragraph 89 that Judge Phillips considered that letter  and
    came to conclusions, which cannot be said to be  perverse  particularly
    since she records that the letter was not relied  on  in  the  skeleton
    argument or submissions.

23. Turning to the issues arising from family tracing, Mr  Avery  submitted
    that neither aspect was material to the outcome of the  appeal  because
    there were other  reasons  why  the  sister's  account  was  not  found
    credible.

24. Similarly, Mr Avery argued that  the  allegation  that  Judge  Phillips
    failed to consider the entirety  of  Mr  Marsden's  expert  report  was
    immaterial to the outcome since his conclusions were  contrary  to  the
    published country guideline cases and were mere disagreement  with  the
    binding judicial findings.  Mr Marsden's comments were nebulous and not
    founded on  evidence  of  sufficient  weight  to  disturb  the  country
    guideline cases.

25. As to whether Judge Phillips properly assessed the  appellant's  family
    life with his sister, even though  there  was  no  express  mention  of
    Ghising, it was clear  that  the  judge  examined  the  nature  of  the
    relationship and came to  sound  conclusions  that  the  appellant  was
    living an  independent  life  from  his  sister  and  her  children  in
    paragraph 105

Decision

26. Despite the convoluted arguments presented in this appeal, the issue is
    in fact very straightforward.   The  appellant  presented  evidence  to
    support his claim  to  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Afghanistan.  A central part of his evidence  related  to  his  sister.
    That evidence needed to be considered.

27. There appears to have been concern and confusion as to how  to  present
    the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  sister   because   much   remained
    confidential to her and her right to privacy had to be respected.  This
    is unusual if not a unique situation and having read the  decision  and
    reasons statement I can see that the judge, Ms Foot and  Ms  Butt  (who
    represented the Home Office) acted appropriately.  Although not  stated
    specifically, it is clear they all had regard to rule 13  of  the  2014
    First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules.

28. Despite the unusual nature of the proceedings, the judge did  focus  on
    assessing the evidence and  paid  careful  attention  to  that  of  the
    appellant's sister.  She rejected the primary submission that the  fact
    the sister had been  granted  refugee  status  should  be  taken  as  a
    concession that the sister's account of what  happened  in  Afghanistan
    was to be believed.  In my view, her approach and  assessment  of  this
    argument is correct in law.  The appellant  and  his  sister  (and  the
    appellant's representatives) drew that inference but in fact there  was
    no basis on which to draw that inference.

29. Since she was not able to accept the primary submission, Judge Phillips
    realised she had to make her own findings regarding the credibility  of
    the sister's account.  She found  there  were  inconsistencies  in  the
    accounts and concluded that the accounts were not credible  but  in  so
    doing failed in my view to have proper regard to the medical and social
    worker evidence.  The Medical Foundation had found that her account was
    consistent with their physical examination of her, which took place two
    years  before  the  birth  of  her  first  child.   The  Social  Worker
    identified the trauma the appellant's sister encountered  in  May  2010
    which resulted in strong safeguarding procedures having to  be  put  in
    place.

30. These were independent markers that had to be weighed  but  which  were
    not weighed.  At paragraph 87 the judge makes no reference to  the  key
    medical finding, that the doctor  found  the  appellant's  body  showed
    marks "consistent with the allegation of repeated rapes."  At paragraph
    88, the judge makes no  finding  in  relation  to  the  fact  that  the
    additional safeguarding was put in place  in  the  UK  because  of  the
    potential threats arising here because of what  the  appellant'  sister
    claimed had happened in Afghanistan.  Instead, Judge Phillips looks  at
    the fact the risks in the UK had lessened.

31. The failure to make relevant findings  on  these  issues,  which  could
    change the assessment of the credibility  of  the  appellant's  sister,
    would perhaps also change how the judge would have assessed  the  risks
    on return facing the appellant.  It is by this route that  I  find  the
    legal error to be material and require the decision on  credibility  to
    be remade.

32. Because credibility needs to  be  assessed  in  the  round,  I  do  not
    preserve any of  the  credibility  findings  made  in  respect  of  the
    appellant or his sister.  All the evidence will need to be reviewed and
    analysed by whoever next hears this appeal.

Other issues

33. I have already indicated that the Tribunal's specialised  nature  means
    it is aware that the Red Cross will advise those thinking about tracing
    their relatives of the potential risks to their  relatives  that  might
    arise from the tracing process itself.  It  is  for  an  individual  to
    decide whether to continue with tracing and therefore it will rarely be
    appropriate to infer from a decision  not  to  pursue  tracing  that  a
    person is not credible.  This knowledge means that I would  have  found
    the adverse credibility findings in paragraph  97  to  be  unsound  but
    accept that these findings are  separate  from  the  other  credibility
    findings and are immaterial.

34. I accept that the judge failed  to  properly  engage  with  the  expert
    evidence that the appellant would be at risk  on  return  even  if  his
    account was untrue.  Although I accept this  error,  I  agree  with  Mr
    Avery that it was not material because  the  evidence  provided  by  Mr
    Marsden is insufficient to displace the existing country guidance.   If
    the appellant seeks to pursue this aspect of his claim,  then  he  will
    require stronger and  more  cogent  evidence.   But  the  parties  will
    recognise that whether the expert evidence is relevant will  depend  on
    whether the appellant is found to be credible.

35. Turning to the issue of private and family life rights, I agree with Mr
    Avery that the judge properly assessed this  aspect  of  the  evidence.
    Judge Phillips correctly identified that the appellant and his  sister,
    although close, live independent lives and could not be said  to  enjoy
    family life within the meaning of article 8(1).  I  therefore  preserve
    this finding.  Of course,  if  the  appellant  has  new  or  additional
    evidence regarding his private and family life rights  because  of  the
    passage in time, it will be for him to make a fresh human rights  claim
    to the Home Office and not trouble the Tribunal with it further.

 Decision and directions

36. I find that the decision and reasons statement of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge C M Phillips contains an error on a point of law in  relation  to
    the assessment of credibility.  The error is such that I must set aside
    the decision and it will have to be remade.

37. The parties suggest, and I agree, that this is a case where remittal to
    the First-tier Tribunal is appropriate.

38. The remitted hearing must not be before First-tier Tribunal Judge  C  M
    Phillips.

39. The following findings and conclusions are preserved.

     a. The fact that the appellant's  sister  has  been  recognised  as  a
        refugee is not a reason of itself to find that she  is  a  credible
        witness or that her account of what happened to her and her  family
        before she came to the UK is to be believed.

     b. On the evidence provided, the appellant  has  not  shown  that  his
        removal would violate the UK's obligations under article 8  of  the
        human rights convention (i.e. he has not  shown  that  it  is  more
        likely than not that his private and family life  rights  would  be
        breached).

     c. The Tribunal cannot draw an  adverse  inference  about  credibility
        from a person's decision not to pursue family tracing via  the  Red
        Cross.

     d. Mr Marsden's report is insufficient of itself to displace the Upper
        Tribunal's  country  guideline  cases  regarding  risk  of   forced
        recruitment to the  Taliban  or  of  the  article  15(c)  risks  to
        civilians.

40. In light of these preserved factors, it  will  be  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to assess the credibility of the appellant and his sister  and
    to determine if the appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution in
    Afghanistan for one or more convention reasons.

41. If the First-tier Tribunal concludes that the evidence is not credible,
    then without evidence sufficient  to  displace  the  country  guideline
    decisions, the First-tier  Tribunal  will  be  bound  by  the  existing
    country guideline decisions.

42. The parties should also remember that in the absence  of  fresh  cogent
    evidence about the appellant's private and family life rights in the UK
    the First-tier Tribunal will be bound by the  findings  made  by  Judge
    Phillips.

43. It follows that the parties are free to provide  new  evidence  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to address the above issues and I direct  that  any
    fresh evidence must be filed and served at least  seven  calendar  days
    before the remitted hearing.



Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge C M Phillips contains  an  error
on a point of law and is set aside.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  as  per  the
above directions.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
