
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: aa/08462/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                   |Decision signed:   10.01.2017        |
|on    05.12.2016                     |sent out:                11.01.2017  |


                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judges
                      John FREEMAN and Helen RIMINGTON

                                  Between:

                                  Javid [A]
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Gemma Loughran (counsel instructed by Islington Law
Centre)
For the respondent:    Mr Tom Wilding


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      This is an appeal, by the , against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Surinder Singh Chohan), sitting  at  Birmingham  on  30
    July 2015, to  an asylum and  human  rights  appeal  by  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan, born 1 March 1995. The first-tier decision was set  aside,
    and a fresh hearing  ordered  by  Judge  Hugo  Storey  (Upper  Tribunal
    hearing 26 January, decision sent out 14 July), and that decision  will
    be attached to ours: however, we shall briefly  set  out  the  relevant
    history.

 2. Since Judge Storey upheld the first-tier judge's credibility  findings,
    the following account may be taken as accepted. The appellant  and  his
    family lived in a village in Jalalabad province in  the  south-east  of
    Afghanistan: his father was a government lorry  driver,  who  regularly
    drove to Herat, in the west. Cousins on his father's side  had  pressed
    the family to join the Taleban; but his father had refused. One day  in
    2007 the appellant's father rang to say he was on his way home; but  he
    never arrived. His  paternal  uncle  saw  his  father's  lorry  on  the
    television news two days later, burnt out and covered with blood.

 3. After his father's presumed death, the appellant's uncle supported  the
    family; but they received visits from sons of his father's cousin,  who
    wanted the appellant to join the Taleban. On one  occasion  his  mother
    hid him, and was beaten for it; another  time  the  appellant  and  his
    mother made a complaint to the police: the cousins told her not to, and
    beat her again. Following this, the appellant's uncle arranged to  sell
    his father's land, and to send him  to  England  on  the  proceeds.  He
    arrived here on 24 February 2009, a few days before his 14th  birthday,
    claimed asylum and was given  discretionary  leave  to  remain  till  1
    August 2012. On 30 July he applied for further leave to remain, refused
    on 15 September 2014, the decision under appeal.

LAW & COUNTRY GUIDANCE

 4. The first-tier judge dismissed the appeal, on the  basis  that,  though
    the appellant would be at real risk in his home  area,  he  would  face
    none from his paternal cousins in Kabul, and could safely return there.
    Judge Storey upheld his findings on the risk at home, and the  lack  of
    any from the cousins in Kabul; but he set his decision  aside,  on  two
    grounds:

     a) PM & others (Kabul,  Hizb-i-Islami)  Afghanistan  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
        00089, on which the judge had relied, was out-of-date; and  he  had
        not taken account of AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT
        163 (IAC); and

     b)  nor  had  the  judge  taken  proper  account  of  the  appellant's
        individual circumstances.

 5. We may have more to say about AK in due course; but, despite the  lapse
    of some time since it was decided[1], there was no challenge before  us
    to its central conclusions on Afghanistan, which were as follows:

        (ii) ... the level of indiscriminate violence in that country taken
        as a whole is not at such a high level as to mean that, within  the
        meaning  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive,   a
        civilian, solely by being present in the country, faces a real risk
        which threatens his life or person.
        (iii) Nor is the level of  indiscriminate  violence,  even  in  the
        provinces worst affected by the violence (which may now be taken to
        include Ghazni but not to include Kabul), at such a level.
        (iv) Whilst when assessing a claim in the context of Article  15(c)
        in which the respondent asserts that Kabul city would be  a  viable
        internal relocation alternative,  it  is  necessary  to  take  into
        account (both in assessing "safety" and reasonableness")  not  only
        the level of violence  in  that  city  but  also  the  difficulties
        experienced by that  city's  poor  and  also  the  many  Internally
        Displaced Persons (IDPs) living there,  these  considerations  will
        not in general make return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.

 6. It follows that there  is  no  separate  article  15  (c)  humanitarian
    protection case on the general safety of Kabul for us to deal with, and
    the only issue before us on the asylum appeal is whether this appellant
    could reasonably be expected to return to Kabul. So far as the  law  is
    concerned, it was common ground between both sides that essentially the
    same secondary question of fact has to be answered on this as is raised
    by the appellant's case on article 3 (by way  of  risk  of  suicide  on
    return) or article 8, either under the Immigration  Rules,  or  outside
    them. The Rules claim, since he is now over 18, depends, as the  first-
    tier judge pointed out, on his satisfying paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (vi),
    requiring him to show 'very significant obstacles' to  his  integration
    in Afghanistan. That provision is  not  specifically  directed  to  the
    nature of the appellant's private life in this country, though that may
    be relevant; otherwise we should  look  at  the  need  for  'compelling
    circumstances' for going outside the rule in the light of that.

 7. The provisions of s. 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 are by now well known; but we shall set the relevant ones  out
    here, just in case anyone should take it into their heads to suggest we
    have ignored them:

       117B Article 8: public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
       cases
       (1) The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
          public interest.
       (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
          of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
          seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
          are able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
       (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
          of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
          seek to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
          independent, because such persons-
           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
       (4) ...
       (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
          person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status   is
          precarious
       (6) ...

EVIDENCE

 8. We heard oral evidence face-to-face from  the  appellant  himself,  and
    from Jenny Allsopp and her husband  George  Gabriel,  who  have  looked
    after him (in much the same way as parents would a young person who had
    left home and gone out to work) since he left local authority care:  as
    they are both only 29 and have no objection,  we  shall  call  them  by
    their Christian names from now on. We also heard oral evidence from  Dr
    Brock Chisholm, a clinical psychologist with considerable experience of
    reporting on this  sort  of  case:  that  was  done  by  video-link  to
    Istanbul, where he was at the time, though at one point the picture had
    to be cut for the sake of the sound. There was also a very large amount
    of other evidence, and, although we  have  considered  the  case  as  a
    whole, we shall have severely to restrict our coverage of it  here,  if
    this decision is to remain intelligible.

 9. The appellant      confirmed the  various  witness  statements  he  has
    made: nothing was drawn to our attention outside the current one, dated
    this 20 November. He says he did not realize at the age of 14 that  his
    status on discretionary leave to remain was 'precarious': as  a  matter
    of law, of course it was, but we shall have more to  say  ourselves  on
    that point. He feels British, and has taken to playing cricket (as,  we
    should add, have his erstwhile fellow-countrymen in  Afghanistan,  even
    fielding a Test team). He takes pride in his work, as sous-chef at what
    he describes as one of the best restaurants in Oxford.

10. At this point we should mention that the appellant gave his evidence in
    English throughout (an interpreter stood by, but was not  needed),  and
    this, like his financial independence from work, is a  relevant  factor
    under s. 117B; not, on the authorities, one  which  raises  a  positive
    point in his favour, but is certainly one which is not against  him  in
    any way. We have to treat these as neutral points.

11. The appellant goes on to deal with his relationship with Jenny, whom he
    has known for over five years, and describes as like an older sister to
    him. They met when she was working as a  volunteer  at  a  local  youth
    group called 'Asylum Welcome', where  he  went  every  week.  He  gives
    details of a number of other friends, including Jenny's mother, and  of
    what  they  all  get  up  to  together;  but  his  really   significant
    relationships in this country are clearly with Jenny  and  George,  who
    trust him to the extent of letting him keep  their  house-key  for  the
    last two years, (after he first had it to look after  their  cat  while
    they were away). One friend he does not mention in his  own  statement,
    but whose name will come up later, is called Irfan.

12. The appellant describes what happened in June 2016: he saw,  apparently
    on Facebook, a photograph of the dead body of someone he  knew  in  his
    own village in Afghanistan, who had met his end, he thought, in  Kabul.
    "His face was all covered in blood and I just couldn't stop looking  at
    the photograph and I was just crying and I lost  it".  He  was  on  his
    break at the time from work, where the restaurant was very busy: he had
    "crazy thoughts" of cutting himself with the knives, but must have  had
    the much more sensible one of telling his head chef, who  told  him  to
    take the day off, and come back when he was better.

13. That evening the appellant rang Jenny and George, who were  on  holiday
    in France at the time. He was "crying and  going  crazy",  and  telling
    them he wanted to kill himself; but they succeeded in calming him down,
    and he went to see his therapist Heather al-Yousef at Refugee Resource,
    whom he went on seeing weekly till lately, but still sees  monthly.  He
    has been prescribed various forms of medication, but is  worried  about
    becoming over-reliant on them.

14. The appellant says his work has kept him going:  he  has  been  at  the
    restaurant for four years now, and worked his way up to being  a  sous-
    chef, taking his  responsibilities  very  seriously.  He  mentions  his
    efforts to trace his mother and brothers, of whom he has had no news at
    all: this was also accepted by the first-tier judge. He describes  "all
    my friends, mentors and work colleagues" as his  adopted  family,  and,
    while for us they must come under the head of 'private life',  that  is
    clearly of a very special kind for him.

15. In oral evidence, the appellant explained that he had lost  touch  with
    his mother only a couple of months after he arrived here: one  day  the
    phone connexion simply didn't work any more, and he  had  not  been  in
    touch with any other family members in Afghanistan either  since  then.
    While he had met other Afghans at Asylum Welcome, he had no  particular
    friends from home: one, called Jangur, had been sent back  there  about
    four years ago, and he had got him to go to a  police  station  on  his
    return and ask after his family; but there had been  no  news  of  them
    either there, or through the village head.

16. Jenny   is a PhD student in social policy and refugee studies at Oxford
    University, and has worked in that field as a volunteer  for  the  last
    ten years. That was how she met the appellant at the  youth  club,  six
    years ago; but it has been over the last two that she and  George  have
    become particularly close to him, which she says is not  an  experience
    she has had before. Nor had she given evidence  at  an  asylum  appeal,
    before the first-tier hearing in this case: even  before  us,  she  was
    visibly nervous and upset, much more, we thought,  than  the  appellant
    himself. She said in oral evidence that she had not  only  worked  with
    unaccompanied minors as a volunteer, but her PhD involved investigation
    of how they were interviewed. She thought  she  must  have  interviewed
    'thousands' of unaccompanied  minor  asylum-seekers  herself,  but  had
    never gone so far before as even to provide  a  witness  statement  for
    one.

17. Jenny describes the  appellant's  activities  and  general  helpfulness
    around the club, and with friends he has made there; but she says he

       ... was always more vulnerable than the other boys  and  would  stick
       close to the volunteers. He was not street smart. He looked  younger,
       is physically small and was very gentle. Whereas the other  boys  had
       teenager bravado ... [the appellant] came not to spend time with  his
       peers, but us volunteers, almost as if we were parental figures.

    While we know no more of the appellant than we have been  able  to  get
    from the papers and the half-day's hearing in this case, we have seen a
    good many other Afghan former unaccompanied minor  asylum-seekers,  and
    should not disagree with Jenny's relative impression of him  and  them.
    That population as a whole may  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  self-
    selected (or selected by  parents  or  family  members)  as  more  than
    averagely self-reliant; so that is the standard of comparison.

18. When the appellant reached 18, the local authority support he had  been
    getting began to wind down, as is normal; but  Jenny  regarded  him  as
    still having 'fundamental support needs': although he had friends  from
    work and cricket, he had no-one to talk to about personal matters, such
    as his health and his past. In case his happy surface led these  to  be
    overlooked, she encouraged him to get  help  from  Asylum  Welcome  and
    Refugee Resource locally. (There is also a letter from Helena Cullen at
    Asylum Welcome, who speaks very highly of the appellant).

19. In oral evidence, Jenny said the appellant had not just  threatened  to
    kill himself while she and George were in France, but 'loads of times':
    she had never heard anyone make such a threat before. She  believed  he
    would do it, if returned to Afghanistan: he often spoke of  death,  and
    how it had come to people there. In  her  statement,  she  mentions  an
    occasion in May 2016 when the appellant "... had to be  talked  out  of
    cutting himself by George and I [sic]": he  had  come  round  to  their
    house the next day "... looking wretched with totally blood  shot  eyes
    and told us he had been walking around all night".

20. Going back to her original acquaintance with the appellant at the club,
    Jenny mentioned how there had been a good  many  fights  between  other
    young Afghans over table football and the like: one day one of them had
    pushed the appellant, so he had come and hidden  with  the  volunteers.
    Jangur (see 15) on the other hand was a rough lad.  Jenny  thought  the
    appellant could never have held down his restaurant job as he  had  for
    the last five years, if it had not been for the help she and George had
    given him  throughout.  Asked  whether  she  had  been  away  from  the
    appellant at all during that time, apart from  their  trip  to  France,
    Jenny mentioned that at one point she had spent eight months in  Italy;
    but she had had a lot of calls from the appellant while there.

21. George  confirms in his statement what Jenny has said: he says  he  too
    has become great friends with the appellant, who he regards  as  'kind,
    considerate and hardworking', but 'immensely fragile'. George says  the
    appellant's mental health has got worse since the  first-tier  hearing,
    and he dreads being removed to Afghanistan. Dealing with  the  incident
    while he and Jenny were on holiday in France, he says the applicant had
    been in what seemed to him like a psychotic  state,  going  on  and  on
    about seeing the dead body of someone he had known in Afghanistan,  and
    sobbing uncontrollably, saying he would "... rather join his friend now
    than be murdered if he was  sent  to  Afghanistan".  George  and  Jenny
    managed to calm the applicant down, and spoke to him at least thrice  a
    day for the rest of their trip, encouraging him  to  seek  professional
    advice.

22. George goes on to describe his relationship  and  activities  with  the
    applicant, and friends they have in common: he too speaks highly of his
    personal qualities and skills at his work and other activities, such as
    cricket, when he has time. George describes the applicant's Westernized
    appearance (though he does not  claim  any  special  knowledge  of  the
    current appearance of young men about Kabul), and his obvious  distress
    at the prospect of being removed from his  friends  and  life  in  this
    country.

23. In oral evidence, George was asked about  what  experience  he  had  of
    people with mental health problems, and mentioned  his  godmother,  who
    had had a history of them. During the appellant's phone-call to him and
    Jenny in France, he had been 'completely incoherent'. That was in  June
    2016: the only identifiable previous incident of that kind had been  in
    October 2015. George accepted that there were now  about  five  Western
    restaurants in hotels in  Kabul,  which  were  themselves  targets  for
    terrorist attack; but everyone there would ask where the appellant came
    from.

24. Dr Chisholm  helpfully summarizes his conclusions as follows at  pp  20
    -21 of his report: the appellant

        109. ... suffers from a  moderate  to  severe  depressive  episode,
             accompanied by symptoms  of  PTSD  in  response  to  childhood
             events  in  Afghanistan.  Without  continued  treatment  these
             symptoms will worsen.
        110. His mental health is a reaction to the loss of his family that
             has been re-triggered by the asylum process and the threat  of
             further loss. It is worsened by  a  real  fear  of  what  will
             happen to him if he relocates to Kabul.
        111. If he is not able to  continue  to  work  as  a  chef  in  the
             restaurant that he currently works in, his mental health  will
             very severely deteriorate. His risk of  suicide  will  greatly
             increase.
        112. If he is removed from his current support  system  of  friends
             and  colleagues  his  mental   health   will   very   severely
             deteriorate. His risk of suicide will greatly increase.
        113. If he is relocated  to  Kabul  his  mental  health  will  very
             severely  deteriorate.  His  risk  of  suicide  will   greatly
             increase.
        114. If his current  psychological  treatment  is  interrupted  his
             mental state will decline. In any event, because  his  current
             situation  resembles  past  traumatic  events  of   loss   and
             separation, he is unlikely to significantly improve unless the
             threat of removal no longer exists.
        115. Even while he is working and  has  the  support  networks  his
             mental health is poor and the risk of suicide is high.
        116. He is well adapted to life in the UK. If the threat of removal
             is removed, he will likely make a full recovery. His  previous
             experiences, however,  make  him  more  vulnerable  to  future
             mental health difficulties.

25. In oral evidence Dr Chisholm explained his conclusions at 113 in  terms
    of PTSD being a condition based on  current  fears,  as  well  as  past
    memories: with the trauma for  the  appellant  of  losing  his  support
    system would come increased flashbacks, interrupting his work, as  well
    as the effect on his mood. The appellant's first  placement  in  foster
    care had broken down, and it had been a while before he had acquired  a
    support system to replace it. However,  on  return  to  Afghanistan  he
    would face suicide and other risks associated with his mental health.

26. Dr Chisholm said he had reported in many asylum cases, some  where  the
    risks had been exaggerated' but this appellant was "in the top 5%". His
    history suggested that he would be likely to kill  himself  on  return;
    somehow he had reconciled the idea of that with his religious  beliefs.
    His 'support network' (Jenny and  George)  had  mentioned  his  thought
    disorder, in other words not making sense when he spoke to them on  the
    phone in France.

27. Cross-examined, Dr Chisholm agreed that he had only seen the  appellant
    for three hours last August; hut he had reviewed  his  medical  records
    first, and then spoken to his 'support network'. As for  his  'cry  for
    help', sometimes people  could  want  to  die,  but  hope  for  another
    solution. Asked whether he  himself  had  placed  too  much  weight  on
    Jenny's views, he said he had to rely on people who knew the subject of
    a report: he believed the appellant would have killed himself,  if  not
    for her. Uncertainty about the appeal process had been  a  factor;  but
    leaving those he now considered his family, with  no  support  himself,
    was bound to make him worse, together with his fear  for  his  life  in
    Afghanistan.

28. We were curious to know more about the occasions when the appellant had
    actually manifested suicidal thoughts; so we asked  Dr  Chisholm  about
    one he describes at paragraph 101 of his report, as follows:

       I also received  further  specific  details  from  his  friend  Irfan
       regarding how close [the appellant] came to jumping from  a  motorway
       bridge to kill himself. After gaining the details  of  this  suicidal
       gesture, I consider Irfan's view to be credible. His view is that  if
       he had not been there, and enlisted other people's help,  to  prevent
       [the appellant] from jumping, then [he] would be dead.

29. Dr Chisholm said the appellant had been on the  bridge,  and  rang  his
    friends, since Jenny and George were away in France: Irfan had come  to
    the bridge and talked him down. The appellant had been getting more and
    more upset, and it had been because of that occasion that  his  Talking
    Space counselling service (see GP's letter 20 July 2016 at [AB  105-6])
    had rated him as at an 80% risk of suicide in the next 24 hours.

30. We reminded Dr Chisholm that he had mentioned two  occasions  when  the
    appellant had threatened to  kill  himself  (and  the  GP  records  the
    Talking Space assessment as having been made on  referral  to  them  in
    October 2015). Dr Chisholm accepted that it might have been a different
    occasion from the one in June 2016,  when  Jenny  and  George  were  in
    France, as described at paragraph 102 of his report, and he could  have
    been confusing the two.

31. Besides the letter from Asylum Welcome (see 18), which is more  like  a
    personal reference, there is a report (9 June 2016)  from  Heather  Al-
    Yousuf, a counsellor at Refugee Resource in Oxford. She  says  she  has
    trained as a 'systemic practitioner' (without explaining what that  is)
    at the Tavistock in London, and has also trained as  a  family,  couple
    and  individual  counsellor  at  Relate,  and  has  over  2500   hours'
    experience working with them in Oxfordshire and in London.

32. Mrs Al-Yousuf had had four one-hour sessions with the appellant by  the
    date of her report, and speaks  as  highly  as  everyone  else  of  his
    success in fitting in with work and friends in this country. So far  as
    her professional assessment is concerned, she describes him  as  having
    formed 'anxious attachments' to his close friends in this country: this
    she says is characteristic of

       ... survivors of trauma [who] may seek to hold onto a sense of safety
       for a child to build an internal sense of security and  psychological
       well-being, and this attachment style  would  tend  to  persist  into
       adulthood.  When  this  secondary  closeness   and   reassurance   is
       challenged or removed, or  ...  threatened  ...  those  with  anxious
       attachments may experience a high level of anxiety and stress.

33. Mrs Al-Yousuf goes on to describe how previously  suppressed  traumatic
    memories of the appellant's childhood (described later as  hearing  the
    news of his father's murder, and the  discovery  of  his  blood-stained
    lorry, and hiding in the oven while the Taleban searched the house  for
    him and beat his mother) have "... tended to intrude uninvited into his
    consciousness more and more as he faces the possibility of repatriation
    to a homeland he inevitably associates with his most traumatic memories
    of loss and where he has no supportive figures". Hard work  in  a  busy
    kitchen distracts him; but there are quieter times, when he  thinks  of
    using one of his knives on  himself,  and  the  night:  however  he  is
    reassured by the support of friends. That means  separation  from  them
    would be particularly hard for him. He is also upset  by  the  ill-will
    shown him, in the name of Islam, by the Taleban,  when  he  has  always
    been a faithful Muslim himself.

SUBMISSIONS/BACKGROUND EVIDENCE

34. Miss Loughran      referred us to the following items of  evidence.  Dr
    Liza Schuster (report at [AB 23 - 59]), reader in sociology at the City
    University, had lived in Afghanistan doing fieldwork from  2012  -  15,
    apart from six months in 2013. She had carried out a survey,  including
    interviews with 55 single men, as well as six families,  who  had  been
    forcibly removed to Afghanistan from Britain, Germany  and  the  Nordic
    countries, and monitored 25 of them. She explains in  her  report  that
    she was not concerned with their credibility  as  such,  and  that  her
    subjects had nothing to gain from misleading her.

35. Dr Schuster's own highlighted conclusions (paragraphs 65 and 70, [AB 46
    -7] are as follows:

       While long term residents of Kabul are at risk  of  being  caught  in
       cross fire, or killed or injured  in  attacks  targeting  governments
       [sic]  officials,  the  security  forces  or  employees  of   foreign
       governments  or  NGOs,  someone  arriving  in  Kabul  without   prior
       knowledge of the city, and without a network to offer advice on dress
       and behaviour would be at significantly higher risk than the  general
       population.

       ... I do not claim that someone  forcibly  returned  to  Kabul  would
       inevitably be killed, but that there is a real risk that  they  could
       be  killed  or  injured  as  collateral  damage,  and  that  risk  is
       particularly high for those who have never lived in Afghanistan,  are
       unfamiliar with Kabul, and do not have support networks.

36. The Refugee Support Network [RSN], in their report of 15 February  2016
    [appellant's bundle B, pp 7-66], had monitored 25 out  of  2,018  young
    care leavers returned to Afghanistan since 2007. Their  interviews  had
    been carried out over a period of 18 months, and they provide a  useful
    'executive summary' of their conclusions at pp 6 - 7 of the report  [BB
    12 - 13]. 17 out of the 25 had made contact with  their  families,  but
    only 12 had been able to live with them. The rest had had difficulty in
    building  relationships  with  individuals,  leaving  them  'internally
    isolated and disconnected' [lonely, as we should say in plain English].
    A minority had managed to get help from the International  Organization
    for Migration [IOM].

37. Twelve of the young persons monitored had had first-hand experience  of
    security incidents, "in particular  being caught up in bomb blasts  and
    suicide attacks". Three had been threatened or 'targeted'  for  reasons
    connected with their asylum claims, and seven simply because they  were
    returnees. Only two had been in full-time education: ten had not worked
    at all since they returned, and only five of  the  rest  had  had  jobs
    lasting more than three months, while the other ten  had  managed  with
    day labour or temporary jobs which had left them out of work  for  long
    periods. Seventeen reported mental health problems since their  return,
    and fifteen physical ones, while twenty-two had described 'symptoms  of
    poor emotional wellbeing' [being unhappy].

38. Fifteen out of the twenty-five planned to leave Afghanistan again  when
    they could, and by the end of the survey, six had already done so, with
    the whereabouts of eleven more being unknown. A number of case  studies
    are set out at various points in the report, which might have been very
    much more useful to us, if they had only given the city where the young
    person concerned was living. However  the  furthest  they  go  in  this
    direction is to mention when the subject did not live in Kabul: see for
    example no. 4 on Sajid, who had difficulties  travelling  to  Kabul  to
    follow a university course.

39. Interesting as the views expressed by Dr Schuster and the RSN were  for
    us, we had to raise with Miss Loughran the obvious question of the size
    and selection of their samples. Miss Loughran  relied  on  Dr  Schuster
    being a published and (presumably) peer-reviewed academic. Looking  for
    ourselves at RSN's section on 'Methodology' [p 14, BB 20 -  21],  while
    it gives a perfectly satisfactory explanation of  interview  techniques
    and monitoring arrangements, it does nothing to answer this essentially
    statistical question.

40. Miss Loughran also referred us in general terms to the  reports  of  Dr
    Nassim Roxane Majidi [AB 60 - 90] and Mr Bhavin  Vyas  [AB  91  -  99].
    Given their length, we shall refer only to those parts she  picked  out
    in her skeleton argument. Dr Majidi describes herself  as  a  published
    academic researcher, and a field  researcher  with  over  eight  years'
    experience as the head of a research organization called 'Samuel Hall',
    based in Kabul since 2007. The passage in her report to which  we  were
    referred is at [AB 72], paragraph 6 (i). Dr  Majidi  says  violence  in
    Kabul is on the rise, and she gives details of a number of instances in
    2016. She goes on to say that

       The frequency of  attacks  has  increased  to  new  levels  and  with
       unprecedented civilian casualties  in  2016.  UNAMA  [United  Nations
       Assistance Mission in Afghanistan]'s mid-year  report  in  July  2016
       shows a record number of civilian casualties since counting began  in
       2009.

    Dr Majidi does not give an actual casualty figure for Kabul, either for
    2016 or preceding years, at that point; but she does  give  figures  at
    [AB 44 - 45] for reported large-scale attacks in Kabul for  January  to
    October 2016, though none for the "many other smaller attacks that I do
    not list". These figures total 298 identifiably civilian casualties: we
    were not provided with a figure, which would have been helpful, so have
    had to add them up for ourselves. We shall return to this point in  our
    conclusions.

41.  Mr Vyas is the lead analyst for South Asia at the Risk Advisory  Group
    plc, and says he has written  200  reports  on  Afghanistan.  While  he
    provides an interesting overview of the general security  situation  at
    [AB 91 - 92], more interesting for present purposes is the  section  at
    [AB 93 - 94] on specific threats to the appellant  in  Kabul.  Mr  Vyas
    points out that, if he were to get anything like the sort of job he has
    been doing here, then

       ... it would be  either  at  a  restaurant  affiliated  with  Western
       countries or for wealthy Afghans. As  a  result  he  would  become  a
       target for terrorist just by working at those places.

    There is also, according to Mr Vyas, a risk, connected with  an  attack
    on the American University in Kabul,  of  the  appellant's  being  "...
    specifically targeted for his Western ideas,  values,  connections  and
    having lived in the West".

42. We were next referred to the UNHCR Afghanistan eligibility  guidelines,
    issued  19  April  2016.  At  p  41  (j),  'Individuals  perceived   as
    Westernized' are identified as belonging to a  category  at  risk  from
    AGEs [Anti-Government Elements], "... due to their imputed support  for
    the Government and the international community". Once again, there  are
    no statistics.

43. We were then referred, by both Miss Loughran  and  Mr  Wilding,  so  we
    shall take it together, to Home Office country guidance. The July  2016
    bulletin at 9.1.2 shows that a  substantial  number  of  asylum-seekers
    were returned from Pakistan and Iran to Afghanistan during  2015,  with
    nearly 58,000 returned from Iran in the first four months of 2016,  and
    nearly 6,500 from Pakistan. While Miss Loughran  made  the  point  that
    people who had been living in those countries  would  be  less  visibly
    different from stay-at-home Afghans than those who had come  back  from
    the West, we also note the following:

       The driving factor  for  55  per  cent  of  returnees  from  Pakistan
       interviewed by UNHCR was cited as the  improvement  in  the  security
       situation. [IOM] recorded 83,128 spontaneous  returns  from  Pakistan
       between January and 30 November 2015.

44. The Home Office December 2016 bulletin refers at 8.9.3 to a report from
    the  (Australian)  Department  for  Foreign  Affairs  and  Trade  which
    assessed that returnees from Western countries  were  not  specifically
    'targeted' on the basis of their being failed asylum-seekers:

       ... returnees from western countries who maintain a low profile  such
       as by taking steps to conceal their association with the country from
       which they have returned do not face a significantly higher  risk  of
       violence or discrimination than do other people in Afghanistan with a
       similar ethnic and religious profile.

45. Finally there is evidence from the IOM, in their quarterly  report  for
    January - March 2016. At 1.5 reintegration assistance  is  said  to  be
    limited, and not available for all returnees. 1.1 however shows that in
    the quarter in question there  were  1400  voluntary  assisted  returns
    under the IOM's programme, described as "...  a  dramatic  increase  as
    compare to the year 2015  where  in  the  whole  year  1,414  voluntary
    returnees arrived to the country".

CONCLUSIONS

46. Asylum/article 3   We shall begin by remembering that, as Judge  Storey
    found (see  4),  this  appellant  faces  no  real  risk  from  anything
    connected with the troubles he faced in his  home  area.  Nor  were  we
    invited to depart from the general country guidance in AK . We have  to
    deal with the appellant, so  far  as  his  asylum/article  3  claim  is
    concerned, as a  young  provincial  Afghan  whose  only  distinguishing
    characteristics are the time he has spent in this country  since  2009,
    and what is said to be his fragile personality.

47. There will be other considerations, on both  sides,  when  we  come  to
    article 8; but needless to say, there is no proportionality balance  to
    be struck on the asylum/article 3 case. It  is  simply  a  question  of
    whether there is any real risk of Convention persecution or 'inhuman or
    degrading treatment' on return: there is no  need  to  deal  separately
    with any risk of death, contrary to article 2, as our  risk  assessment
    will be on the article 3 basis, most favourable to the appellant.

48. Suicide A real risk of suicide on return has been accepted as  a  basis
    for an asylum/article 3 case since well before J [2005] EWCA  Civ  629;
    but that remains the leading case on the subject. The Court  of  Appeal
    reviewed the European jurisprudence and held, so far as  overseas  risk
    was concerned, as follows at paragraphs 26 - 31: we have replaced their
    ordinals in the text with cardinal numbers  outside  it,  for  ease  of
    reference.


   i) ... the test requires an assessment to be made of the severity of  the
      treatment which it is said that the applicant would suffer if removed.
       This must attain a minimum level of severity.  The court has said  on
      a number of occasions that the assessment of its severity  depends  on
      all the circumstances  of  the  case.    But  the  ill-treatment  must
      "necessarily be serious" such that it is "an  affront  to  fundamental
      humanitarian principles to remove an individual to a country where  he
      is at risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].


  ii) ... a causal link must be shown to exist between the act or threatened
      act of removal or expulsion and the inhuman  treatment  relied  on  as
      violating the applicant's article 3 rights.  Thus in Soering  at  para
      [91], the court said:

             "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may  be
             incurred,  it  is  liability  incurred  by   the   extraditing
             Contracting State by reason of its having taken  action  which
             has as a direct consequence the exposure of an  individual  to
             proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).


             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka..."


 iii) ... in the context of a foreign  case,  the  article  3  threshold  is
      particularly high simply because it is a foreign case.  And it is even
      higher where the alleged  inhuman  treatment  is  not  the  direct  or
      indirect responsibility of the public  authorities  of  the  receiving
      state, but results from  some  naturally  occurring  illness,  whether
      physical or mental.  This is made clear in para [49]  of  D  and  para
      [40] of Bensaid.


  iv) ... an article 3 claim can in principle  succeed  in  a  suicide  case
      (para [37] of Bensaid).


   v) ... in deciding whether there is a real risk of a breach of article  3
      in a suicide case, a question of importance is whether the applicant's
      fear of ill-treatment in the receiving state upon which  the  risk  of
      suicide is said to be based is objectively well-founded.  If the  fear
      is not well-founded, that will tend to weigh  against  there  being  a
      real risk that the removal will be in breach of article 3.


  vi) ... a further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is  whether  the
      removing and/or the receiving state has effective mechanisms to reduce
      the risk of suicide.  If there are effective mechanisms, that too will
      weigh heavily against an applicant's claim that removal  will  violate
      his or her article 3 rights.

49. There was no suggestion before us that Her Majesty's Government did not
    have effective mechanisms  to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide  for  the
    appellant at all times between the giving of our decision  (which  will
    be done through his solicitors), and  his  return  to  and  arrival  in
    Afghanistan; so there is no need for  us  to  review  the  position  on
    'domestic' cases. The appellant's claim on this  head  depends  on  his
    being at a real risk  of  suicide  after  his  return  to  Afghanistan,
    because of his own fears of what might happen, and the difficulties  he
    would experience there.

50. The perceived existence of that risk depends in the first place on  the
    appellant's manifested suicidal thoughts while still in  this  country.
    These manifestations did not take place  at  any  time  soon  after  27
    August 2015, when the first-tier decision was sent out: compare  J,  at
    paragraph 57

       His first and only attempt at suicide was more  than  4  weeks  after
       removal directions were issued against him, and  more  than  2  weeks
       after his notice of appeal against  the  decision  had  been  lodged.
       There had been no attempt at self-harm or suicide when the  appellant
       was informed of the adjudicator's decision to dismiss the appeal.

51. There is no obvious 'trigger mechanism' for  either  of  the  occasions
    when the appellant threatened to kill himself, either in October  2015,
    or in June 2016, except that Jenny and George were away  in  France  at
    the time of the second. We should have thought that the details of each
    of those occasions, and especially the fact that the appellant chose to
    ring round his friends from the motorway bridge on  the  second,  would
    have called for detailed examination by Dr  Chisholm.  Instead,  as  he
    frankly admitted, he had confused the two.

52. While we note Dr Chisholm's experience, and we do not doubt either that
    he was doing his best to give what he saw as evidence  which  would  be
    helpful to us, for the reasons given at 50 we do not find that evidence
    of any great assistance. The best that can be said is that  it  had  at
    least more basis in expert knowledge than the assessment of the suicide
    risk presented by the appellant following the  June  incident  as  80%,
    made by Talking Space, and quoted without comment by his GP. That is no
    more than misuse of figures to provide a spurious basis  of  scientific
    analysis.

53. We do not doubt that removal to Afghanistan, after seven years in  this
    country from the age of 14, and separation from his friends,  would  be
    an unpleasant and distressing experience  for  the  appellant;  but  we
    shall consider whether there would  be  a  real  risk  of  his  killing
    himself on return there in the light of our assessment of conditions in
    Kabul, and whether those themselves would  present  any  real  risk  of
    Convention persecution or ill-treatment for him.

54. Risk from events in Kabul     We start from  the  point  of  not  being
    asked (despite having offered to review it, given the passage of  time,
    in a further country guidance decision: see foot-note to 5)  to  depart
    from the general country guidance in AK , so that any decision  in  the
    appellant's favour  must  depend  on  his  individual  characteristics,
    limited to his personal and  psychological  history  in  this  country.
    While his memories of events in his home area may  well  form  part  of
    that, it has already been decided, and confirmed by Judge Storey,  that
    those past events present no real risk to him in Kabul now.

55. In those circumstances our review of the evidence of background risk of
    death or serious harm in Kabul (see 34 - 45) can be  relatively  brief.
    While it is clear that things have got a good deal worse since AK,  and
    Dr Majidi (see 40) does mention, without any attempt to  analyse  them,
    "many other smaller attacks", we shall review in a little  more  detail
    those she does list. It is clear, either from the brief description she
    gives herself, or from the details of the  incident  in  the  web-link,
    that each of them represents a general attack, either on the population
    at large, or some identifiable element of it. For example, even the '11
    people killed during morning rush hour' on 25 May appears from the link
    to have been the work of a single suicide bomber. The only attack  with
    particular relevance to  this  appellant's  case  is  the  one  on  the
    restaurant on 1 January.

56. Looking at Dr Schuster's conclusions (see 35), the risk  she  describes
    is one of becoming a victim of 'collateral damage'  in  an  outrage  of
    this kind. It is hard to see that Westernized dress (so  far  as  there
    may be any difference between that, and what is worn by young men about
    Kabul, she gives no details of it) could have anything to do  with  it.
    While there are no doubt places where  it  is  safer  not  to  go,  the
    dangers of being accidentally caught up in a terrorist attack have very
    little to do with any obvious imprudence, or lack of  local  knowledge,
    on the part of those concerned. Recent events in Paris, and now Berlin,
    besides others not so long ago in London, have made that all too clear.
    The only real difference between the risks of  this  kind  run  by  the
    inhabitants of these cities, and those of Kabul, is one of degree.

57. While we note the expressed wish of a majority of the small  sample  of
    young men returned  from  northern  Europe  (see  36  -  38)  to  leave
    Afghanistan again when they could, we  do  not  regard  that  as  doing
    anything to show that there is  presently  a  real  risk  of  death  or
    serious injury in Kabul to persons in that category. So far as  asylum-
    seekers in general are concerned, it would not be an  overstatement  to
    say that the evidence at 43 and 45 shows them flocking back.  No  doubt
    the majority of those who do are coming from less attractive conditions
    in Iran or Pakistan, where the life they have led leaves them with less
    visible difference from those who have stayed in Afghanistan.

58. However, looking at the conclusions of the Australian  report  referred
    to at 44, we have no doubt, on all the evidence to which we  have  been
    referred on this point, that they  are  accurate:  even  asylum-seekers
    returning from Western countries, if they do what they can to blend in,
    face no significantly greater risk of violence or  even  discrimination
    than do their section of the local population in general.

59. Asylum/article 3: conclusions We have found no real  risk  to  life  or
    limb for this appellant, or anyone else in his position,  from  outside
    events in Kabul. We still have  to  consider,  bearing  that  in  mind,
    whether he nevertheless faces such a risk from his own actions. Drawing
    together the relevant principles set out in J  (see 48), that risk must



          i) reach a 'minimum level of severity';

         ii) be the direct result of removal;

   iii) not only be particularly high in a 'foreign case' such as this, but
        even higher because it would be the result of the  appellant's  own
        actions, and not those of the foreign authorities;

    iv) ...

     v) depend to a significant extent on whether the appellant's own fears
        were objectively well-founded; and

    vi) on whether either the removing  and  or  the  receiving  state  has
        effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide.

60. Starting with the last point, it has not been, and, as in J, could  not
    realistically be suggested that this country has no such mechanisms: on
    the other hand, there is  nothing  to  show  that  the  authorities  in
    Afghanistan did have any, and we should be very surprised if that  were
    so. On the other hand, we have found that the appellant's own fears  of
    death or ill-treatment in Kabul are not well-founded,  however  genuine
    they may be; and we do not consider that the no doubt  equally  genuine
    fears of those who love him are  adequately  supported  by  the  expert
    evidence about his mental health, for the reasons already given at 50 -
    52. It follows that we do not think any possible  risk  of  suicide  he
    might face on return reaches the minimum level of severity required  in
    any article 3 case, still less the enhanced level required by principle
    (iii) in J. It follows that we should dismiss the appellant's appeal on
    asylum/article 3 grounds.

61. Paragraph 276ADE   So far as this appellant is  concerned,  we  do  not
    think there are any 'very significant obstacles' to his integration  in
    Afghanistan, simply in terms of the situation there,  for  the  reasons
    already given. What we shall have to consider is whether  that  remains
    the case when that situation is considered in the light of his personal
    and emotional life, including his psychological  history  and  anything
    else of similar relevance.

62. 'Reintegration' is a term of European jurisprudence, which the drafting
    of the rule was no doubt intended to reflect, rather than  an  ordinary
    English expression: without going into  the  European  authorities,  to
    which we were not referred, we are confident that our reading of it  is
    a reasonable, and perhaps the only reasonable one  in  the  case  of  a
    young person of this appellant's age.  Dealing  first  with  the  'very
    significant obstacles' required by paragraph 276ADE  (1)  (vi)  of  the
    Rules, the 'reintegration' referred to must mean  something  more  than
    merely 'coping with life'; and we think 'settling down',  in  the  same
    way as for any young person starting life on their own, must be what is
    intended by the Rules.

63. We turn to the considerations raised by paragraph 276ADE  (1)  (vi)  of
    the Immigration  Rules  as  a  whole,  besides  the  'very  significant
    obstacles'  to  reintegration  into  Afghanistan  it  requires.     The
    appellant is just 21 years old.  Although he has  not  spent  half  his
    life here, he came to this country when he was  only  14,  seven  years
    ago. He was placed in care and has  now  spent  a  large  part  of  his
    formative years, between the ages of 14 to 21 years, in  this  country.
     He has been educated here and formed close friendships.  While he  is
    now of full age, AA (unattended children) Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00016 makes it clear there is no 'bright line',  making  considerations
    of this kind irrelevant in the case of a  young  grown-up  person.   We
    accept that the appellant  has  completely  lost  touch  with  his  own
    family, and has formed a highly dependent emotional  relationship  with
    Jenny and George: he describes them as his 'adopted family', and so  do
    they themselves.

64. Although we have concluded that the appellant is not at  real  risk  of
    suicide, in terms of J, during and after return to Afghanistan,  we  do
    accept that he has some mental health  problems.   While  we  have  not
    accepted Dr Chisholm's evidence on that point, for the reasons we  have
    given, he is a recognised expert in his field, and there is  no  reason
    not to accept his description of the appellant as  having  symptoms  of
    PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder]  associated  with  his  childhood
    experiences, together with moderate to severe depression. The appellant
    has  harmed  himself;  he  receives  prescribed  medication,  and  also
    psychological counselling.  We accept the appellant's evidence that his
    work keeps him going, together with support from Jenny and George,  and
    his other friends.

65. We also accept Jenny  and  George's  own  evidence,  which  was  clear,
    consistent and candid. We could see for ourselves that the appellant is
    not big or strong, as our judicial experience of young Afghans  of  his
    age goes. Jenny, who has interviewed  a  great  many  such  young  men,
    described him as 'immensely fragile'. Without necessarily going as  far
    as that, we do regard him as personally vulnerable, and, because of the
    formative  years  he  has  spent  here,  westernized  in   manner   and
    appearance. While this in  itself  might  not  pose  'very  significant
    obstacles' to his integration in Kabul, it is part of the general basis
    for our consideration of his ability achieve that, in a city  where  he
    has no family connexions from which he can draw support. We  accept  Dr
    Chisholm's opinion that, without the support he now gets  from  friends
    and work, his mental health would get significantly worse.

66. Although we have expressed our reservations about  the  reports  of  Dr
    Schuster and Dr Majidi, we nevertheless  accept  their  evidence  about
    there being an increasingly hostile environment in Kabul,  particularly
    for those without family and those unfamiliar with the city.   We  also
    consider that a vulnerable appellant of this kind may  find  life  much
    harder: see the Home Office guidance, already referred to, at paragraph
    8.9.2, where it is acknowledged that "the lack of family  networks  for
    single men can also impact on their ability  to  reintegrate  into  the
    Afghan community". We also note the intense pressure  on  such  welfare
    facilities as there are, by way of asylum-seekers returning to Kabul.

67. As we have made clear, we do not accept,  in  general  terms,  that  an
    asylum-seeker returning after several years in the West would be at any
    article 3  risk  for  that  reason  alone.  However  in  our  view  the
    appellant's presently less than robust mental health,  and  its  likely
    deterioration on return, without the emotional support he now gets from
    friends and work, would, together with the general situation  he  would
    face on return to Afghanistan, lead to very  significant  obstacles  to
    his integration in Afghanistan. In case we are wrong about that though,
    we  shall  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  any   'compelling
    circumstances' which would lead us to conclude that the history of  his
    private life in this country now makes his return  disproportionate  to
    the legitimate purpose of .

68. Article 8    We have set out the relevant statutory provisions at  6  -
    7, and dealt with their legal effect at 10. We are very well aware that
    this  appellant,  whom  we  have  to  consider  as  an  individual,  is
    nevertheless  part  of  a  serious  general  problem.   Her   Majesty's
    Government regard themselves as obliged  not  to  return  unaccompanied
    minor asylum-seekers to countries such as Afghanistan, where there  are
    no effective reception arrangements in place. The result, at one end of
    the process, has been a flood of young persons, mainly  boys,  sent  by
    their friends and  relations  to  make  the  difficult,  dangerous  and
    expensive journey to this country, precisely in the  hope  that,  being
    practically irremovable till they reach 18, they will have created  for
    themselves by then an established position here from which their  whole
    family may benefit.

69. In a case where the asylum claim made has been rejected for credibility
    reasons, this will provide a  public  interest  consideration  for  the
    appellant's removal so strong that only the  most  exceptional  factors
    against it are likely to prevail. However that is not  the  case  here.
    The first-tier judge accepted the appellant's history of events in  his
    home area, and was specifically upheld on that by Judge Storey. So this
    appellant unarguably  needed  to  be  sent  away  from  home,  and  his
    asylum/article 3 claim only failed on the basis  of  the  situation  in
    Kabul. While we have not accepted it on that  basis,  this  would  have
    been a judgment very much  less  easy  to  make  for  his  friends  and
    relations in Jalalabad province, without connexions in the capital, and
    we do not think they can be blamed for the decision they made; or  that
    the situation created by it makes for the  particularly  strong  public
    interest factors present in a credibility case.

70. Looking at the rest  of  the  unaccompanied  minor  reception  process,
    different factors come into play. If Her Majesty's Government wanted to
    make return at the age of 18 as safe and undisruptive  as  they  could,
    then special arrangements would be needed: they might for example  take
    the form of special boarding schools, with Dari,  Pashtun  and  Islamic
    studies an essential part of the curriculum[2], and the end in  view  a
    return   to   gainful   employment   in   Afghanistan.   Instead,   the
    responsibility for unaccompanied minor  asylum-seekers,  as  for  other
    young people on their own at that age,  has  been  delegated  to  local
    authorities, who have no means of fulfilling it, other than by the same
    arrangements as for their ordinary charges.

71. These involve children's homes, where necessary, and foster-care, where
    possible. It is quite hard  enough  for  young  persons  born  in  this
    country to sort out their lives when they leave care  and  to  cope  on
    their own, as anyone sitting in crime, as well as immigration, will  be
    well aware. It is not through official foster-care that this  appellant
    has managed to sort out his own  life,  in  terms  of  being  a  valued
    worker, and financially self-sufficient but very much through Jenny and
    George, and the organization through which they met; however he remains
    a young man with a strong need for emotional support.

72. We have already noted that the knowledge of English, and financial self-
    sufficiency this appellant has built up for himself, have been held  to
    be no more than neutral factors in the s. 117B equation; and factor (5)
    requires little weight to be given to a private life established  while
    the person's status here is precarious. However, that does not mean  no
    weight: though it may mean very little indeed in  a  credibility  case,
    for the reasons given at 62, this case, as we have explained, is not an
    example of abuse of that kind.

73. While we do not think, for the reasons we have given, that there is any
    real risk of the appellant's killing himself on return to  Afghanistan,
    it is perfectly clear that the mainly happy and entirely useful life he
    has built up here, by his own efforts and with the help  of  Jenny  and
    George, would  be  completely  and  irreplaceably  torn  apart  by  his
    removal. While it is theoretically possible that he  might  get  a  job
    cooking at one of the few Western-style restaurants in  Kabul,  and  if
    so, then he could reasonably be expected to face  the  attendant  risks
    with the rest of his fellow-countrymen working there, we do not  regard
    that as at all likely, without any contacts in  the  city.  The  result
    would be that he led,  for  the  foreseeable  future,  a  hand-to-mouth
    existence, depending on casual work and accommodation.

74. We have discussed the  arrangements  for  unaccompanied  minor  asylum-
    seekers who cannot be returned; these are not something they  have  any
    choice about, once here, though as we have made  clear,  their  friends
    and  relations  may,  in  many  or  even  most  cases,  bear  the  real
    responsibility for sending them  here  in  the  first  place.  For  the
    reasons we have given, that is not so in this case. In our view,  there
    are 'compelling circumstances', even  apart  from  our  conclusions  on
    paragraph 276ADE (1), which would make his return  to  Afghanistan  now
    disproportionate to the legitimate purpose of .

75. To sum up, these are, besides his mental health, the  unusually  strong
    emotional dependency the appellant has formed  on  Jenny,  George,  and
    members of their family  and  friends;  and  the  unusually  successful
    efforts he has made to build up a useful working life for himself here.
    While he has done so on the basis of a precarious  immigration  status,
    this is not a case, as with so many grown-up asylum-seekers, of someone
    letting things run on in the hope that his position will  improve  with
    the passage of time; instead he has been allowed to stay  here  between
    the crucial ages of 14 and 19 (when his application for further  leave
    to remain was refused), without being offered any real preparation  for
    return, then or now (beyond, no doubt,  the  cash  grant  available  on
    voluntary assisted departure). This young man's situation, as  a  care-
    leaver, is, with the best will in the world, to a  considerable  extent
    the responsibility of Her Majesty's Government.

Appeal
                               [pic]                           (a judge of
                                   the Upper Tribunal)

-----------------------
[1]   At an earlier stage we proposed dealing with this case by  way  of  an
    up-to-date  country  guidance  decision;  but,  no  doubt  for  reasons
    connected to the individual case in hand, both the  appellant  and  his
    present representatives declined this opportunity.
[2]   Rather in the same way as the East India Company  replaced  Latin  and
    Greek with Sanskrit and Persian when it ran Haileybury as its  training
    school.

