
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08208/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 March 2016                              |On 29 March 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                    [N S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Lane, Counsel instructed by French & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr. G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Juss, promulgated  on  8  December  2014,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The first ground is arguable, since it appears that the judge has  not
    given any consideration to such  matters  as  the  claimed  arrest  and
    detention of the appellant, and the particular social group."


 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral submissions from both
    representatives following which I  announced  that  I  found  that  the
    decision involved the making of a material error of law,  and  that  my
    full reasons would follow.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Lane relied on his skeleton argument.  He submitted that 90% of the
    decision was focussed on the Appellant's claim to be a  Christian,  but
    the primary case put forward by the Appellant was in  relation  to  her
    imputed political opinion.   This  was  due  to  the  threats  she  had
    received as a result of the murder of her father and the  execution  of
    his killer, and also due to the treatment she  had  received  following
    the publication of the article relating  to  standards  in  prisons  in
    Iran.  Her claim was that the uncle of the man executed  (the  "uncle")
    was behind the treatment she received from the publishing company which
    resulted from the publication of her article.  Her Christianity  was  a
    secondary issue.  She had not been baptised  as  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.


 5. Her  interview  was  primarily  concerned  with  her  political  claim.
    However  the  only  paragraph  of  the  decision  which  addressed  the
    political claim was paragraph [20] and was  woefully  inadequate.   The
    judge rejected her claim on one ground, which was  that  there  was  no
    reason given as to why the Appellant's mother would have  been  spared.
    However, there was no consideration of the subsequent arrest, detention
    and questioning by Ettelaat referred to at paragraph  [49]  onwards  of
    the reasons for  refusal  letter.   This  did  not  necessarily  follow
    straight on from the threats received from the  uncle.   She  had  been
    arrested when working at the publishing company, but this had not  been
    considered at all.  This was an error of law.


 6. Further there was an error of fact in paragraph [20] which was relevant
    to the issue of materiality.  The judge  stated  that  the  Appellant's
    mother pressed for the  execution  of  her  husband's  killer.   I  was
    referred to paragraphs [18] to [20] of the reasons for refusal  letter.
    It was the Appellant's paternal family who had not  agreed  to  forgive
    the killer.  The Appellant's mother had wanted to forgive him  and  had
    not been pressing for his execution.  Further, the  Appellant,  as  the
    eldest child, was expected to carry out the  execution,  and  for  this
    reason she would have been the target, not her mother.


 7. In relation to the particular  social  group,  the  Appellant  presents
    herself contrary to the social norms of women in Iran.  I was  referred
    to paragraph [19] of her statement.  Objective evidence had been before
    the First-tier Tribunal but it had not been considered at all.


 8. Mr. Harrison accepted that there were a number of deficiencies  in  the
    decision.  The question was whether these were material.   He  accepted
    that the issue of the particular social group had not  been  considered
    at all.  He submitted that a Christian conversion was often seen  as  a
    "trump card" in such cases which is  why  the  judge  had  focussed  on
    Christianity.  However the judge had found that the claim had failed in
    relation to her claim to be a Christian.  The issue then was whether or
    not adequate reasons had been given in relation to the  claim  relating
    to her imputed political opinion.   The  judge  had  made  findings  in
    paragraph [20] regarding what had happened in Iran by reference to  the
    reasons for refusal letter.

Error of law


 9. I find that the judge has not given adequate reasons for dismissing the
    Appellant's claim relating to her imputed political  opinion.   I  have
    considered the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal.   This
    sets out three bases of claim, imputed political opinion, religion, and
    membership of a particular social group.  The judge has focussed on the
    second  of  these,  the  Appellant's  claim  to   have   converted   to
    Christianity.  He dismissed this claim for the reasons given.


10. The reasoning in relation to the first of basis of claim  is  contained
    in one paragraph, [20].  This states:


    "First, I do not accept that the Appellant  is  at  any  risk  of  ill-
    treatment or persecution in Iran or on account of the execution  of  an
    assailant, who was only executed following a proper process of the  law
    in a criminal trail (sic),  resulting  in  a  sentence  by  a  properly
    constituted court.  If the Appellant's mother was given the  option  of
    either accepting "blood money" or of pressing for  an  execution,  this
    was part of the process of the law in that country.  She opted  for  an
    execution.  If now the threat comes from a  former  judge,  he  of  all
    people would be aware that the decision taken was pursuant to  carrying
    out a sentence under law.  But in any event, I see no reason why, if it
    was the mother who had pressed for the execution, and rejected an offer
    of blood money, she should be spared, and her daughter, the  Appellant,
    be subjected to the risk of persecution or ill-treatment.  This  simply
    does not make sense.  Accordingly, I accept, for the reasons set out in
    the refusal letter, that the  claim  in  this  respect  is  lacking  in
    credibility."


11. The claim relating to imputed political  opinion  was  the  Appellant's
    primary reason for claiming asylum, yet the judge has dismissed  it  in
    one paragraph.  The majority of the Appellant's interview was concerned
    with her account of events in Iran, and consideration of  these  events
    ran to 18 paragraphs in the reasons  for  refusal  letter.   The  judge
    dismisses it by reference to the reasons set out  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter, but this is not adequate, especially given that he  has
    not accurately stated the position of the Appellant's mother, or  given
    any consideration to the fact that the Appellant would be  the  primary
    target for threats as she  was  the  one  expected  to  carry  out  the
    execution.


12. Further, there is no reference in paragraph  [20]  to  the  Appellant's
    claim to have been arrested, detained and questioned by Ettelaat.  This
    part of the Appellant's claim is set out in paragraphs [49] to [56]  of
    the reasons for refusal letter.  She claims that this happened when she
    was employed at the publisher.  While the Appellant considers that this
    arrest was linked to the uncle, these events do not merely flow on from
    the threats the Appellant received, yet there is no assessment  of  the
    evidence in relation to this part of her claim.  There is no  reference
    to the  article  which  the  Appellant  claims  to  have  written,  and
    therefore no consideration of whether this article was the  reason  for
    the arrest.

13. I find that the judge erred by failing  to  engage  properly  with  the
    Appellant's claim for  asylum  on  account  of  her  imputed  political
    opinion.  He has failed to consider the Appellant's claim to have  been
    arrested, detained and questioned, and  has  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for why this part of the Appellant's  claim  was  rejected.   I
    find that this is a material error of law.


14. I further find that the judge has  erred  by  failing  to  address  the
    Appellant's claim to be a member of a particular social group.


15. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of material  errors  of  law.   I  set  the
decision aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.



Signed                                  Date 11 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


