
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
aa/08785/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields             |                 Determination    |
|                                   |Promulgated                       |
|On 8 March 2016                    |                 On 26 April 2016 |
|                                   |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     RMO
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               TEH SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Susan Harrison of Immigration Advice Services
For the Respondent:    Mr John Kingham, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant  is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 8 May 2015 refusing to  grant  him  further
    leave to remain and to remove him to Eritrea.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born in 1989. He claims  that  he
    was in military service from 2005 to 2014. He  failed  to  return  from
    leave twice and was eventually arrested in a round up in July 2009.  He
    was imprisoned for twenty months and then  sent  to  two  years  forced
    labour in Wadi Shaka. He eventually escaped in 2014  with  a  colleague
    when collecting firewood. He exited Eritrea illegally and travelled  to
    Sudan. He arrived in the UK in December 2014 and  claimed  asylum  when
    detained.

The Appeal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at North Shields on 13 November 2015. The judge found  that  he
    was  not  credible  and  could  not  assume  illegal  exit.  The  judge
    appreciated that the appellant could  be  of  draft  age  but  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had proved when he left Eritrea.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  judge
    had not adequately addressed the issue of what basis the appellant  did
    leave Eritrea. The appellant was at risk as a failed asylum  seeker  in
    any event.

 6.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hodgkinson on 15 December 2015 on the basis that it was  arguable  that
    the judge did not adequately reason his conclusion that  the  appellant
    did not leave illegally and if he did leave illegally then  he  was  at
    risk of persecution in Eritrea. All grounds were arguable.

 7. In a rule 24 response dated 31 December 2015, the respondent sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the grounds represented a
    mere disagreement. The judge was entitled to find that  the  claim  was
    not made out and the negative pull of the lie led the judge to discount
    the illegal exit.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

 9. Ms Harrison submitted that the main thrust of the appeal was  that  the
    judge did not identify how the appellant left Eritrea.  There  were  no
    findings at to how the appellant left Eritrea and that was  a  material
    error of law.

10. Mr Kingham submitted in response that there was no requirement for  the
    judge to speculate as to how the appellant left  Eritrea.  It  was  not
    possible to identify whether the appellant left Eritrea before or after
    2008.

11. I have considered MO (Illegal Exit -  Risk  on  Return)  -  Eritrea  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00190 IAC. The Eritrean authorities  continue  to  envisage
    lawful exit as being possible for those who are above national  service
    age or children of 7 or younger. Otherwise, the potential categories of
    lawful exit are limited to two narrowly drawn  medical  categories  and
    those who are either  highly  trusted  government  officials  or  their
    families who are  members  of  ministerial  staff  recommended  by  the
    department to attend studies abroad. In  this  appeal,  the  respondent
    conceded that the appellant was of military service age and  the  judge
    did not find otherwise.

12. The country guidance goes on to  state  that  illegal  exit  cannot  be
    assumed if a person has been found to be wholly incredible. However, if
    such  a  person  is  found  to  have   left   Eritrea   on   or   after
    August/September 2008 then it may be that inferences can be drawn  from
    their health, history or level of education or their skills profile  as
    to whether legal exit on their part was feasible,  provided  that  such
    inferences can be  drawn  in  the  light  of  the  adverse  credibility
    findings.

13. In this appeal,  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant's  account  of
    repeated  desertion,  arrest  and  detention  was  vague  and  somewhat
    evasive. He was vague as to when his uncle went  to  Saudi  Arabia  and
    when his uncle visited him in Sawa. He could not say why his uncle went
    to Saudi Arabia and it was strange that  the  uncle  arranged  for  the
    appellant to come to the UK from Italy rather than join  him  in  Saudi
    Arabia. There was no satisfactory explanation for  burying  the  weapon
    during the escape or why he was armed in any event. The account of  27-
    30 absconders or deserters being sent  out  to  collect  wood  with  no
    guards was not credible. The appellant failed to claim asylum in France
    and the judge made an adverse credibility finding.

14. The judge did not make a finding  as  to  whether  the  appellant  left
    Eritrea before or after August/September 2008. There are no findings of
    fact as to how the appellant might have left Eritrea; if not illegally.
    There is no analysis of  the  feasibility  of  legal  exit  taking  the
    appellant's profile into account. I find that the judge has  not  given
    adequate reasons for finding that the appellant did not  leave  Eritrea
    illegally. In the context  of  a  young  man  of  military  age,  I  am
    satisfied that is a material error of law.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

16. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the error of law infects  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]                      Date: 22 April 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
