
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: AA/08561/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |       Decision & Reasons        |
|                                           |Promulgated                      |
|On 23 December 2015                        |       On 20 January 2016        |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                                    m.R.R
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by M & S
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought  pursuant  to  permission  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Blum on 30 September 2015.   The  appeal  relates  to  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S L Farmer which was  promulgated
    on 3 July of 2015.

2.   Judge Blum identified a  discrete  issue  which  merited  consideration
    today as being an arguable error of law. It relates  primarily  to  the
    consequence of the inclusion of the appellant's name  on  a  stop  list
    having regard to the authority of the Upper  Tribunal  in  the  country
    guidance case of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  I am grateful to Counsel  for  the  appellant
    for the narrow and focused way in which that single  ground  of  appeal
    has been developed before me.

3.   I can take  the  history  and  background  to  this  matter  relatively
    shortly.  The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  20  August
    1984 who was refused  asylum  on  the  basis  that  he  had  failed  to
    demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution.

4.   The immigration history is  that  the  appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in September of 2006 on a  student  visa.   That  was  extended
    twice and was due to expire on 19 May 2015.  On 28 May 2014  that  visa
    was curtailed.  Prior to coming to the United Kingdom the appellant had
    lived in Dubai with his mother and his  sister.   He  had  visited  Sri
    Lanka in March 2014 for a holiday and to get married and returned  from
    Sri Lanka to the United Kingdom on 28 April 2014, claiming asylum  upon
    arrival at Heathrow Airport.

5.   The view taken by the Secretary of State was that the options  for  the
    appellant on his return to the  United  Kingdom  were  either  to  seek
    judicial review in relation to his student visa or to claim asylum and,
    put shortly, the asylum option was pursued as a spurious claim  in  the
    Secretary of State's view, because the judicial review claim was  bound
    to fail.

6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal went into  considerable  detail
    as to the background to the matter  and  came  to  certain  conclusions
    based upon concessions on the part of the  respondent.   The  following
    matters were not in issue before the First-tier Tribunal:

    (1)  the appellant's identity and nationality,
    (2)  the appellant's Muslim faith,
    (3)  the fact of return to Sri Lanka and of marriage to a Muslim woman,
    (4)  an attack by Buddhists in March and April 2014,
    (5)  the fact that the mother's house in Chilaw had been attacked, that
         the police had visited his  wife's  flat  in  Colombo  and  that  a
         warrant for his arrest had been issued in Sri Lanka,
    (6)  that the appellant had attended three protests against the BBS and
         the Sri Lankan government in the United Kingdom in  April  and  May
         2014, all of which were subsequent to his return from Sri Lanka.


7.   There were therefore two factual matters which remained in  dispute  on
    which the First-tier Tribunal Judge was required to make findings.  The
    first  related  to  the  appellant's  participation  in  demonstrations
    earlier than the admitted ones in April and May 2014;  and  the  second
    concerned whether or not the appellant was on a stop list in Sri Lanka.
    For the purposes of this determination I need not explore  the  factual
    evidence in relation to the  earlier  demonstrations  because  argument
    before me has quite properly been  focused  upon  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's name was included on a stop list.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge came to the conclusion  that  "I  do  not
    accept that [the appellant] is on the stop list or the wanted  list  in
    Sri Lanka.  He does not therefore fall within paragraph  7(d)  of  GJ".
    It seems that the judge's reasoning for coming to that  conclusion  was
    that in her assessment the offence  in  relation  to  which  an  arrest
    warrant had been issued was "a low level offence".  Paragraph 17 of the
    decision states as follows:

         "I find that the appellant is not on the stop list  or  the  wanted
         list.  I accept the respondent's submission that the arrest warrant
         is a low level offence, 'fail to present  to  court  in  connection
         with charges' and therefore I  find  that  the  appellant  has  not
         satisfied me to the correct standard of  proof  that  he  would  be
         stopped at the airport if he returned to Sri Lanka."


9.   I have been taken today to  a  letter  which  was  in  the  appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal at pages 10 and 11.  That  letter
    is from A M.  He is an attorney-at-law with a professional  address  in
    Colombo.  The letter is dated 22 September 2014 and at page 12  of  the
    bundle is what appears to be a business card indicating  membership  of
    the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.  I need not rehearse the bulk of that
    letter which deals with various background matters but  the  concluding
    paragraph of the first page reads as follows:

         "The status of the arrest warrant is 'live' and I have had sight of
         the original arrest warrant, on 5 September 2014 which  remains  at
         the Magistrates' Court of Chilaw.  If [the appellant] comes to  Sri
         Lanka he will be arrested."

10.  On the second page of that letter at the concluding part of  the  first
    paragraph  is  a  clear  statement  from  attorney  A  M   that   "[the
    appellant's] name listed in the wanted/stop  list  in  the  airport  to
    arrest him on his return or departure".  It is  regrettable  that  this
    material piece of evidence is not mentioned at all  by  the  First-tier
    Judge in coming to the conclusion which he  did.   It  is  evidently  a
    material piece of evidence and one  which  goes  to  a  key  matter  of
    dispute.  I have  not  had  sight  of  the  record  of  the  First-tier
    proceedings, nor were the representatives before me today in a position
    to comment on  whether  submissions  were  made  with  regard  to  that
    document.

11.  However, Mr Tufan,  who  appears  as  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    today, quite properly concedes that there may be an  error  of  law  in
    that letter not being dealt with. I am of the view that  clearly  there
    was.  Mr Tufan says that notwithstanding that error of  law,  I  should
    not consider it to be material because, having regard  to  all  of  the
    surrounding circumstances, it  did  not  necessarily  follow  that  the
    appellant would attract the interest of the authorities  in  Sri  Lanka
    and it cannot therefore be demonstrated that the appellant has a  well-
    founded fear of persecution.

12.  With respect to Mr Tufan, I find that submission to  be  optimistic  in
    the extreme.  I  have  read  with  care  the  lengthy  decision  of  an
    experienced panel of the Upper Tribunal in  GJ  (above)  and  have  had
    particular regard to the features  summarised  in  the  head  note,  in
    particular, paragraph 7(d) which reads as follows:

         "A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  'stop'  list
         accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against  whom
         there is an extant court  order  or  arrest  warrant.   Individuals
         whose name appears on a 'stop' list will be stopped at the  airport
         and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
         pursuance of such order or warrant."


14.  In the body of the decision at paragraph 347  is  reference  to  checks
    which are made at the airport.  That  paragraph  concludes:  "If  on  a
    'stop' list [individuals] will be interviewed by the TID  and  that  is
    likely to involve physical abuse engaging international protection."

15.  Having regard to all of the circumstances in this case, it is clear  to
    me for the reasons I have briefly outlined that in this instance  there
    was a clear error of law on the part of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    in not  dealing  with  evidence  which  was  before  the  Tribunal  and
    accordingly coming to a conclusion which was not open to  the  Tribunal
    on the evidence as to whether the appellant's name was  included  on  a
    stop list.  For that reason the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    must properly be set aside.

16.  The issue then is how should  the  decision  be  remade?   Neither  the
    appellant nor the Secretary of  State  wished  to  put  any  additional
    evidence before this Tribunal and were content for me to deal with  the
    matter on the material that was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    specifically  invited  submissions  as  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position  on  the  letter  from  attorney  A  M  from  which  I  quoted
    extensively above, and it was indicated that no contrary  evidence  was
    to be put forward. In those circumstances, I  come  to  the  inevitable
    conclusion that the appellant's name at the material time was  included
    on a stop list.

17.  I am of the view, on a  proper  reading  of  the  decision  of  GJ  and
    notwithstanding the submissions made on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to the contrary, that mere inclusion of a name on a stop list  is
    sufficient for me to be satisfied that the appellant was likely  to  be
    detained at the airport in a manner likely to  involve  physical  abuse
    engaging international protection. In those  circumstances  it  follows
    that a well-founded fear of persecution is made out.

18.  Even if mere inclusion on a list is arguably not enough,  it  seems  to
    me that there is more than sufficient material in  this  case  both  in
    respect of  sur  place  activities  and  other  matters  to  make  this
    appellant an individual of interest to the Sri Lankan  authorities  and
    someone  in  relation  to  whom  there  is  a  well-founded   fear   of
    persecution.

19.  Therefore, in remaking this decision  I  allow  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds. In the light of that determination it is unnecessary for me to
    address the  alternative  arguments  both  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and in relation to the separate human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed on asylum grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         18 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         18 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


