
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08423/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th October 2015                  |On 7th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     SY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Smith of Counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, SY, is a citizen of Iran.   Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances I consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.



 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna promulgated on 17th March 2015.  The judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    to remove the Appellant from the  United  Kingdom  after  refusing  the
    Appellant asylum, humanitarian protection or relief under the  ECHR  or
    Immigration Rules.

 3. By a decision made on 7th April 2015  leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted.  Thus the matter appeared before me to  determine
    in the first instance whether or not there is a material error  of  law
    in the original determination.

 4. A major part of the Appellant's claim is that he is a member of Erfan-e-
    Halgheh, a spiritual religious group much in the tradition of Sufism in
    Islam.  The Grounds of Appeal allege that the  findings  by  the  judge
    with regard to whether or  not  the  Appellant  is  a  member  of  this
    movement are unsafe and fail properly to take into account  documentary
    evidence and evidence presented by the  Appellant  in  support  of  his
    claims.

 5. There were certificates produced on behalf of the Appellant to  confirm
    that he was a member of the group and had connections to the  "ring  of
    defensive radiation" within the  Erfan  spiritual  group.   There  were
    documents from his religious teacher, who is now in Germany. There  are
    photographs of the appellant's involvement in demonstrations in  London
    in support of the Erfan leader, Mohammed Ali Taheri.  He  had  produced
    his original membership card for the Erfan Movement.

 6. The Respondent had been given an opportunity to  counter  the  evidence
    from the  Appellant's  religious  teacher  and  other  sources  but  no
    evidence to counter or undermine the documents had been  presented.  No
    issues have been raised with regard to that evidence.

 7. The judge had not raised any  challenge  to  the  evidence  during  the
    course of the hearing. However in the decision the judge  had  rejected
    the evidence but the Appellant and his representative  had  never  been
    given an opportunity dealing with  the  grounds  raised  by  the  judge
    rejecting the evidence. Fairness required that the appellant  be  given
    an opportunity to deal with the issues.

 8. The second Ground of Appeal relates to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
    would be returning to Iran as an undocumented failed asylum seeker, who
    amongst  other  things  had  been  active  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    demonstrations.

 9. Reliance has been placed upon the most recent country guidance case  in
    respect of such.  Certainly the case of BA (Demonstrators in Britain  -
    risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 makes clear that a returnee, who
    is undocumented and has no an exit stamp on a passport or other  travel
    document, would be questioned by the authorities in Iran.

10. As the Appellant had  been  active  in  demonstrations  in  the  United
    Kingdom there was an issue as to whether the Appellant's involvement in
    such would have come to the attention of  the  authorities.  On  return
    through the airport the Appellant would have  to  explain  his  absence
    from and departure from Iran and the circumstances in which he had been
    in  the  United  Kingdom.   Given   the   Appellant's   activities   in
    demonstrations there was an issue as to whether or not such  activities
    would give rise to a risk to the Appellant.

11. Before me it was conceded by the Respondent's representative  that  the
    judge had failed properly to look at the  issues  with  regard  to  the
    Appellant being returned as an undocumented failed  asylum  seeker  and
    the impact of his activities in the United Kingdom. The issue  was  not
    whether or not the appellant  was  genuinely  a  member  of  the  Erfan
    Movement but how his activities would be perceived by  the  authorities
    in Iran and whether by reason of their perception the  Appellant  would
    be at risk of persecution  on  return.  It  was  accepted  that  proper
    consideration had to be made of whether or not the Appellant  would  be
    at risk by reason of his perceived membership of  Erfan  Movement,  his
    activities in demonstrations in support of that group and  the  profile
    that that would create with the authorities coupled  with  his   having
    left Iran illegally.

12. The Respondent's representative also accepted  that  documentation  had
    been submitted to establish that the Appellant  was  a  member  of  the
    Erfan  Movement  and  that  no  challenges  had  been  made  to   their
    documentation during the course of the  hearing.   The  judge  had  not
    raise the issue with the Appellant or the representative at the hearing
    and therefore the Appellant had had no opportunity of dealing with  the
    challenges made by the judge.

13. It was noted within the determination specifically  paragraph  38  that
    those, who follow the Erfan-e-Halgheh movement, faced a  real  risk  on
    return of being detained and ill-treated on account of their  adherence
    to the movement and at that risk would  give  rise  to  a  prospect  of
    persecution for an imputed religious  belief.  In  the  light  of  that
    clearly adherents of Erfan-e-Halgheh would be at risk of persecution on
    return to Iran if the authorities in Iran believed  that  the  returnee
    was an adherent of the movement.

14. It was accepted that the judge made findings on the Appellant's alleged
    arrest and detention and made findings with regard to the  plausibility
    and credibility  of  those  incidents.   However  with  regard  to  the
    assessment of whether or not the  Appellant  was  an  adherent  of  the
    movement, if there were any challenges to be made  to  the  documentary
    evidence the issues should have been raised during the  course  of  the
    hearing to give the Appellant and  the  Appellant's  representative  an
    opportunity of dealing with such challenges

15.  It  was  conceded  that  the  judge  without  properly  assessing  the
    evidential value of the documentation made assessment of whether or not
    the Appellant was a member of the Erfan Movement.

16. It was therefore conceded that the judge had  failed  to  look  at  the
    evidence properly and that there were material errors of law within the
    decision.  The consequence of that is that it  was  accepted  that  the
    decision could not stand and that the appeal would have to  be  reheard
    and fresh findings of fact made.

17. In the light of that concession by the  Respondent's  representative  I
    find that  there  are  material  errors  of  law  within  the  original
    determination and direct that the appeal be heard afresh in the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

18. I allow the appeal to the extent that the appeal  is  returned  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full hearing afresh with none of the findings
    of fact maintained.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
