
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA 08144 2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 May 2014                                |On 24 June 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     P M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Turner, counsel instructed by Greater
                    London, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Sri Lanka against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom.  It is his case that  he  is  entitled  to
    international protection because he is a refugee.

 2. The case has taken a rather unusual procedural turn.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in what is in many ways a  careful
    determination.  Permission to appeal was refused by a different  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and the renewed application to the  Upper  Tribunal
    was also refused, all judges involved thinking that  the  determination
    was legally sound.

 3. However, the appellant felt so strongly about the matter that  he  took
    legal advice and began proceedings in the  Administrative  Court  where
    his case came before an experienced Deputy High  Court  Judge  who  was
    persuaded there was something at least arguably  wrong,  and  following
    his decision the Upper Tribunal intervened  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Lane gave permission to appeal on the original grounds.

 4. I note that there is a Rule 24 notice signed by Miss Powell,  a  Senior
    Home Office Presenting Officer, saying the appeal would be opposed  but
    the letter with the Rule 24 notice  giving  that  information  made  it
    plain  that  it  was  said  without   sight   of   the   determination.
    Unconsidered letter like that are rarely helpful.

 5. There is really a very narrow point and it is basically  this.   It  is
    the appellant's case that his feet had been whipped by  agents  of  the
    Sri Lankan state.  In very simple terms, having been persecuted once he
    says that he is at risk of being persecuted again because  he  has  not
    changed and he is sufficiently active to be  amongst  the  category  of
    people who are at risk.

 6. The claim that he has been beaten in this way is supported  by  medical
    evidence which, in the absence  of  any  proper  challenge  to  it,  is
    apparently very strong.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  aware  of
    this and acknowledged it expressly in the determination but found  that
    when set with the other evidence in the case it was not  an  acceptable
    explanation for the injuries caused.

 7. The difficulty is that the evidence that he had been beaten in that way
    was very strong and not undermined in  any  way,  and  it  was  thought
    arguable by the Deputy High Court Judge  that  this  skewed  the  whole
    determination.

 8. Before me Mr Tarlow took what might be considered a realistic view  and
    decided that he could not responsibly oppose the appeal.  The error  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is not giving a  satisfactory  explanation  for
    discounting  strand  of  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant   being
    tortured.  Although the judge has considered it with the  rest  of  the
    evidence, which in some ways is the right approach, he  has  not  given
    any reasons for disregarding the evidence for the  conclusions  of  the
    medical practitioner and that is what has led to the difficulty.

 9. It is not just a matter of balancing evidence but of analysing  it  and
    explaining the decisions reached.  The  result  of  this  is  that  the
    determination as a whole is unsatisfactory and has to be decided  again
    and it has to be done in the First-tier because it is necessary to have
    a rehearing.  This is not something that can be repaired and  so,  with
    the consent of the parties, I find an error of  law  as  indicated  and
    allow the appeal with the result that the case will have to be  decided
    again in the First-tier.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 June 2014                   |








