
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08728/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2015                  |On 30 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     kj
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Kiai of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1 January  1988.   He
    appealed  against  the  respondent's   decision   to   refuse   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds  dated  16  October
    2014.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 18 August 2014 Judge  Andrew  (the  judge)
    dismissed the appeal.  She did not find the appellant to be a  credible
    witness regarding events in Afghanistan or that he would be at risk  on
    return.

 3. The grounds claimed a procedural impropriety on the part of the  judge,
    in particular, failure to give  the  appellant  proper  opportunity  to
    address evidence.  At  [17]  of  her  decision,  the  judge  found  the
    appellant was not a member of the Afghan National Army as  he  claimed.
    The judge placed little weight upon the background material  which  she
    referred to at [18] of her decision, given it was from  a  more  recent
    time than when the appellant claimed to have served in 2007.  The judge
    went on to conduct her own research.  She referred to the  COIS  Report
    at [19] of her decision which was not produced or referred  to  at  the
    hearing.

 4. The grounds claimed the  judge  asked  the  appellant  at  the  hearing
    whether he was in the army or the police and  he  replied  the  former.
    The judge did not then pursue that answer  with  further  questions  to
    challenge the appellant as to any concerns that the army might  not  be
    responsible for border control as she found at [20].  The  judge  noted
    on more than one occasion within the decision that the appellant was of
    borderline intelligence and illiterate.  In that regard she  took  into
    account the expert evidence of Dr Egnal.  In such circumstances it  was
    all the more important that the appellant  be  asked  directly  if  the
    judge had concerns which the grounds claimed she clearly  had,  as  she
    carried out further research on the point post-hearing.

 5. Following the decision, an expert  on  Afghanistan,  Dr  Giustozzi  was
    approached for his specific comments on the  issue.   Attached  to  the
    grounds was a letter from Dr Giustozzi to Wilson Solicitors  LLP  dated
    28  August  2015.   The  grounds  claimed  that  letter  supported  the
    proposition that it appeared more likely from the  appellant's  account
    that he had served in the  border  police  but  given  the  militarised
    nature of the police, it was plausible that the appellant was  confused
    given his illiteracy and relatively  low  IQ.   Therefore  the  judge's
    finding at [20] that the appellant was aware of the difference  between
    the police and the army was unsafe, as the situation was  more  nuanced
    than that.  Further, that the  negative  finding  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's status in the army might well  have  infected  the  judge's
    other credibility findings, his occupation  being  so  central  to  his
    background and the claim.

 6. Judge Fisher granted permission to appeal on 11 September 2015.   Judge
    Fisher found there was no merit in the grounds regarding the additional
    comments from Dr Giustozzi.  The judge had to determine the  appeal  on
    the evidence which was before her and the post-decision  production  of
    further evidence could not amount to an error of law  in  the  original
    reasoning.  However, Judge Fisher found it was arguably unfair to  make
    adverse credibility findings on evidence  which  was  not  put  to  the
    appellant, especially as he had clear  intellectual  difficulties  such
    that permission to appeal was granted.

 7. The Rule 24 response from the respondent was dated 29  September  2015.
    As regards the COIS Report, the  respondent  submitted  she  could  not
    concede any error or provide a specific response to that ground without
    the benefit of access to the Record of Proceedings,  to  identify  what
    evidence  was  before  the  judge.   Nevertheless,   given   that   the
    appellant's subjective evidence was not consistent with  the  objective
    evidence before the judge and given that the COIS Report was dated 2008
    and had been in the public domain for many years and was  the  accepted
    medium of objective evidence relied upon  in  asylum  appeals,  it  was
    difficult to see  how  the  judge's  reference  and  reliance  on  that
    evidence could amount to a material arguable error of law.

Submission on Error of Law

 8. Ms Kiai handed up a witness statement of Mark Bradshaw of Counsel dated
    18 November 2015.  Mr Bradshaw was Counsel at the  substantive  hearing
    before the judge and drafted the grounds.  Ms Kiai  also  handed  up  a
    printout from the website of Duncan Lewis with regard to them obtaining
    an " ... unprecedented generic injunction from the Court of  Appeal  in
    relation to removals to Afghanistan" together with a copy of the  order
    of the Court of  Appeal  dated  24  August  2015  in  the  case  of  HN
    (Afghanistan) (C2/2015/2582).

 9. Ms Kiai relied upon the grounds.  There was a procedural impropriety on
    the  part  of  the  judge  in  carrying  out  her  own  research   from
    documentation which had not been before her.  See in that regard [2] of
    the statement of Mark Bradshaw.  Further,  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge  compounded  her  error  which  infected  the  evidence  of   the
    appellant's brother.  At [22] of her  decision,  in  referring  to  the
    COIS, she commented, "It follows from this  that  I  am  unable  to  be
    satisfied that the appellant's brother A was kidnapped and that  if  he
    was, it was anything at all to do with the appellant".

10. Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied upon the Rule 24  response.   She  conceded
    that the judge had erred, however, she  submitted  the  error  was  not
    material.  The COIS Report dated 2008 had been in the public domain for
    many years and was the accepted medium of objective  evidence  commonly
    relied upon in asylum appeals.  It was difficult to see how the judge's
    reliance on that evidence could be  material  such  that  the  decision
    ought to be set aside.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. I do find the judge erred in her approach to the evidence  and  I  also
    find the error was material.  That was because the  judge  referred  to
    the 2008 COIS Report on Afghanistan within  her  decision,  a  document
    that had not been filed by either  party  nor  referred  to  by  either
    advocate.  At [19] of her decision, she quoted from [9.22] of the  COIS
    Report  describing   the   Afghan   Border   Police,   its   functions,
    responsibilities  and  organisation.   Relying  upon  that   background
    material, the judge went on to analyse  the  appellant's  evidence  and
    made a finding as a result that he was not credible.

12. I find there was a procedural impropriety in the manner  in  which  the
    judge approached that background material.  No issues arising from that
    material had been put  to  the  appellant  who  was  in  any  event  of
    borderline intelligence and illiterate.  I find that  given  he  was  a
    vulnerable person, there was  all  the  more  reason  for  the  judge's
    concerns which she set out at [20] to be put to him.

13. I also find that the judge's error I have set out  above  infected  her
    other credibility findings with regard to A, the  appellant's  brother.
    The judge was  clear  at  [22]  that  following  on  from  her  adverse
    credibility findings at [20] - [21] she found A not to be credible.

14. I find the judge erred in law for the reasons I have set out above.   I
    set aside the judge's decision.

Decision

15. The judge's decision is set aside and will be re-made  following  a  de
    novo hearing.  Directions are attached to this short decision.

Anonymity direction continued.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 19 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08728/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2015                  |On 30 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                     KJ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Kiai of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                                 DIRECTIONS

 1. Remit to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 2. List first available date.  Time estimate four hours.

 3. Not later than ten working days prior to the hearing, the parties  must
    file with the First-tier  Tribunal  and  serve  upon  each  other,  all
    documentary evidence (including witness  statements)  upon  which  they
    intend to rely, as well as any skeleton arguments.

Signed   Date 19th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
