
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08067/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2016                   |On 29 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                GR (PAKISTAN)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fletcher, Counsel instructed by the Immigration
                    Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Quinn sitting at Harmondsworth on 5  October
    2015) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise
    requiring international or human  rights  protection.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  consider  that  it  is
    appropriate that the appellant continues to be accorded  anonymity  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission

 2. On 9 November 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen granted permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "2.  The grounds on which permission to appeal is sought submit the
             judge failed to take account of evidence that was relevant  to
             the appellant's claim to be a practising Christian and  failed
             to apply the principles set out in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31.
             These grounds are arguable.

         3.   Further to the grounds on which the application  is  made,  it
             was arguable that the judge failed to make any  clear  finding
             as to  whether  he  accepted  the  appellant  as  genuinely  a
             Christian at all.  Several of his findings appear to point  to
             a negative finding on this issue.  Further, if he was accepted
             to be a Christian, the judge made no clear findings as to  how
             openly he has practised his faith in the UK and [how] he would
             wish to practise his faith in Pakistan."

The Rule 24 Response

 3. On 23 November 2015 Paul Duffy of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a
    rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  In summary,  he  submitted  that
    the judge of the First-tier Tribunal  directed  himself  appropriately.
    His findings were entirely consistent with the ratio of HJ  Iran.   The
    judge found that the appellant had been discreet about his faith in his
    past and would continue to be so, not through fear of persecution,  but
    through fear of familial disapproval.  This was a finding that was open
    to the judge on the evidence before him.

Relevant Background

 4. The appellant arrived in the UK on  3  October  2012  to  study  for  a
    Masters Degree in Information Security and  Privacy.   He  had  a  visa
    which was valid until 29 January 2015.  On  24  November  2014  he  had
    applied for asylum in the UK on the basis of his conversion from  Islam
    to Christianity.

 5. As summarised in the subsequent refusal letter,  the  appellant's  core
    claim was that he had not followed his religion like other Muslims.  In
    2011 he had been in a relationship with an Iranian  national,  who  was
    Christian, and who had persuaded him to study Christianity and to begin
    to read the Bible and participate in an online Christian forum.  He was
    discreet about his activities because of the social  pressure  that  he
    might otherwise face.

 6. While studying in the UK, he had attended an evangelic  church  at  his
    university.  He would attend the church once or twice every month.   He
    started dating a Czech national whilst he was in the  UK.   They  would
    practise Christianity together.  In August  2013  he  and  his  partner
    decided  to  get  engaged,  but  they  broke  up  shortly  after  their
    engagement.  In June 2014 he decided to become open about his  religion
    as a Christian.  He did this by becoming involved  in  more  forums  on
    face book, and by communicating with priests and rectors at St  Peter's
    Church in Farnborough, where he undertook charity work.  In  July  2014
    he had decided to convert to Christianity properly.  He lived with  his
    brother in the UK, but he had not told them of  his  conversion  as  he
    would react badly to the news.  Following the death of his father on 17
    July 2014, he had gone back to Pakistan for his father's  funeral,  and
    had stayed there until 11  August  2014.   He  had  not  mentioned  his
    conversion whilst he was in Pakistan.  On his return, he had started an
    Alpha course at St Peter's Church.  According to his witness statement,
    as he lived with his brother in the  UK,  he  could  not  practise  his
    religion openly here.

The Reasons for Refusal

 7. In the Reasons for Refusal Letter, the Secretary of State  referred  to
    the appellant's attendance at Leeds Registry  Office  on  24  September
    2014 to marry a British national called Rachael Tiffany.  The registrar
    had completed a suspicious marriage report.  Neither he nor his claimed
    partner were able to  provide  each  other's  address,  and  they  both
    provided different details about the length of time they had been in  a
    relationship.  It was noted that he was only  allowed  to  work  twenty
    hours a week, but his bank  statements  showed  an  income  of  �1,200.
    Rachael was later interviewed by an Immigration  Officer  at  her  home
    address.  She stated that they were no  longer  living  together.   She
    stated that he was living in Edinburgh, but his own evidence  was  that
    he had never lived there.  On the topic of his religion, Rachael stated
    that his religion was either Sikh or Muslim.  When he was questioned in
    his asylum interview about Rachael, he said he was not open  about  his
    religion to her.

 8. Accordingly, it was not accepted that he  had  genuinely  converted  to
    Christianity.  He claimed that he was an evangelist, and that he wanted
    to be open about his religion, yet he had not told his partner whom  he
    wanted to marry that he was a Christian.  It was reasonable  to  expect
    that he would disclose his religion to his partner and future wife.

 9. He claimed to be open about his faith as a Christian, yet  his  brother
    with whom his was residing did not know that he had converted.  It  was
    not considered credible that he would be able to  hide  his  conversion
    from his brother.  Moreover, as an evangelist, he had failed to explain
    why he would want to hide his faith as a Christian whilst he was in the
    UK.

10. In  his  asylum  interview,  he  had  demonstrated  poor  knowledge  of
    Christianity.  He did not know how many disciples  followed  Jesus,  he
    did not know the Lord's Prayer, he did not know how  many  books  there
    were in the Bible, and he did not know who had betrayed Jesus.   So  he
    had little knowledge  about  the  evangelic  denomination,  or  how  it
    differed from other Christian faiths.

11. Effectively, no one actually knew he was a Christian,  he  knew  little
    about Christianity, he had never  preached  to  anyone  and  he  rarely
    attended church.  It was considered he  had  made  attempts  to  attend
    church in the UK and learn about Christianity to enable him to be  able
    to manufacture an asylum claim, and this included  making  arrangements
    to be baptised on 10 May 2015.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

12. Both parties were legally represented before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The judge received oral evidence from the  appellant,  and  was  cross-
    examined by  the  Presenting  Officer.   In  closing  submissions,  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that  the  appellant  was  not  a  genuine
    convert.  All the documents relied  on  dated  from  after  his  asylum
    claim, and there was no evidence before the claim  of  an  interest  in
    Christianity.  On the issue  of  risk  on  return,  he  submitted  that
    Christians were generally permitted to practise their faith and no  one
    else knew of his conversion.

13. In reply, the appellant's representative said that the appellant  would
    be persecuted in Pakistan because of his apostasy.  He  submitted  that
    the appellant did not have to be an active Christian  in  order  to  be
    liable to persecution.  If the  appellant  was  returned  to  Pakistan,
    religion fanatics there would not ask him if he was a genuine Christian
    or not, but would persecute him for being a Christian.

14. The judge's findings of credibility and fact were set out at paragraphs
    [28] onwards in his subsequent decision.  The judge held  that  if  the
    appellant was a Christian but not practising, he did not  see  why  the
    situation could not continue in Pakistan.  He  did  not  need  to  tell
    anyone in Pakistan that he was a Christian.  The appellant said he  had
    been open about his religion in the UK, but he did not find this to  be
    the case.  He clearly had not been open about  his  religion  with  his
    claimed partner Rachael Tiffany: she believed that he was  either  Sikh
    or Muslim.  This was quite telling as it was  reasonable  to  expect  a
    partner to have knowledge of one's religion.  If he had been open about
    practising his religion, she could not have failed to have  been  aware
    of it.

15. He noted the appellant was not baptised until 10 May 2015 at St Peter's
    Church in Farnborough, and that he was confirmed there four days later.
     There was no letter from the vicar confirming that the  appellant  was
    known to him as a Christian or confirming he was a regular attender  at
    the church.  Neither were there any letters or witness statements  from
    any fellow parishioners.  There was no evidence  of  any  witnesses  in
    Cardiff where the appellant claimed to have become  interested  in  the
    Christian faith.  It was usual for  a  would-be  Christian  to  have  a
    sponsor for baptism.  There was no statement from such a person in this
    case.

16. Despite the appellant having allegedly followed Christianity  for  some
    time and having attended an Alpha course, the appellant was  unable  to
    name the correct number of disciples  (he  said  sixteen)  and  neither
    could he name Judas Iscariot.

17. The appellant's actions in going back  to  Pakistan  for  his  father's
    funeral did not suggest he had a genuine fear of returning there.

18. The appellant had not practised evangelical Christianity in the  United
    Kingdom so far as he could see.  Even if Muslims were more at  risk  in
    Pakistan for having converted, the fact of the matter was  that  nobody
    knew,  or  needed  to  know,  that  the  appellant  had  converted   to
    Christianity.

19. The judge continued at paragraph [54]:

         "The appellant kept his religion a secret from his  former  partner
         and  could  keep  it  a  secret  from  his  family  as  well.   The
         concealment of his alleged faith from his brother coupled with  his
         poor knowledge of Christianity persuaded me  that  the  appellant's
         knowledge of Christianity was not deep and  given  the  appellant's
         history and the facts  recited  in  the  respondent's  Reasons  for
         Refusal Letter the conversion to Christianity appeared to be one of
         convenience."

20. At paragraph [57], the judge said he had also considered the case of FS
    and Others (Iran - Christian Converts)  Iran  CG  [2004]  UKAIT  00303.
    Although it was related to Iran, and contained much useful information,
    the judge went on to quote from paragraph 19 as follows:

         "I have noted that since his 'conversion' on 15 August 2001 and his
         departure almost a year later the appellant was apparently  content
         to practise a religion in safety by restricting his  activities  to
         his personal reading and writing in the safety of his own home  and
         he had never attempted to join an evangelical  church  in  his  own
         country.  I therefore find the appellant had adopted a cautious and
         sensible approach to his wish  to  follow  Christian  teaching  and
         philosophy I can see no reason why if he would be returned to  Iran
         he would not behave in a similar manner.  I accept that he would be
         prescribed  from  evangelising  and  attempting  to  convert  other
         Muslims to his way of thinking but he has not described a need or a
         wish to do so."

21. The judge said that the appellant was in a similar  position,  and  was
    being "a cautious Christian."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

22. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Fletcher developed the case advanced  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  It was a fundamental error of law to require the
    appellant to be discreet about his religion in  order  to  avoid  being
    persecuted.  As was held in HJ Iran, being forced to be discreet  about
    having converted was in itself persecutory.

23. The judge had also erred at paragraphs [32] and [33] of his decision in
    finding that the appellant had  not  said  that  he  was  a  practising
    Christian in the United Kingdom, and/or in finding that  the  appellant
    was not in fact a practising Christian in the  United  Kingdom.   As  a
    result of this error, that the judge had  wrongly  concluded  that  the
    appellant would  not  be  at  risk  in  Pakistan  as  a  non-practising
    Christian.

24. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Bramble adhered to the Rule  24
    response which had been settled by his colleague.   He  submitted  that
    the judge had made sufficiently clear adverse credibility findings such
    as to make his failure to apply HJ Iran an error  that  was  ultimately
    not material.  Looking at the matter through the prism of HJ Iran,  the
    judge had given adequate  reasons  as  to  why  the  appellant's  claim
    failed.



Discussion

25. In HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010]  UKSC  31,  the  Supreme  Court  gave  the  following
    guidance at paragraph [82]:

         "When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  Tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he will be treated as gay by potential persecutors  in
         his country of nationality.  If so, that a Tribunal must  then  ask
         itself whether it is satisfied on the available evidence  that  gay
         people who lived openly would  be  liable  to  persecution  in  the
         applicant's country of nationality.  If so, the Tribunal must go on
         to consider what the individual  applicant  would  do  if  he  were
         returned to that country.  If the  applicant  would  in  face  live
         openly and thereby be exposed to a real risk of  persecution,  then
         he has a well-founded fear of persecution - even if he could  avoid
         the risk by living  'discreetly'.   If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
         Tribunal concludes that the applicant would in fact live discreetly
         and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he  would
         do so ... If the Tribunal concluded that a material reason for  the
         applicant living discreetly on  his  return  would  be  a  fear  of
         persecution which would follow if he were to live openly as  a  gay
         man, then, other things being  equal,  his  application  should  be
         accepted.  Such a person has a well-founded fear of persecution"

26. The judge has left himself vulnerable to an error of law  challenge  as
    he did not  make  his  findings  within  the  framework  of  this  test
    formulated by Lord Rodger, or the similar test propounded by Lord  Hope
    at paragraph [35] of the same decision.  In particular, he  dealt  with
    the issues in the wrong order.  He addressed the question  of  how  the
    appellant behaved as a Christian in the UK, and hence how he was likely
    to behave as a Christian in Pakistan, before resolving the question  of
    whether the appellant was a genuine convert in the first place.

27. However, the two questions were interlinked in that how  the  appellant
    had behaved as a claimed Christian in the UK was highly material to the
    question of whether his conversion to Christianity was genuine.

28. I am not persuaded that the judge erred in finding that  the  appellant
    was not openly practising Christianity in the UK, and  indeed  was  not
    claiming to be openly practising his  new  faith,  on  one  version  of
    events that he gave.   As  brought  out  in  the  refusal  letter,  the
    appellant had himself said that he  was  not  open  about  his  alleged
    conversion to Christianity either with his  brother  or  with  Rachael.
    The fact that his self-proclaimed discretion about his Christianity was
    inconsistent with the parallel claim that he was a fervent  evangelical
    Christian who attended church with reasonable regularity only served to
    undermine, rather than to enhance, his general credibility.

29. Accordingly, I consider  that  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    reaching the conclusion at paragraph [54] that the appellant was not  a
    genuine Christian convert.  This finding is enough to  dispose  of  the
    appeal in the Secretary of State's favour, following HJ (Iran).

30. Ms Fletcher submits that the finding at paragraph [54] is undermined by
    the judge going on to find at paragraph [57] that the  appellant  is  a
    cautious Christian.  Mr Bramble submits that there is no  inconsistency
    between the finding in  paragraph  [57]  and  the  earlier  finding  in
    paragraph [54], as the appellant is a Christian as a matter of fact  on
    account of him being baptised into the Christian faith.  This does  not
    detract, he submits, from the earlier finding that  the  appellant  has
    become a Christian in order to  mount  a  dishonest  asylum  claim.   I
    concur with this submission.  On the facts  found  by  the  judge,  the
    appellant's reticence about his  Christianity  on  return  to  Pakistan
    would not be engendered by a fear of persecution  if  he  revealed  his
    conversion to those who might regard him as an apostate. For this could
    not  explain  why  he  had  been  reticent  about  his  conversion   to
    Christianity in the United Kingdom, where he could have been open about
    it without a risk of persecution.  In short, the appellant could not be
    heard to say that an inability to state publicly on return to  Pakistan
    that  he  had  converted  from  Islam  to  Christianity  constituted  a
    persecutory suppression of his religious identity.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

