
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08728/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 July 2016                       |On 27 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     L Y
                         (ANONyMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Solanki, instructed by Uma Duraisingham
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka. He applied for  asylum  in  the
   United Kingdom and asked to be recognised as a  refugee.  In  a  decision
   dated 8 May 2015 the Respondent refused his application  and  decided  to
   remove him under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.  The
   Appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  and
   dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Solly in a decision promulgated on
   1 February 2015. The Appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was
   refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 24 February  2016  and  granted  on
   renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on 10 March 2016.

2. Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun found that it was  arguable  that  the  First-
   tier Tribunal failed to apply the approach in Mibanga v SSHD [2005]  EWCA
   Civ 367 in addressing the medical evidence only after she had reached her
   conclusions on the Appellant's credibility. This was particularly evident
   in her conclusion at paragraph 79.  Whether  the  Judge's  error  in  her
   approach materially undermined her decision was a matter that  needed  to
   be addressed.

   The Grounds

3.  The  grounds  contend  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   comprehensively
   rejected the Appellant's account  and  found  the  Appellant  not  to  be
   credible before turning to the medical evidence. She then found that  the
   corroborative medical report of Dr Sinha did not help  the  Appellant  as
   she did not find her to be a credible witness. The grounds  contend  that
   this approach was in error  and  had  she  had  regard  to  the  detailed
   diagnoses of mental health problems and the medical evidence she may have
   had a different approach to the issues. It is  further  issued  that  the
   approach to credibility was flawed  because  the  Judge  misunderstood  a
   submission in respect of the Appellant's age.

4. It is further argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially  erred
   in her approach to risk. It is  asserted  that  she  failed  to  properly
   consider whether the Appellant fell under the MP (Sri  Lanka)  &  Anor  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 829  "list  of
   risk categories,...the UNHCR's "more elaborate links"  examples  as  risk
   factors". It is also asserted that she failed to consider paragraphs 288-
   294 of GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT
   00319 and the argument that the Appellant's cousins fell within the UNHCR
   risk category 4 as 'Former LTTE supporters who may never  have  undergone
   military training, but were involved in sheltering or  transporting  LTTE
   personnel, or the supply and transport of goods for  the  LTTE'  and  the
   Appellant as such fell into category 6 'Persons with family links or  who
   are dependent on or otherwise closely related to persons with  the  above
   profiles'. It is further argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
   consider that the Appellant was from the North of Sri Lanka and that  his
   too arguably placed him at heightened  risk  given  his  accepted  family
   links and the militarisation in the area.

5. The final ground asserts that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred
   in her approach to the Appellant's health claim.

   The Rule 24 Response

6. The Respondent submitted a Rule 24 response dated 21 March  2016.  It  is
   submitted that the Judge clearly stated at paragraph 50 and 51  that  her
   findings were based on the  totality  of  the  evidence  (both  oral  and
   documentary). The Judge listed the evidence at paragraphs 24  and  at  26
   noted that an expert medical report  was  submitted  a  week  before  the
   hearing. It is submitted that the adverse credibility findings took place
   after considering all of the evidence. The Respondent contends  that  the
   determination is well written and  considers  all  of  the  evidence  and
   properly addresses it.

   The Hearing

7. At the hearing  Ms  Solanki  expanded  on  her  grounds  of  appeal.  She
   submitted that the Judge  adopted  the  wrong  approach  to  the  medical
   evidence. She failed to refer to specific submissions and  case  law  and
   finally she erred in relation to health care and in relation to paragraph
   276ADE. It was clear that the adverse findings started at  paragraph  50.
   It was clear that there had been an assessment of his credibility  and  a
   consideration of the medical evidence after a rejection  of  the  account
   due to inconsistencies. At paragraph 79 she considered the R35 report  in
   the last sentence and said that it  was  predicated  the  on  Appellant's
   account. The report had been considered as an add-on. It was exactly  the
   error fallen into in Mibanga. The Judge had no criticism  of  report  but
   rejected all of that evidence on the basis of her grave  concerns  as  to
   credibility. It was simply not  the  correct  approach  especially  where
   there was such strong medical evidence. Because of the approach taken  to
   the medical evidence, she held against him that he did not try to explain
   that inconsistencies were due to health. However, you  would  not  expect
   him  to  be  aware  why  he  would  be  inconsistent.  There  were   good
   explanations advanced there. Dr Sinha based his conclusions on the  whole
   picture. In the report and in the Appellant's own witness statement there
   was a detailed  explanation  as  to  why  he  had  not  received  medical
   treatment. Ground 3 linked to the approach  taken  to  medical  evidence.
   Paragraphs 90 and 91 of the decision referred to Dr Sinha's finding  that
   there was a severe level of depression. The Appellant had a lack of trust
   of officials. The Judge did not set out submissions in relation to GJ and
   others. Those with mental health problems were treated with real  stigma.
   It was submitted to tribunal that on a case by case basis  mental  health
   may be determinative. There was also background evidence put  before  the
   Tribunal and from the OGN. None of that was engaged with. The  fact  that
   he could not access treatment was  not  relevant.  Judge  had  failed  to
   engage with the fact that there would  good  reasons  why  he  could  not
   access treatment. The Tribunal was referred to MP and it was argued  that
   the Appellant's cousins fell in the risk category. It was said that  that
   it placed the Appellant into a risk category.   Significantly  the  Judge
   did  accept  that  the  Appellant's  cousins   had   been   involved   in
   significantly assisting LTTE at paragraph 55 of the decision but did  not
   engage with submission in that regard and without that  assessment  being
   made the findings were incomplete.

8. Mr Richards submitted that there was no material error of law  disclosed.
   The Judge dealt in considerable detail with the evidence and particularly
   with the medical evidence at paragraphs 72 to 79. This was not a case  of
   a Judge coming  to  a  conclusion  on  credibility  and  then  coming  to
   conclusion on report as an "add on". What was important is that the Judge
   considered the evidence in the round. She did because at paragraph 86 she
   said she had considered all of the evidence in the round.   She  properly
   weighed the evidence and made a key finding  in  paragraph  86  that  the
   inconsistencies were too numerous to be explained by his  mental  health.
   The finding was open to her. In essence she  conducted  a  very  detailed
   analysis of the whole of the evidence and her conclusions were in no  way
   infected. In relation to the Appellant's health with regard to Articles 3
   and Article 8, the Judge found at paragraph 92 that  there  would  be  no
   suicide risk even without the Judge reminding herself  of  the  extremely
   high threshold. At paragraph 100 in relation to Article 8  she  had  said
   she has considered his medical health weighing against removal. There was
   no material error of law in that regard. With regard to the MP point, the
   cousin was not a close  family  member.  Even  if  that  point  were  not
   specifically dealt with it could not be a material error of  law  and  no
   issue should arise from such an omission. No material error  of  law  had
   been identified and it should stand. I was asked to dismiss appeal.

9. In reply Ms Solanki said that his cousins were witness who  attended  and
   said that he grew up with them and did so until he left for  the  UK  and
   therefore it was material. In relation to the health claim the difficulty
   was that Sri Lankan health claims were different.  This was  not  just  a
   structural failing.

   Discussion and Findings

10. The First-tier Tribunal set  out  her  conclusion  in  relation  to  the
   Appellant's credibility at the outset of  the  section  of  the  decision
   entitled "Evidence and Findings". She stated  that  she  found  that  the
   Appellant's account contained discrepancies  and  statements  which  were
   internally inconsistent and inconsistent with the background evidence and
   the cumulative effect was to cast serious doubt on the reliability of his
   evidence and veracity of his case. She then engaged with the evidence and
   set out the discrepancies which she found to exist in the  evidence  from
   paragraphs 52 to 71. She found numerous discrepancies in his account  and
   comments in the course of these findings that  the  conflicting  evidence
   detracts from his account but that she weighs it up in the light  of  the
   surrounding evidence.

11. After having found numerous inconsistencies in his account she sets  out
   the conclusions of Dr Sinha, who  provided  expert  medical  evidence  in
   accordance with the Istanbul  Protocol.  She  sets  out  the  records  of
   scaring, Dr Sinha's conclusions as to the consistency of the scaring with
   the Appellant's account and Dr Sinha's  conclusions  on  the  Appellant's
   mental health.  Her evaluation and assessment of the medical evidence  is
   found at paragraphs 76 to 79 of the decision. The key findings in respect
   of Dr Sinha's report are at paragraphs 76 and 77 and I set  them  out  in
   full below:

        "76. I consider whether  the  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
        account can be attributed to his mental health. The  appellant  was
        composed in his account to Dr Sinha (paragraph 29  of  his  report,
        pate 11 of the appellant's bundle).  He  was  composed  before  me.
        There were  no  indications  of  formal  thought  disorder  and  no
        recorded symptoms of thought block or thought  broadcast  according
        to Dr Sinha. He was oriented in time, person and place  (paragraphs
        33 and 35 of his report, page 12 of  appellant's  bundle).  I  have
        carefully considered this report  as  a  whole  and  in  particular
        paragraph 65 which considers inconsistencies in testimony. I  heard
        the appellant's conflicting evidence before me and at no time  when
        inconsistencies were pointed out to him did he seek to explain them
        by reference to health save once on  length  of  detention  in  Sri
        Lanka. In this cases the inconsistencies are  too  numerous  to  be
        explained by his mental health given his presentation.

        77.  The opinion expressed by Dr Sinha is predicated on  acceptance
        of the appellant's account of  mistreatment.  I  do  not  find  the
        appellant  a  credible  witness  due  to   the   very   substantial
        inconsistencies in the evidence. Once his history  is  removed  the
        report adds little to  the  picture.  The  scars  have  alternative
        causes as mentioned by Dr Sinha, and PTSD, low mood and  depression
        may  be  due  to  other  causes.  The  report  cannot   assist   in
        establishing that the torture was politically based  or  for  other
        reason relevant to this appeal which is a matter for me."

12. Dr Sinha's report is at pages 8 to 28  of  the  Appellant's  bundle.  He
   assessed the Appellant against the DSM IV criteria for  Major  Depressive
   Episode, Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  and  in  accordance  with  the
   Istanbul Protocol. He concluded at paragraph 57 that the Appellant had  a
   cluster of symptoms indicating a major depressive disorder  and  that  he
   met the diagnostic criteria for PTSD as  set  out  by  the  DSM-IV.  With
   regard to the physical injuries, he found that  three  of  the  scars  or
   groups of scars were highly consistent with the  Appellant's  account  of
   the stated mechanism of the injury and six of  the  scars  or  groups  of
   scars were consistent with the described mechanism of the injury. In  his
   overall evaluation he concluded that the clinical picture of the quantity
   of scars distributed on different parts of his body  and  with  different
   appearances, and the presence of scarring on sites not  commonly  injured
   accidentally, was overall highly  consistent  with  the  torture  he  had
   described (paragraph 87). Further, he stated that the Appellant took care
   to describe each incident where he could not be sure of  the  attribution
   and to take care to say when he could not, or could not remember  or  did
   not know the cause of the scars. This, in his experience,  made  it  more
   likely that he was not confabulating. He also concluded that none of  the
   injuries could be suggestive of self-harm (paragraph 91).

13. As Dr Sinha noted at paragraph 87 of his report, the  Istanbul  Protocol
   Chapter V, paragraph  188  states  that  it  is  ultimately  the  overall
   evaluation of all lesions and not the consistency of each lesion  with  a
   particular form of torture that is important  in  assessing  the  torture
   story.  Since his overall evaluation was that the presence of  scars  was
   highly consistent  with  the  torture  he  described,  according  to  the
   definition of terms, the lesions "could have been caused  by  the  trauma
   described and there were few other possible causes."

14. In Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ
   367 Mr Justice Wilson stated at paragraph 24:

       24. What the fact-finder does at his peril is to reach a  conclusion
           by reference only to the appellant's evidence and then, if it be
           negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be shifted by the
           expert evidence.  Mr Tam has drawn the court's  attention  to  a
           decision of the tribunal dated 5 November 2004, namely HE (DRC -
           Credibility and  Psychiatric  Reports)  [2004]  UKIAT  00321  in
           which, in paragraph 22, it said:

              "Where the report  is  specifically  relied  on  as  a  factor
              relevant to credibility, the Adjudicator should deal  with  it
              as an integral part of  the  findings  on  credibility  rather
              than  just  as  an  add-on,  which  does  not  undermine   the
              conclusions to which he would otherwise come."

15. Whilst I find no error in the First-tier Tribunal's  evaluation  of  the
   Appellant's mental health at paragraph 76, it is clear from the reasoning
   in paragraph 77 that she found the Appellant not to be  credible  due  to
   the substantial inconsistencies in his account and then concluded that Dr
   Sinha's conclusions on scarring could be  disregarded  for  this  reason.
   This is the approach that was found to be in error in Mibanga.   Further,
   Dr Sinha, did not, as recorded by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  paragraph
   77, find that the scars had alternative causes, he found that  the  scars
   were highly consistent which meant that there  were  few  other  possible
   causes.  The medical report was a critical and objective analysis of  the
   injuries displayed and had status as independent evidence and should have
   been accorded weight as such.

16. The First-tier Tribunal also approached the R35 report  prepared  whilst
   the Appellant was in detention  in  a  similar  manner,  disregarding  it
   because the Appellant was found not to be credible. The Judge  stated  at
   paragraph 79:

        "The report identifies scars on both lower limbs and his  face.  He
        is recorded as having ongoing mental difficulties  particularly  at
        night involving reliving the episodes of torture and beating. There
        is some consistency between the scarring identified in this  report
        and in Dr Sinha's report as  being  due  to  torture  and  beating.
        However the report is predicated on the appellant's account.  Given
        my grave concerns on his  credibility  I  consider  that  once  his
        account is discredited little weight can be given to this report in
        establishing ill-treatment."

17. In the circumstances I find that  the  error  is  material  as  had  the
   correct  approach   to   the   evidence   of   scarring   been   adopted,
   notwithstanding the many discrepancies in the  Appellant's  account,  the
   conclusions on the Appellant's credibility may have been  different.   In
   the light of the fact that it  was  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  was
   detained and ill-treated in 2014 after the end of the civil  war  in  May
   2009 it was arguable that according to MP (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
   Civ 829  that the Appellant was perceived to be a threat to the integrity
   of Sri Lanka as a single state or  that  the  evidence  showed  that  the
   Government might regard him as posing a current threat to  the  integrity
   of Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence of  evidence  that  he
   had been involved in diaspora activism.



Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  with  no
findings of fact preserved.





Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray  27 September 2016

