
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA084582015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd May 2016                              |On 8th June 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     NB
                        (ANoNYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr H Mohamed, Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
                  Greenwood
For the Claimant: Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Maka dismissing the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision to refuse the Appellant's asylum, humanitarian protection  and
    human rights claims.




 2.  The  Appellants  appealed  against  that  decision  and  were  granted
    permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on all grounds.






 3. I was provided with a Rule 24 response from the Respondent.





    Concession


 4. In submissions before me, the Respondent accepted that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made material errors of law in relation to  the  consideration
    its own views instead of those of the Respondent as  contained  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter, and the Tribunal further erred  in  failing
    to put issues that concerned it to the  Appellant  which  deprived  the
    Appellant of an opportunity to reply. The Appellant  was  in  agreement
    with this concession.


    Error of Law


 5. In light of the above agreement and concession by the Respondent, I
    find that the decision involved the making of an error of law as stated
    above.



 6. Consequently, I remit the matter to be reheard by the First-tier
    Tribunal.





    Decision

 7. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




 8. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  with  no
    findings preserved.



 9. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.













Signed                              Date 3rd May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

