
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08232/2015
                                                               AA/08233/2015
                                                               AA/08234/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2016                  |On 7th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between


                                    J N O
                                    D C O
                                   C C P O
                         (anonymity direction  MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr I Kumi, instructed by Rehoboth Law
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeramen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria born  in  1976,  2013  and  2015
    respectively. They appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Heatherington, dated 5th October 2015, dismissing  their  appeals
    against removal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell
    on 26th October 2015 on the following grounds:

         "The judge did not record any self-direction as regards the  burden
         and standard of proof.  That is not necessarily fatal if it can  be
         seen from the body of the decision  that  the  correct  burden  and
         standard was in fact  applied,  but  it  cannot  be  seen.  On  the
         contrary, the phrase 'I am not satisfied' in paragraph  39  may  be
         taken as an indication that the balance of probability standard has
         been employed when assessing the  asylum  claim,  rather  than  the
         attachment of such weight to various  pieces  of  evidence  as  the
         Tribunal thinks appropriate in accordance  with  Degirmanci  [2004]
         EWCA Civ 1553 and Karankaran."

3.   Mr Kumi relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted  that  there  was
    no proper application of the standard and burden of proof; the  Judge's
    credibility findings were not open to him and  were  unreasonable;  and
    the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for those findings.  Mr  Kumi
    agreed that the Appellant could not succeed under paragraph  276ADE  if
    her asylum claim was not made out. He submitted the Judge had failed to
    consider the best interests of the children, although he accepted  that
    it was in their best interests to remain with their mother.

4.   Ms Sreeramen relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that  it  was
    clear the Judge was aware of the appropriate test to be applied at  [8]
    and he was mindful of all  the  evidence.  Even  though  there  was  no
    direction on the burden and standard of proof the Judge was aware  that
    the burden was on the Appellant at [39]. The reasons given at [30] were
    sufficient to show that the Judge had agreed  with  the  Respondent  in
    relation to credibility. The Judge's adverse credibility findings  were
    not perverse and it was implicit in the nature of the findings that  he
    had applied the correct standard of proof.

5.   The Judge  set  out  the  Appellant's  cross-examination  at  [34]  and
    rejected the core of the Appellant's claim, her forced marriage.  There
    was no corroborative evidence of the Appellant's  forced  marriage  and
    the Appellant made no reference  to  it  in  her  visa  application  or
    screening interview. The Appellant  had  used  deception  in  her  visa
    application and her application under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations
    2006. The Judge had focussed on  the  relevant  issues  and  had  given
    adequate reasons for his conclusions.

6.   I find that the Judge erred in law in failing to  demonstrate  that  he
    had applied the correct  standard  of  proof.  There  was  no  specific
    direction in the decision and he did not refer to the standard of proof
    in asylum cases in considering the Appellant's credibility. What is set
    out at [8] was insufficient to show that he  had  applied  the  correct
    standard of proof.

7.   Further, the application of the  correct  standard  of  proof  was  not
    implicit in the Judge's findings at [30] to [39]. The Judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for why the Appellant's account was not  credible
    or for why her account  was  implausible.  He  makes  no  reference  to
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account nor does he give examples of
    why her account is implausible in the light of background material.

8.   I have decided  in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements of 25th September 2012 that the decision dated  5th  October
    2015 should be set aside and the  appeal  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

    (i)  The  Tribunal  is  directed  pursuant  to  section  12(3)  of  the
         Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal
         at a hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington.

    (ii) I direct that the Appellants  serve  on  the  Respondent  and  the
         Tribunal not less than 7 days before the hearing a fully  paginated
         and indexed bundle of documents on which they intend to rely.

    (iii)    No interpreter is required. Time estimate two hours.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


           J Frances
Signed   Date 6th January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
