
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08054/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     W A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ian Palmer, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the Appellant may be put at risk solely as a  result
    of his claim attracting publicity.

2.   This is an appeal brought by the Appellant against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Aujla who, by a  determination  promulgated  on  12
    January 2015,  dismissed  on  asylum,  human  rights  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds, a refusal by the Secretary of State to grant asylum
    and a decision to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

3.   The matter has a convoluted procedural history but the  discrete  point
    raised in this appeal is  narrowly  focussed  and  was  succinctly  and
    forcefully argued by Mr Palmer on behalf of the Appellant.

4.   The Appellant was born on 3 May 1994 and is a citizen of Pakistan.  The
    Appellant together with his father came to the United Kingdom in  2008.
    They came to attend an Ahmadiya Convention (as they had  also  done  in
    2006) with the  intention  of  returning  thereafter.  The  Appellant's
    father duly did so, leaving the Appellant (then aged 14) with a friend,
    Mr SJ, who is a British citizen.

5.   On 14 October 2008, the Appellant accompanied by  Mr  SJ  attended  the
    Home Office and claimed asylum. The claim was subsequently refused  for
    the reasons given in a letter dated 25  March  2009.  However,  as  the
    Appellant was a minor he was  granted  Discretionary  Leave  to  Remain
    until 2 October 2011.

6.   On 15 September 2011 the Appellant  made  an  application  for  further
    leave to remain, repeating the asylum  claim  and  further  relying  on
    Article 8 ECHR, private and family life. This  was  refused  by  letter
    dated 26 December 2011.

7.   The Appellant appealed this decision and his appeal  was  dismissed  by
    the First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 7 March 2012. That
    decision was however set aside by the Upper Tribunal on 2 July 2012 and
    remitted to the Respondent to make a lawful  decision.  The  Respondent
    reconsidered the matter and again refused the asylum and  human  rights
    claims for reasons given in a letter dated 25 September 2014.

8.   On the  same  date,  25  September  2014,  the  Respondent  issued  the
    Appellant  with  a  Decision  to  Remove  an  Illegal  Immigrant.   The
    Respondent appealed the refusal to grant asylum  and  the  decision  to
    remove. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla, and it
    is this determination,  promulgated  on  12  January  2015,  which  the
    Appellant now seeks to impugn. I  note  the  determination  incorrectly
    refers to Somalia (not Pakistan) at paragraph 15 and  wrongly  ascribes
    to the Appellant the female gender in paragraphs 37 and  38.  No  point
    was taken on these infelicities, presumably because they were  accepted
    as being merely typographical errors.

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cheales
    on a single ground relating to the Judge's application of the  guidance
    in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31. This ground had been  fully  developed  in
    the Grounds of Appeal which accompanied the application for permission.
    In the course of his submissions, whilst conceding that the Judge could
    lawfully have reached the conclusion which he did in the determination,
    Mr Palmer submitted that the Judge did not properly deal with one  step
    of the sequential approach prescribed  in  MN  and  others  (Ahmadis  -
    country conditions - risk Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC) and  this
    misapplication of the guidance amounted to an error  of  law  requiring
    that element of the decision to be remade. No challenge is  brought  in
    relation to any of the other findings, including those  concerning  the
    Appellant's credibility.

10.  The determination in the First-tier Tribunal is thorough  and  careful.
    After a summary of the proceedings, it  sets  out  the  law  concerning
    refugees and humanitarian protection and no criticism of this is  made.
    The Judge then identifies the evidence which was before him.

11.  Next comes a summary of the  evidence  called  by  and  behalf  of  the
    Appellant which I need not rehearse because  the  Judge's  findings  of
    fact, which were informed to a  significant  degree  by  the  wholesale
    rejection of much of the Appellant's evidence, are  unchallenged.  This
    is followed by a summary of the respective cases advanced on behalf  of
    the Appellant and Respondent.

12.   The  Judge's  findings  of  credibility  and  fact  are  contained  in
    paragraphs 35 and following. His reasoning and conclusions are orderly,
    fulsome and rigorous. Reference is made to the country material  in  MN
    and others (above). In paragraph 37, the Judge  identified  four  basic
    issues for him to determine:

    i.   whether or not the Appellant belongs to the  Ahmadi  faith  as  he
         claimed;

    ii.  whether he accepts the Appellant's account of his  experiences  in
         Pakistan;

    iii. whether the Appellant has truly been actively practising his faith
         since his arrival in the United Kingdom;

    iv.  if so, whether he would do so after his return to Pakistan to such
         an  extent  that  he  would  come  into  confrontation   with   the
         authorities with the result that he would be at risk of persecution
          and ill-treatment.

    Mr Palmer criticised the Judge's formulation of  the  fourth  question,
    suggesting it disregarded the import of the  judgment  of  the  Supreme
    Court in HJ (Iran) (above) to the effect that persecution (in that case
    on the ground of sexual orientation) still exists even  if  the  person
    persecuted can eliminate the harm by  taking  avoiding  action.  It  is
    clear from the context that the Judge was doing nothing  more  in  this
    paragraph than setting out the broad scheme which  he  would  adopt  in
    disposing of the appeal and guiding the reader as to  the  ordering  of
    his judgment. It did not purport to be a definitive  and  comprehensive
    statement of every nuance of the issue to be addressed. It was merely a
    short hand identification of the points he was coming  to,  and  in  my
    view a perfectly adequate one. I consider Mr Palmer's criticism of this
    paragraph to be misplaced.

13.  The Judge identified discrepancies in the appellant's various  accounts
    and concluded that the adverse credibility  findings  set  out  in  the
    Respondent's  refusal  letters  remained  unexplained.  He  speaks   in
    paragraph 46 of the Appellant's credibility being 'undermined'  and  in
    paragraph 47 of it being 'seriously flawed'.

14.  The Judge gave no weight to the First  Information  Report  and  arrest
    warrant relied on by the Appellant as he was not  satisfied  they  were
    genuine. He rejected the Appellant's account that he left  Pakistan  at
    the age of 14 because of his religion or because he was in fear of  his
    life. He commented at paragraph 47: '[The Appellant's] case, in my view
    has  all  the  hallmarks  of  migrating  to  the  United  Kingdom   for
    educational/economic betterment and not due to religious problems'.

15.  As appears from paragraph 49, the Judge was, however, satisfied,  'that
    the Appellant was practising his Ahmadi faith in the United Kingdom'.

16.  The Judge then came to the fourth issue, namely whether  the  Appellant
    would continue to practise his faith after his return to  Pakistan  and
    if so, in what manner. Twice in his judgment he identified this as  the
    most important issue for his determination: see paragraphs  37  and  49
    respectively. It is the focus of Mr Palmer's criticism in  the  present
    appeal.

17.  The Judge made clear and repeated  references  to  MN  and  others  and
    quoted  extensively  from  its  headnote.  For  completeness,  and   in
    deference to the detailed submissions which were made as to its precise
    meaning and import, I set it out in full.

    "1.  This country guidance  replaces  previous  guidance  in  MJ  &  ZM
         (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033, and  IA  &  Others
         (Ahmadis: Rabwah) Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00088. The  guidance  we
         give  is  based in part on the developments in  the  law  including
         the decisions of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31,  RT
         (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and the CJEU decision in Germany v. Y (C-
         71/11) & Z (C-99/11).  The guidance relates principally to  Qadiani
         Ahmadis; but as the legislation which  is  the  background  to  the
         issues raised in these appeals affects Lahori  Ahmadis  also,  they
         too are included in the country guidance stated below.

    2.   (i)  The background to the risk faced by  Ahmadis  is  legislation
         that restricts the way in which they are able  openly  to  practise
         their faith. The legislation not only prohibits preaching and other
         forms  of  proselytising  but  also  in  practice  restricts  other
         elements of manifesting one's religious beliefs,  such  as  holding
         open  discourse  about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis,  although  not
         amounting  to  proselytising.  The  prohibitions   include   openly
         referring to one's place of  worship  as  a  mosque  and  to  one's
         religious leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are not permitted
         to refer to the call to prayer  as  azan  nor  to  call  themselves
         Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam. Sanctions include a  fine
         and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found, there is a risk of  the
         death penalty which to date has not been carried out although there
         is a risk of lengthy  incarceration  if  the  penalty  is  imposed.
         There is clear evidence that this legislation is used by  non-state
         actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis. This includes the filing  of
         First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first step  in  any  criminal
         proceedings) which can result in detentions whilst prosecutions are
         being pursued. Ahmadis are also subject  to  attacks  by  non-state
         actors from sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.

         (ii) It is, and has long been, possible in general for  Ahmadis  to
         practise their faith on a restricted basis either in private or  in
         community with other Ahmadis, without infringing domestic  Pakistan
         law.

    3.   (i) If an Ahmadi is able to demonstrate that it is  of  particular
         importance to his religious identity to practise and  manifest  his
         faith openly in Pakistan in defiance of  the  restrictions  in  the
         Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) under sections 298B and 298C, by engaging
         in behaviour described in paragraph 2(i) above, he or she is likely
         to be in need of protection, in the light of the serious nature  of
         the sanctions that  potentially  apply  as  well  as  the  risk  of
         prosecution under section 295C for blasphemy.

         (ii) It is no answer to expect an Ahmadi who fits  the  description
         just given to avoid engaging in behaviour  described  in  paragraph
         2(i)  above  ("paragraph  2(i)  behaviour")  to  avoid  a  risk  of
         prosecution.

    4.   The need for protection applies equally to men and women. There is
         no basis for considering that Ahmadi women as  a  whole  are  at  a
         particular or additional risk; the decision that  they  should  not
         attend mosques  in  Pakistan  was  made  by  the  Ahmadi  Community
         following attacks on the mosques in Lahore in  2010.  There  is  no
         evidence that women in particular were the target of those attacks.

    5.   In light of the above, the first question the decision-maker  must
         ask is (1) whether the claimant genuinely is an Ahmadi. As with all
         judicial fact-finding the judge will need to reach  conclusions  on
         all the evidence as a whole giving such weight to aspects  of  that
         evidence as  appropriate  in  accordance  with  Article  4  of  the
         Qualification Directive.  This is  likely  to  include  an  enquiry
         whether the claimant was registered with  an  Ahmadi  community  in
         Pakistan and worshipped and engaged there on a regular basis. Post-
         arrival activity will also be  relevant.   Evidence  likely  to  be
         relevant includes confirmation  from  the  UK  Ahmadi  headquarters
         regarding the activities relied on  in  Pakistan  and  confirmation
         from  the  local  community  in  the  UK  where  the  claimant   is
         worshipping.

    6.   The  next  step  (2)  involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
         intentions or wishes as  to  his  or  her  faith,  if  returned  to
         Pakistan.  This is  relevant  because  of  the  need  to  establish
         whether it is of particular importance to the religious identity of
         the Ahmadi concerned to engage in  paragraph  2(i)  behaviour.  The
         burden is on the claimant to demonstrate that any intention or wish
         to practise and manifest aspects of the faith openly that  are  not
         permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) is genuinely held and of
         particular importance to  the  claimant  to  preserve  his  or  her
         religious identity.  The decision maker needs to evaluate  all  the
         evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK may also  be  relevant.
         If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely to be  in  need
         of protection.

    7.   The option of internal relocation,  previously  considered  to  be
         available in Rabwah,  is  not  in  general  reasonably  open  to  a
         claimant who genuinely wishes to engage n paragraph 2(i) behaviour,
         in the light of the nationwide effect  in  Pakistan  of  the  anti-
         Ahmadi legislation.

    8.   Ahmadis who are not able to show that they practised  their  faith
         at all in Pakistan or that they did so on anything other  than  the
         restricted basis described in paragraph 2(ii) above are in  general
         unlikely to be able to show that their genuine intentions or wishes
         are to practise and manifest  their  faith  openly  on  return,  as
         described in paragraph 2(i) above.

    9.   A sur place claim by an Ahmadi based on post-arrival conversion or
         revival in belief and  practice  will  require  careful  evidential
         analysis. This will probably include consideration of  evidence  of
         the head of the claimant's local United  Kingdom  Ahmadi  Community
         and from the UK headquarters,  the  latter  particularly  in  cases
         where there has been a conversion.  Any  adverse  findings  in  the
         claimant's account as a whole may be relevant to the assessment  of
         likely behaviour on return.

    10.  Whilst an Ahmadi who has been found to be not reasonably likely to
         engage or wish  to  engage  in  paragraph  2(i)  behaviour  is,  in
         general, not at real risk on return  to  Pakistan,  judicial  fact-
         finders may in certain cases need to consider whether  that  person
         would nevertheless be reasonably likely to be targeted by non-state
         actors on return for religious persecution  by  reason  of  his/her
         prominent social and/or business profile."

18.  The Judge adopted the step-by-step approach  which  he  had  previously
    set out and about which I have already commented.  He  dealt  with  the
    Appellant's intentions in paragraphs 52  to  56  and  it  was  in  this
    section that Mr Palmer maintained that an error of law was to be found.

19.  In  paragraph  52  the  Judge  reminded  himself  of  his  findings  of
    credibility, particularly in relation to the Appellant's own  testimony
    of events in Pakistan (despite allowance being made for his  young  age
    at the time) but also the submission of false documents in  support  of
    claim (namely a First Information Report and arrest warrant).  He  also
    bore in mind that the  letters  from  AMA  UK,  whilst  confirming  the
    Appellant's Ahmadi faith, did not  suggest  that  the  Appellant  would
    continue to practise his faith if returned to Pakistan 'in  the  manner
    that was likely to bring him into contact  with  the  authorities'  and
    thereby expose him to a real risk of persecution.

20.  In paragraph 53 the Judge recorded that the Appellant  was  intelligent
    and familiar with the restrictive religious laws of Pakistan. He stated
    in a particular passage relied on by Mr Palmer:

         "Whilst I do not expect the Appellant to  suppress  his  desire  to
         practise his religion in Pakistan to avoid persecution,  I  do  not
         believe that he would be so naive  as  to  deliberately  to  expose
         himself to a real risk.  Instead  of  just  saying  that  he  would
         practise his faith after return to Pakistan even if it exposed  him
         to personal risk, the Appellant had to do more to persuade me about
         his intentions. The Appellant was involved in the AMA  UK  and  yet
         there was no one from that organisation  or  the  Ahmadi  community
         generally who could provide evidence in support to the  Appellant's
         declaration that he would practise his faith even at the expense of
         personal harm to himself."

21.  The Judge indicated much the same in  the  following  paragraph  adding
    that he would expect the Appellant to be pragmatic after his return  to
    Pakistan. He concluded:

         "I therefore do not find that the Appellant's account credible when
         he stated that he would practise faith in  Pakistan  regardless  of
         harm to himself'."

22.  He noted  in  paragraph  55  that  the  Appellant  had  no  profile  in
    Pakistan. This accorded with his rejection of the Appellant's  evidence
    concerning events prior to his departure in 2008. He  also  noted  that
    the Appellant did not hold office with AMA UK or his local association.
    The fact that he had run a stall to  propagate  his  faith,  the  Judge
    found, did mean he had a prominent social or business  profile  in  the
    United Kingdom such as to attract adverse consequences.

23.  What Mr  Palmer  submits,  crystallising  the  more  extensive  matters
    advanced in the Grounds of Appeal, is that  having  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had practised his Ahmadi faith  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he
    should also have accepted that he would practise  his  faith  upon  his
    return to Pakistan in a manner which would expose  him  to  risk  under
    Pakistan. Instead, it  is  submitted,  the  Judge  made  the  error  of
    determining that the Appellant would not be  put  at  risk  because  he
    would curtail his religious activities to keep within the  law  thereby
    compromising his religious identity.  In  seeking  to  make  good  that
    submission, reliance was placed on both HJ (Iran) and MN and others.

24.   Despite  the  able  argument  of  Mr  Palmer,  I  cannot  accept  this
    submission  as  it  proceeds  on  a  misreading  of  both  the  Judge's
    determination and of the guideline authority  of  MN  and  others.  The
    Judge positively rejected the Appellant's assertions  of  intention  as
    not being credible. He was perfectly entitled to do so.

25.  As the headnote in MN and others makes clear there  are  two  types  or
    strains of the Ahmadi faith: open practice (type 2(i) activities) which
    brings the individual into conflict with Pakistan's  domestic  law  and
    restricted  practice  (type  2(ii))  which  does  not.   The   headnote
    emphasises that determining which type of practice applies in any given
    case is a fact-specific exercise and an evidential burden rests  on  an
    Appellant.

         "3.  (i) If an  Ahmadi  is  able  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of
             particular importance to his religious  identity  to  practise
             and manifest his faith openly in Pakistan in defiance  of  the
             restrictions in the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC)  under  sections
             298B and 298C, by engaging in behaviour described in paragraph
             2(i) above, he or she is likely to be in need  of  protection,
             in the light of the  serious  nature  of  the  sanctions  that
             potentially apply as well as the  risk  of  prosecution  under
             section 295C for blasphemy."

26.  This is reinforced by paragraph 6 of the headnote which states:

         6.   The  burden  is  on  the  claimant  to  demonstrate  that  any
             intention or wish to practise  and  manifest  aspects  of  the
             faith openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code
             (PPC) is genuinely held and of particular  importance  to  the
             claimant to  preserve  his  or  her  religious  identity.  The
             decision maker needs to evaluate all the  evidence.  Behaviour
             since arrival in the UK may also be relevant. If the  claimant
             discharges  this  burden  he  is  likely  to  be  in  need  of
             protection. (emphasis added)

    Additionally, paragraph 9 provides:

         9.    A  sur  place  claim  by  an  Ahmadi  based  on  post-arrival
             conversion or revival in  belief  and  practice  will  require
             careful  evidential  analysis.  This  will  probably   include
             consideration of evidence of the head of the claimant's  local
             United Kingdom Ahmadi Community and from the UK  headquarters,
             the latter particularly  in  cases  where  there  has  been  a
             conversion. Any adverse findings in the claimant's account  as
             a whole may be relevant to the assessment of likely  behaviour
             on return. (again, emphasis added)

27.  In this instance the Judge's scrutiny of the evidence  was  meticulous,
    thorough and balanced. He had the particular advantage of hearing  oral
    testimony tested by cross-examination. He was uniquely placed  to  make
    findings of  credibility,  a  position  which  is  not  afforded  to  a
    reviewing tribunal. No challenge is made to  the  Judge's  findings  of
    fact or to his findings on credibility.  On  the  evidence,  the  Judge
    concluded that the Appellant had not demonstrated that on his return to
    Pakistan he would practise his faith regardless of harm to himself.  In
    other words, the Appellant had not satisfied the Judge  that  he  would
    come within type 2(i). That being so, he would come within  type  2(ii)
    whereby he will practise  his  faith  on  a  restricted  basis  without
    infringing domestic law.

28.  It may be that  a  different  judge  might  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion. But this is not the test which Upper  Tribunal  applies  on
    determining  appeals  of  this  type.  It  is  for  the  Appellant   to
    demonstrate an error of law. Here there is none. The Judge  turned  his
    mind to the Appellant's stated intention and disbelieved him. This  was
    a factual finding which was open to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence.  It
    therefore follows that the discrete point under  the  principle  in  HJ
    (Iran) concerning the suppression of religious identity never  fell  to
    be engaged  because  of  the  logically  prior  finding  of  the  Judge
    disbelieving the Appellant's stated intention in the first place.

29.   Mr  Palmer  conceded  that  the  Judge's  general  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's credibility was a weighty consideration but stated that  it
    ought not to have been determinative. As I read the determination  that
    is precisely how the Judge approached the  matter.  In  the  particular
    case of MN and others, the Upper Tribunal considered it appropriate  to
    afford less weight to the negative findings of the  various  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges because they had not had the benefit of  the  extensive
    expert evidence on Ahmadi practices and the circumstances  in  Pakistan
    which was admitted by way of fresh evidence on the appeal. Now however,
    the landscape is somewhat changed  in  that  this  material  is  widely
    available in country reports and elsewhere. There is no suggestion that
    the Judge did not understand the position for Ahmadis in  Pakistan.  On
    the contrary, the tenor of the determination makes plain  that  he  was
    fully conversant with it.

30.  Cases such as these are fact-sensitive and argument by analogy  is  not
    always helpful. It appears to me, however, that this case is more  akin
    to ZN which was one of the  conjoined  appeals  determined  in  MN  and
    others. In that instance (albeit on somewhat different facts from those
    here)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  determined  that   there   was
    insufficient evidence to show that the appellant met the  criteria  for
    type 2(ii) and the Upper Tribunal did not  disturb  that  finding:  see
    paragraphs 146-148.

31.  In all the circumstances, I can detect no error of  law  in  the  clear
    and systematic application by the Judge of the approach laid down in MN
    and others. The Judge's conclusions were entirely open to  him  on  the
    facts as he found them and this appeal must accordingly be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.



|Signed Mark Hill                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Mark Hill QC                         |Dated  17 July 2015                  |
|Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal   |                                     |

