
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08986/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 15 April 2016                     |On 12 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                    [B L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell (counsel) instructed by Malik & Malik,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Grimmett promulgated on 31  December  2016,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on [ ] 1989 and is a national of Albania. On  8
June 2015 the Secretary of State refused  the  Appellant's  application  for
asylum.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Grimmett ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and,  on  26  January
2016, Judge Brunnen gave permission to appeal stating, inter alia

    "2.    The grounds on which permission to appeal is sought submit  that
    the Judge erred in her approach to finding that the man who had  forced
    her into prostitution was not a member of a gang and  that  her  family
    had  not  been  threatened.  It  is  submitted  that  when  considering
    inconsistencies in and omissions form the Appellant's  account  in  her
    interview the Judge failed to take account of the  possible  effect  of
    her vulnerability and failed to have regard to the limitations  of  the
    questions she was asked. This submission is arguable.

    3.     The grounds submit that when finding that the  Appellant  had  a
    viable option of internal relocation the Judge failed to have regard to
    the guidance given in AM & BM. This is also arguable.  It  is  arguably
    not clear whether the Judge found that  the  Appellant  would  need  to
    relocate but could do so safely or that she had no need to do so. "

The Hearing

5.    (a) Mr Blundell, for the appellant, adopted the terms of  the  grounds
of appeal. He told me that the respondent accepts that the  appellant  is  a
victim of trafficking because the competent authority reached a decision  to
that effect on 20 December 2015. He told me that  the  undisputed  facts  in
this case are that  the  appellant  was  forced  into  prostitution  by  her
boyfriend ("Albi") whilst in Greece. The  appellant  was  beaten  threatened
and raped. The lives of the appellant and her son  were  threatened.  For  4
months the appellant was forced to work between 10 pm & 2 am,  seven  nights
a week, as a prostitute. In August 2013 she managed to escape and return  to
Albania, where she stayed with a friend. When  she  made  contact  with  her
family, her father threatened to kill her because she told him that she  had
been forced into prostitution. The appellant's uncle  was  more  sympathetic
and he made arrangements for the appellant to travel to the UK in  the  back
of a lorry.

(b)   Mr Blundell told me that, even though those facts  were  accepted,  at
[14], [15] & [17] the  Judge  rejected  parts  of  the  appellant's  account
because of the difference in the accounts given at asylum  interview  &  the
appellant's account contained  in  a  witness  statement  prepared  for  the
hearing. The Judge rejected the appellant's account that Albi  is  a  member
of a large gang with influence in Albania, & that  Albi  continued  to  look
for the appellant after her escape.  The  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
appellant's family  in  Albania  had  been  threatened  by  traffickers.  Mr
Blundell told me that the evidence placed  before  the  first-tier  made  it
clear that the appellant's experiences (and her mental  state)  made  her  a
vulnerable witness, and that the joint presidential guidance note no.  2  of
2010 (child, vulnerable adult and sensitive witness guidance) had  not  been
followed. He told me that the failure to follow  the  presidential  guidance
vitiates the Judges findings at [20] of the decision.

(c)   Mr Blundell relied on the cases of JL (Medical reports -  credibility)
China 2013 Imm AR 4 & Minh 2015 EWHC 1725 (Admin). Mr Blundell  took  me  to
the terms of the asylum  interview  record  and  told  me  that  the  record
discloses that the appellant  had  not  been  asked  questions  which  would
enable her to give a full account of her former boyfriend's gang  membership
and sphere of influence. He told me that the Judge had taken  an  imbalanced
approach to her interpretation of the answers given at asylum interview.

(d)   Mr Blundell moved to the second ground of appeal.  He  relied  on  the
country guidance cases of AM & BM (Albania) CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) &  TD  &
AD (Albania) CG [2016] UKUT 92(IAC). He argued that the Judge had failed  to
properly apply the  country  guidance  and,  as  a  result,  reached  flawed
conclusions about the viability of internal relocation. He argued  that  the
Judge had failed to take account of the appellant's fragile  mental  health,
and the likely reception to be given to the appellant  as  a  single  parent
who has experienced prostitution and now has an illegitimate child.

(e)   Mr Blundell argued that the appellant would inevitably be viewed as  a
"Kurva" on return to Albania, so that it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect
her to internally relocate within Albania. He argued  that  the  appellant's
profile is exactly the profile discussed  in  country  guidance  cases,  and
that although the Judge correctly cited the available  country  guidance  at
the date of decision, the Judge neither properly  interpreted  that  country
guidance, nor did the Judge follow that country guidance.

6.    (a) Mr Clark, for the respondent, told me that the decision  does  not
contain any errors, material or otherwise. He told me that the Judge had  no
need to consider the appellant as a vulnerable witness. He argued that  what
happened in this case is that the appellant gave two separate and  radically
different accounts in an attempt to embellish her claim.  He  told  me  that
the Judge's findings at [14], [15] & [17] are findings which  were  properly
made by the Judge on the  basis  of  the  evidence  presented,  &  that  the
findings are well within the range of findings reasonably available  to  the
Judge. He told me that the Judge's conclusion at [20] is the only  realistic
conclusion available to the Judge & has its basis in  flawless  findings  in
fact.

(b)   Mr Clark responded to the second ground of appeal. He told me that  at
[26] the Judge clearly makes a finding that it will  not  be  necessary  for
the appellant to internally relocate because the appellant has  the  support
of her friend and her uncle. Mr Clark considered the appellant's  undisputed
profile and told me that, even with the appellant's undisputed history,  she
will not be stigmatised as a "kurva" in  Albanian  society  because  she  is
married, but now separated. He drew a  distinction  between  separated  (but
married) woman and a single woman with a child.

(c)   Mr Clark urged me to dismiss the appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.



Analysis

7.    At [10] of the decision, the Judge records a summary  of  the  content
of the letter from the appellant's GP and states "the doctor took  the  view
that the appellant's psychological health had  been  significantly  affected
by being trafficked and sexually exploited and she felt  the  appellant  was
very afraid of returning to Albania." In preparation for the hearing  before
the first-tier, the appellant's solicitors submitted  a  skeleton  argument.
Paragraphs 8 and  9  of  that  skeleton  argument  addressed  "credibility".
Paragraph 9 of the argument refers both to the  case  of  Minh  (2015)  EWHC
1725 (Admin) and to the  previous  asylum  process  guidance:  guidance  for
competent authorities.

8.    In  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010:  Child,
vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant  guidance  it  was  said  that,
although some individuals are by  definition  vulnerable,  others  are  less
easily identifiable. Factors  to  be  taken  into  account  include:  mental
health problems social  or  learning  difficulties,  religious  beliefs  and
practices,  sexual  orientation,  ethnic  social  and  cultural   background
domestic and employment  circumstances  physical  disability  or  impairment
that may affect the giving of evidence. The Guidance sets out factors to  be
taken into account at the case management review  hearings  and  during  the
hearing itself. The Guidance acknowledges that it may be necessary to  grant
adjournments to obtain reports, et cetera in  such  cases.  Importantly,  at
paragraphs 14 and 15, the guidance sets  out  issues  to  be  considered  in
relation to determinations.

    "14.   Consider the evidence, allowing for possible  different  degrees
    of understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to those  are  not
    vulnerable, in the context of evidence from others associated with  the
    appellant and the background evidence  before  you.  Where  there  were
    clear discrepancies in the oral evidence, consider the extent to  which
    the age, vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was an element  of
    that discrepancy or lack of clarity.

    15.    The decision should record whether the  Tribunal  has  concluded
    the appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable or  sensitive,  the
    effect the Tribunal considered  the  identified  vulnerability  had  in
    assessing the evidence before it and  thus  whether  the  Tribunal  was
    satisfied whether the appellant had established his or her case to  the
    relevant standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should  be  given
    to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to a state  of
    mind".

9.    It is clear from the reference  (at  [10]  of  the  decision)  to  the
appellant's GP  letter  and  the  submissions  summarised  in  the  skeleton
argument place before the Judge,  that  it  is  the  appellant's  solicitors
position that the appellant's experiences have left  her  with  a  fragility
which  amounts  to  vulnerability.  Although  the  Judge  acknowledges   the
contents of  the  appellant's  GPs  letter  at  [10]  of  the  decision,  no
reference is made  anywhere  in  the  decision  to  the  Joint  Presidential
Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive  appellant
guidance.

10.   At [14], [15], [16] & [17], the Judge is correct to compare,  contrast
and evaluate the various strands of  the  appellant's  evidence.  The  error
that the Judge makes is that the Judge does not consider whether or not  the
appellant is a vulnerable witness to whom Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note
No 2 of 2010: Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant  guidance
applies. It may be that the Judge considers that  the  appellant  is  not  a
vulnerable witness, but that is not set out in the decision and is a  factor
which would require some reasoning given the established  history  for  this
appellant and the medical evidence produced for this appellant.

11.   The accepted facts of this case are

    (i)    The appellant is a victim of trafficking  who  was  forced  into
    prostitution in Greece in 2013. The appellant managed  to  escape  from
    her trafficker and return to Albania.

    (ii)   When the  appellant  returned  to  Albania,  she  contacted  her
    father, who was so shocked by what had befallen the appellant  that  he
    threatened to kill her because he believes she has brought dishonour on
    their family name

    (iii)  The appellant's uncle arranged for the  appellant's  journey  to
    the UK. Her first attempt was unsuccessful. She got as far  as  Belgium
    before being returned to Albania. On her second attempt, she arrived in
    the UK almost at term with her second baby.

    (iv)   The appellant now has two children. Her second child was  safely
    delivered in the UK and is illegitimate

    (v)    If returned to Albania the appellant will be a single parent  of
    two children, the youngest of whom is illegitimate. She has  a  history
    of sexual exploitation and was forced to work as a prostitute in 2013.

12.   In TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC)  it  was  held
that much of the guidance given in AM & BM  (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG
[2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) is maintained. Where that guidance has been amended  or
supplemented by this decision it is in italics: (i) It is  not  possible  to
set out a typical profile  of  trafficked  women  from  Albania:  trafficked
women  come  from  all  areas  of  the  country  and  from   varied   social
backgrounds; (ii) Much of Albanian society is governed by a strict  code  of
honour  which  not  only  means  that  trafficked  women  would  have   very
considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home  areas  on  return
but also will affect their ability to relocate internally.  Those  who  have
children outside marriage are particularly vulnerable. In extreme cases  the
close relatives of the trafficked woman may refuse to  have  the  trafficked
woman's child return with her and could force  her  to  abandon  the  child:
(iii) Some  women  are  lured  to  leave  Albania  with  false  promises  of
relationships  or  work.  Others  may  seek  out  traffickers  in  order  to
facilitate  their  departure  from  Albania  and  their   establishment   in
prostitution abroad. Although  such  women  cannot  be  said  to  have  left
Albania against their will, where they have  fallen  under  the  control  of
traffickers  for  the  purpose  of  exploitation  there  is  likely  to   be
considerable violence within the relationships and a lack of  freedom:  such
women are victims of trafficking; (iv) In the past few  years  the  Albanian
government  has  made  significant  efforts  to  improve  its  response   to
trafficking. This includes widening the  scope  of  legislation,  publishing
the  Standard  Operating  Procedures,  implementing  an  effective  National
Referral Mechanism, appointing  a  new  Anti-trafficking  Co-ordinator,  and
providing training to law enforcement  officials.  There  is  in  general  a
Horvath-standard sufficiency of protection, but it will not be effective  in
every case. When considering whether  or  not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
protection for a victim of trafficking her particular circumstances must  be
considered; (v)  There  is  now  in  place  a  reception  and  reintegration
programme for victims of trafficking. Returning victims of  trafficking  are
able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases' may  be  able  to
stay there for up to 2  years.  During  this  initial  period  after  return
victims of trafficking are supported and protected.  Unless  the  individual
has particular vulnerabilities such as physical  or  mental  health  issues,
this option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable; whether it is  must
be determined on a case by case basis;(vi) Once asked to leave  the  shelter
a victim of trafficking can live on her own.  In  doing  so  she  will  face
significant challenges including, but not  limited  to,  stigma,  isolation,
financial hardship and uncertainty, a sense of physical insecurity  and  the
subjective  fear  of  being  found  either  by  their  families  or   former
traffickers.  Some  women  will  have  the  capacity  to   negotiate   these
challenges  without  undue  hardship.  There  will  however  be  victims  of
trafficking with characteristics, such as mental  illness  or  psychological
scarring, for  whom  living  alone  in  these  circumstances  would  not  be
reasonable. Whether a particular appellant falls  into  that  category  will
call  for  a  careful  assessment  of  all  the  circumstances;  (vii)   Re-
trafficking is a  reality.  Whether  that  risk  exists  for  an  individual
claimant will  turn  in  part  on  the  factors  that  led  to  the  initial
trafficking, and on her personal circumstances,  including  her  background,
age, and her willingness and ability to seek help from the authorities.  For
a proportion of victims of trafficking, their situations may mean that  they
are especially vulnerable to re-trafficking,  or  being  forced  into  other
exploitative situations; (viii) Trafficked women from Albania  may  well  be
members of a particular social group on that  account  alone.  Whether  they
are at risk of persecution on account of such membership  and  whether  they
will be able to access sufficiency of protection from the  authorities  will
depend upon their individual circumstances including but not limited to  the
following: (a) The social status and economic standing  of  her  family  (b)
The level of education of the victim of trafficking or her  family  (c)  The
victim of trafficking's state of health, particularly her mental health  (d)
The presence of an illegitimate child (e) The area of origin  (f)  Age   and
(g) What support network will be available.

13.    The  decision  contains  a  material  error   of   law   because   no
consideration has been given to the impact of  the  appellant's  experiences
on her ability to  reliably  provide  consistent  evidence,  and  inadequate
consideration has been given to the fragility  of  her  mental  health  when
assessing her evidence. As a result,  the  Judge's  conclusion  at  [20]  is
inadequately reasoned and cannot be sustained. The Judge's findings at  [22]
proceed on assumption rather  than  on  evidence  based  fact  finding.  The
conclusions the  Judge  makes  at  [24],  [25]  and  [26]  are  inadequately
reasoned and (to an extent) based on assumption rather than  evidence  based
fact finding.

14.   I therefore find that the decision is tainted by  material  errors  of
law and must be set aside.

15.   Although I set the decision  aside  find  that  there  are  sufficient
undisputed facts  in  this  case  which  enable  me  to  substitute  my  own
decision, taking guidance from the case of TD and AD (Trafficked  women)  CG
[2016] UKUT 92 (IAC).

16.   The appellant was trafficked  into  prostitution  in  2013.  Paragraph
339K of the immigration rules indicates that if an  appellant  has  suffered
treatment persecution or inhuman or degrading treatment in  the  past,  then
there is a presumption that return to the country where  the  appellant  was
so harshly treated may result in a re-occurrence of that treatment. TD &  AD
tells me that re-trafficking is a reality.

17.   The appellant has an illegitimate child. Both  the  case-law  and  the
background  materials  indicate  that  she  has  no  realistic   chance   of
concealing the fact that her children have different fathers. The  appellant
cannot be expected to lie; the appellant will  face  invasive  enquiries  if
return to Albania. The appellant's own father has sworn to kill her  because
of her experiences since 2013.

18.   I take account those facts and the  combined  guidance  given  in  the
cases of TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC) and  AM  &  BM
(Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC). I remind myself  of  the
standard of  proof.  The  only  conclusion  I  can  come  to  the  appellant
discharges the comparatively low standard of proof and establishes that  she
had a well-founded fear of persecution as a member of  a  particular  social
group.

19.   As I have found the appellant has established a well-founded  fear  of
persecution, by analogy I find that her  claim  engages  article  3  of  the
Human Rights Convention because she would face a real  risk  of  inhuman  or
degrading treatment if she were returned to her country of origin.

20.   The Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal  is  based  on  a  material
error of law and must be set aside. I substitute my  own  decision  allowing
the appeal on asylum and article 3 ECHR grounds.

Decision

21.   The determination of First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  promulgated
on 31 December 2015 contains a material error of law.  I  set  the  decision
aside. I substitute the following decision.

22.   The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

23.   The appeal is allowed on article 3 ECHR grounds.


Signed      Date 18 April 2016

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
