
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08407/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on:  |
|On 2 March 2015                               |On 5 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                 Nisar Ahmad
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Mardaner of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan,  appeals  with  permission
    against  the  determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Thomas
    promulgated on 22 December  2014,  dismissing  his  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and  human  rights  grounds.   The  appellant's
    grounds of appeal, which he drafted himself, may  be  summarised  thus:
    he challenges the rationality of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,
    both generally and in respect of Article 8 both within and outwith  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

 2. When granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb said this:

         "3.  Although the grounds are poorly drafted I  have  decided  that
             they do raise matters that merit further consideration.  It is
             arguable that the credibility reasoning rested on non-evidence-
             based plausibility points and failed to consider  the  country
             context and  the  appellant's  age  pre-departure  and  it  is
             arguable that there was inadequate reasoning  to  support  the
             finding that  the  appellant  would  have  family  support  on
             return.   The  Article  8  assessment   of   the   appellant's
             relationship  with  his  British  partner  arguably  did   not
             consider EX.1 and EX.2 in Appendix FM and it  is  unclear  why
             (the issue of whether this point was conceded, and if so  why,
             would  need  consideration).   It   is   arguable   that   the
             consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules did not refer  to
             Chikwamba when considering the entry clearance option."

    I  would  add  to  that  there  was  also  no  consideration  of  Nagre
    exceptionality.

 3. The Secretary of State filed a Rule 24 reply to the grant of permission
    but that also does not engage with Article 8 outside the Rules.   I  am
    not satisfied that the reasons that the Secretary of State gives in her
    Rule 24 reply of 3 February 2015  are  good  reasons  to  sustain  this
    determination.

 4. I do consider that the reasons challenge is made  out  and  accordingly
    that there is a material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination and the decision will have to be remade.  I consider that
    it is appropriate for it to be remade afresh in the First-tier Tribunal
    at Taylor House where it was determined last.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.  The decision on this appeal  will  be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed, with no findings of  fact  or
credibility preserved.


Signed:  [pic]             Date: 4 March 2015
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

