
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08217/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2015                  |On 25 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     N S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Lee, instructed by Times PBS Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 15 November  1992.
He arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2011 with a Tier 4 student  visa
issued on 22 September 2011. On  31  August  2014  the  Appellant  left  the
United Kingdom and travelled to Afghanistan for a  family  visit,  returning
to the United Kingdom on 25 September  2014  when  he  claimed  asylum.  The
basis of his claim is that he had accompanied a  driver  from  his  father's
transport company and for part of the journey there was a boy  in  the  back
of the truck who the driver stated was his sick nephew who he was taking  to
Kabul for medical treatment. The Appellant decided  to  visit  his  aunt  in
Pilcharkhi en route to Kabul and phoned his mother to  tell  her  this.  His
mother subsequently telephoned  him  to  state  that  his  father  had  been
arrested because the truck in which the Appellant was  travelling  had  been
linked to a suicide bomb in Pilcharkhi and  the  Appellant  was  also  being
sought. The Appellant left his aunt's house and went to  stay  with  another
relative. The police then went to his aunt's house to look for him  and  his
uncle made arrangements for him to leave the country with the assistance  of
an agent.

2.    On 13 October 2014, the Respondent  refused  to  grant  the  Appellant
asylum and refused him leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.  He  appealed
against this decision and his appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Cohen for hearing on 22 April 2015. In a  decision  promulgated  on  21  May
2015, he dismissed the appeal essentially on  the  basis  that  he  did  not
consider the Appellant to be credible.

3.    The grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to  appeal
asserted that the Judge's  approach  to  credibility  and  his  reliance  on
adverse plausibility assertions was unreasonable/unlawful  and  his  failure
to consider  the  witness,  expert  and  documentary  evidence  additionally
amounted to material errors of law. The Judge's findings at  [27]-[40]  were
subjected to detailed challenge.

4.    Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper
Tribunal Judge Perkins on a  renewed  application  on  the  basis  that  the
grounds make out a reasonably arguable case  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge did not engage with the evidence and/or made findings  for  inadequate
reasons.

Hearing

5.    At the hearing before me, Mr Lee stated that a number  of  points  had
been taken in the grounds of  appeal  and  he  wished  to  highlight  a  few
specific errors  as  to  credibility  and  plausibility.  He  made  detailed
submissions  and  argued  that  individually  and  cumulatively  the  errors
amounted to a material error of law. In her equally  detailed  response,  Ms
Willocks Briscoe  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  found  that  there  were
discrepancies, but these were not the only factor taken into account by  the
Judge,  who  was  entitled  to  consider  the  overall  credibility  of  the
Appellant as well as overall factors on which he relies. In  her  submission
it does not demonstrate the Judge's approach is flawed but  these  were  one
of a number of elements that make up the decision as a whole. She  submitted
that the grounds were merely a disagreement with the Judge's findings.

Decision

6.    I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.  The  First-
tier Tribunal Judge's analysis of the Appellant's claim is set out at  [27]-
[44] of the decision. The Judge asserts at [27] that  there  were  "numerous
discrepancies" in  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  that  this  damaged  the
credibility of the claim.  The  discrepancy  identified  at  [27]  was  with
regard to whether the Appellant's family relocated  from  Pakistan  back  to
Kabul in September 2012, as he stated in his oral evidence or December  2012
as his statement records. This is, in fact, incorrect as it was recorded  in
the Appellant's  interview  and  statement  that  his  family  relocated  in
September 2014, which was around the time that the events in  question  took
place. The Judge notes this at [18] of his  decision  and  also  states  the
Appellant's explanation as  being  "it  was  written  incorrectly"  but  has
failed  to  give  any  further  explanation  as  to  when  it  was   written
incorrectly and also why it was written  incorrectly.  Moreover,  the  Judge
has recorded the wrong  date  at  [27].   Given  the  lack  of  clarity  and
apparent confusion by the Judge I  do  not  consider  that  this  particular
discrepancy can properly be held against the Appellant.

7.    At [28] the Judge records the Appellant's response  that  he  did  not
have any uncles  in  Afghanistan  but  then  indicated  that  "his  mother's
husband" remained in Afghanistan and he had lived with him when hiding  from
the authorities. The  Judge  finds  that  this  is  a  further  discrepancy,
however, given the lack of clarity by the Judge as to who exactly was  being
referred to, I do not find that this point can be properly held against  the
Appellant either.

8.    At [29] the Judge finds a discrepancy in respect of the oral  evidence
of the Appellant's sister, who stated in re-examination that  when  she  had
spoken to her mother she did not mention that the Appellant  was  wanted  by
the authorities however, in response to questions by the  Judge  she  stated
that her mother had told her that he was  wanted  by  the  authorities.  The
Judge's record of the Appellant's  sister's  evidence  is  at  [22]  of  the
decision which provides: "In re examination the witness indicated  that  her
mother called her on 22 or 23 September 2014 to advise  of  the  appellant's
problems." It is also recorded  at  that  paragraph  that  she  subsequently
stated: "Her mother would call every two to three weeks. She then said  that
neighbours had called her. They advised that her father had  been  arrested.
Her mother was very upset.  Her  mother  did  not  say  anything  about  the
appellant." Whilst this appears to be  contradictory,  this  record  of  the
witness' evidence is also arguably unclear in that it would appear that  her
mother told her in a telephone conversation on 22 or 23 September 2014  that
her brother had problems (these are not defined) but did not talk about  her
brother again in  subsequent  conversations  following  the  arrest  of  her
father which caused her mother to be very upset. Given the lack  of  clarity
and given the witness' initial response to the question, I do not  find  the
Judge's finding that this is a "significant  discrepancy"  and  damaging  to
"the appeal as a whole" to be sustainable and to amount to a material  error
of law.

9.    At  [33]  the  Judge  found  a  significant  discrepancy  between  the
Appellant's account at his screening interview at 4.1 that  the  authorities
were looking for the truck and his subsequent statement  that  the  boy  was
found in the truck at the checkpoint. This point was put  to  the  Appellant
at the hearing and at [15] it is recorded that  he  stated  that  before  he
arrived in the UK he had not slept properly for 2 days; it was not  what  he
intended to say and he did not have an interpreter. He was told to keep  his
answers brief and he would be given the opportunity to provide full  details
in his substantive interview. Paragraph 15 of the grounds  of  appeal  makes
the point, correctly in my view that "it is trite that the Tribunal must  be
cautious in placing  too  much  weight  on  the  content  of  the  screening
interview since it is a very brief summary, there is no  read  back  and  no
representative in attendance - the accuracy is often open to doubt." In  his
asylum interview the Appellant stated in response to Q. 34  that  the  truck
had been taken by the authorities. His asylum interview took  place  only  9
days after his screening interview. Given the  particular  circumstances  of
this Appellant's screening interview coupled with the points  made  at  [15]
of the grounds of appeal I find that the Judge erred materially  in  placing
substantial reliance on the Appellant's response at  1.4  of  the  screening
interview.

10.   At [34] the Judge found a further discrepancy between the  Appellant's
answer in his asylum interview at in response to Q. 117  that  upon  hearing
that a suicide bomber had been in the area he  called  his  mother  and  his
witness statement where it is recorded that he called his father,  which  he
denied in his oral evidence. It was submitted on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
that the Judge simply got this wrong in that, in response to  Q.119  of  the
asylum interview the Appellant stated that he called his father and  at  the
hearing before the Judge the Appellant did not deny calling his  father.  It
is the case that there is no record  in  the  decision  of  the  Appellant's
evidence in this respect and I consider that the Judge  did  err  materially
in fact in this respect.

11.   At [35] the Judge noted that in his witness  statement  the  Appellant
claimed that his aunt's house had been raided on 20 and  23  September  2014
and in his oral evidence that his mother's house had been raided on 4  or  5
occasions but had failed to raise the issue of multiple raids in his  asylum
interview. It was submitted that the reason for this was that the  Appellant
did not know at the time of  his  interview  that  there  had  been  further
raids, not least because he had not been in contact with  his  family  since
his arrival in the UK [Q.125] and this point was not put  to  the  Appellant
to give him the opportunity to respond during the hearing. I find that as  a
matter of procedural  fairness  the  point  should  have  been  put  to  the
Appellant in order to provide him with the opportunity  to  comment  on  the
reason why he did not  give  details  of  further  raids  in  his  interview
whereas he did at the hearing and the failure so to do renders  reliance  on
this discrepancy a material error of law.

12.   At [38] the Judge noted  that  the  Appellant  had  produced  business
documentation and  a  partially  translated  police  warrant,  to  which  he
applied the test set out in Tanveer  Ahmed  and  in  light  of  his  adverse
credibility findings attached little weight to  the  documentation.  It  was
submitted that the Judge was  simply  wrong  in  that  there  is  no  police
warrant and the only "police" document is  a  petition  by  the  Appellant's
mother to the police regarding her husband's whereabouts and  this  document
was fully translated. Mrs Willocks Briscoe did  not  take  issue  with  this
interpretation. I find that the Judge materially erred in  fact  in  placing
no weight on the petition to the  police  and  consequently  in  placing  no
weight on the documentation as a whole.

13.   At [40] the Judge makes a general finding  that  there  were  numerous
discrepancies in  the  Appellant's  account  and  held:  "I  find  that  the
appellant has been unable to maintain a consistent account  because  he  has
fabricated  the  same  and  has  sought  to  blame  others   for   his   own
discrepancies." This finding is disputed on the basis that the Judge  failed
to have any regard to a statement from  a  caseworker  for  the  Appellant's
representative, Mahmood Osmani, dated  29.10.14  in  which  he  sets  out  a
limited number of issues of concern in the asylum  interview.  That  is  not
sufficient in itself to find a material error of law, however, in  light  of
my decision that the Judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  respect  of  his
findings as to purported  discrepancies,  set  out  at  [6]-[12]  above,  it
follows that this finding is also unsustainable.

14.    Paragraphs  [30]-[32],  [36]-[37]  and  [39]  of  the  decision   are
concerned with implausibilities  in  the  Appellant's  account,  however,  I
accept the points made in the grounds of appeal at [7]-[14] which  challenge
the Judge's findings of implausible in light of the  judgment  of  Neuberger
LJ in HK [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 at [27]-[30] that the fact that some, or  even
most of the Appellant's story may seem inherently  unlikely  does  not  mean
that it is untrue and, following  the  decision  of  Lord  Brodie  in  Awala
[2005] CSOH 73,  that to reject an Appellant's account merely on  the  basis
that it is not credible or plausible was improper. [13]-[14] of the  grounds
of appeal  in  particular  assert,  correctly  in   my  view,  that  it  was
impermissible for the Judge to find the nature of the Appellant's  departure
from Afghanistan to be implausible without having  given  any  consideration
to the addendum report of Dr Guistozzi which expressly addressed this  issue
and which was expressly drawn to the Judge's attention in submissions.

Notice of Decision

15.   For the reasons set out above, I find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  his  approach  to   the   Appellant's
credibility and in his approach to the expert and documentary  evidence  and
his decision cannot stand. I allow the appeal and remit it to  be  heard  de
novo by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Cohen or First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman     21 January 2016
