

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08170/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 6 October 2016                         |On 12 October 2016               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             MUNYARADZI CHIUNYE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Paxton instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors.

For the Respondent: Mr I Richards Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. By a decision dated 3 August 2016 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J F W
        Phillips set aside the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Foudy  in  which  Mr  Chinuye's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
        decision to  refuse  asylum  and  to  set  removal  directions  was
        dismissed.
     2. The key passages of the Deputy Judge's decision are  [11-14]  which
        are in the following terms:
        11.  In making this finding it is clear that the Judge has  had  no
             regard to the Appellant's MDC activity and considered  whether
             this of itself would cause him to face persecution upon return
             to his home area.  The Judge had failed to have regard  to  CM
             (EM Country Guidance:  Disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
             00059 (IAC) and indeed has failed to consider risk  on  return
             at all.  This is a material error of law and on this basis the
             decision must be set aside.  In setting aside, the decision  I
             see no reason to interfere with the credibility findings  made
             and as such the  resumed  hearing  will,  in  respect  of  the
             protection appeal, be confined to the issue of risk on  return
             bearing in mind the Appellant's MDC activities  up  until  the
             time he left Zimbabwe, the activities of his father  up  until
             his death taking into account the Appellant's home  area  and,
             if risk is present in his  home  area  the  reasonableness  of
             relocation.
        12.  So far as Article 8 is concerned the First-tier Tribunal Judge
             made  findings  as  to  the  genuineness  and  length  of  the
             Appellant's relationship with his  then  girlfriend.   I  give
             permission for the Appellant to adduce evidence of the  up  to
             date situation in this respect  at  the  resumed  hearing.   I
             understand that this evidence will show that the Appellant and
             his girlfriend have married and are starting a family.


        Conclusion


        13.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of
             an error of law for the reasons set out above.
        14.  I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  in
             doing so preserve the credulity findings made  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.  The decision  will  be  remade  by  the  Upper
             Tribunal and the resumed  hearing  will  be  confined  to  the
             issues of risk on return taking into account  the  possibility
             and reasonableness of  internal  relocation  if  relevant  and
             Article 8 ECHR.


     3. A judicial transfer order has been made, dated 13  September  2016,
        as a result of Deputy Judge Philips being unavailable to  hear  the
        substantive appeal.



Discussion


The protection claim


     4. The core findings that are preserved from the decision of the First-
        tier Tribunal are summarised in [10] of the decision of Deputy
        Judge Philips in the following terms:


         10.  The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe from Central
             Matabeleland.  It is accepted that both he and his father were
             MDC activists in the Appellant's case up until the time he
             left Zimbabwe in 2005 and in his father's case up until his
             death in 2007.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the
             Appellant's MDC involvement ceased when he left Zimbabwe and
             that he had not been involved in sur place activities.  On
             this basis the Judge dismissed his asylum appeal.  In
             dismissing the appeal, the Judge dealt with the Appellant's
             account of his communication with his cousin, Saviour and
             found this and the appellant's account of making Facebook
             postings to be incredible.  These are findings that the Judge
             was entitled to make.....

     5. The profile of the appellant on return is therefore as a failed
        asylum seeker who was previously active in the MDC but who has not
        engage in MDC activities since his arrival in the UK, which he
        entered on 22 March 2005 with valid leave as a student. The
        appellant had valid leave to remain until 31 March 2013 and has
        overstayed thereafter.
     6. The relevant country guidance case remains CM (EM country guidance;
        disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059(IAC) in which the
        Tribunal held that the evidence does not show that, as a general
        matter, the return of a failed asylum seeker from the United
        Kingdom, having no significant MDC profile, would result in that
        person facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the
        ZANU-PF. In general, a returnee from the United Kingdom to rural
        Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
        significant difficulty from ZANU-PF elements, including the
        security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
        A person may, however, be able to show that his or her village or
        area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF chief,
        or the like. A returnee to Harare will in general face no
        significant difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-
        density area. Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density
        areas is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF
        connections will not face significant problems there (including a
        "loyalty test"), unless he or she has a significant MDC profile,
        which might cause him or her to feature on a list of those targeted
        for harassment, or would otherwise engage in political activities
        likely to attract the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be
        reasonably likely to engage in such activities, but for a fear of
        thereby coming to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF. A returnee to
        Bulawayo will in general not suffer the adverse attention of ZANU-
        PF, including the security forces, even if he or she has a
        significant MDC profile.
     7. The appellant has not been found to have a significant MDC profile
        or to be a person likely to engage in political activities likely
        to attract the adverse attention of Zanu-PF on return.
     8. In relation to risk on return at the airport, the Tribunal in HS
        (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094 found
        that the process of screening returning passengers is an
        intelligence led process and that the CIO will generally have
        identified from the passenger manifest in advance, based upon such
        intelligence, those passengers in whom there is any possible
        interest. The fact of having made an asylum claim abroad is not
        something that in itself will give rise to adverse interest on
        return. In paragraphs 264 and 266 the tribunal said: "The CIO has
        taken over responsibility for the operation of immigration control
        at Harare airport and immigration officers are being replaced by
        CIO officers. We accept also that one of the purposes of the CIO in
        monitoring arrivals at the airport is to identify those who are
        thought to be, for whatever reason, enemies of the regime. The aim
        is to detect those of interest because of an adverse military or
        criminal profile. The main focus of the operation to identify those
        who may be of adverse interest remains those who are perceived to
        be politically active in support of the opposition. But anyone
        perceived to be a threat to or a critic of the regime will attract
        interest also ... We have set out the evidence that indicates in
        whom the CIO has an interest. This will be those in respect of whom
        there is any reason to suspect an adverse political, criminal or
        military profile of the type identified in AA(2). In addition,
        those perceived to be associated with what have come to be
        identified as civil society organisations may attract adverse
        interest as critics of the regime" (and see paragraph 282). At
        paragraph 102 the tribunal had said: "The evidence concerning the
        CIO establishes clearly that anyone who comes to the attention of
        the CIO and is perceived to be an enemy of the regime faces a very
        real risk of being subjected to physical ill-treatment". In CM (EM
        country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059(IAC)
        the Tribunal held that the fresh evidence regarding the position at
        the point of return does not indicate any increase in risk since
        the Country Guidance was given in HS. On the contrary, the
        available evidence as to the treatment of those who have been
        returned to Harare Airport since 2007 and the absence of any
        reliable evidence of risk there means that there is no
        justification for extending the scope of who might be regarded by
        the CIO as an MDC activist.
     9. The appellant is not an MDC activist and it has not been
        established that he will be perceived to be politically active in
        support of the opposition by the CIO when checking the passenger
        manifest on return such as to create a real risk of ill treatment.
        The appellant left Zimbabwe lawfully with a valid student visa and
        remained in the UK for a number of years in this capacity. It is
        known by the authorities that nationals of Zimbabwe travel abroad
        for work and education and this in its self has not been shown to
        create a real risk for the appellant on return.
    10. Mr Richards submitted that the appellant's last 'home area' is
        Harare according to his screening interview and it has not been
        established that he will be required to travel to Central
        Matabeleland.  There is also a viable internal relocation option in
        Zimbabwe to Bulawayo and it has not been made out that it is
        unreasonable to expect the appellant to make use of the same, if
        required. The appellant is a well-educated man and it has not been
        made out that he will be unable to re-establish himself in Zimbabwe
        or lack any support on return.
    11. I find the appellant has failed to establish to the lower standard
        required in an appeal of this nature that he is entitled to be
        recognised as a refugee or a person entitled to any other form of
        international protection.

The human rights claim

    12. The human rights claim is based upon a private life in the United
        Kingdom formed since his entry as a student, his family life with
        his wife Nell Abramczuk, a British citizen, and their child. The
        issue in relation to the child is that he or she has not yet been
        born although the due date is the end of October 2016.
    13. It was conceded by Mr Paxton that the appellant is unable to
        succeed under the Immigration Rules. This is correct as the
        required period of residence in the United Kingdom is not enough to
        enable him to succeed under paragraph 276ADE. The appellant cannot
        meet the requirements of E-LTRP2.2 as he is in the United Kingdom
        in breach of immigration laws.
    14. The submission that the partner could not return to Zimbabwe with
        the appellant as she is white has not been made out.  There is a
        white population in Zimbabwe and a news article in the Telegraph,
        dated 11 October 2016, reported that consideration was being given
        to leasing back farms to a number of named white farmers.
    15. In relation to Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules, Mr Paxton was
        asked what aspects of the case warrant consideration on this basis.
        This is a relevant issue as in SS(Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ
        387 Lord Justice Richards said at paragraph 33 "In our judgment,
        even though a test of exceptionality does not apply in every case
        falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it is accurate to say that
        the general position outside the sorts of special contexts referred
        to above is that compelling circumstances would need to be
        identified to support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new
        Rules in Appendix FM. In our view, that is a formulation which is
        not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a requirement of "very
        compelling reasons" (as referred to in MF (Nigeria) in the context
        of the Rules applicable to foreign criminals), but which gives
        appropriate weight to the focused consideration of public interest
        factors as finds expression in the Secretary of State's formulation
        of the new Rules in Appendix FM. It also reflects the formulation
        in Nagre at para. [29], which has been tested and has survived
        scrutiny in this court: see, e.g., Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson
        LJ". It was submitted that the element that warranted consideration
        outside the Rule is the fact the appellant's wife is pregnant. It
        is accepted that the pregnancy forms part of the appellant's wife's
        private life as the child is, in effect, part of her until birth.
        Article 1 ECHR, however, makes it clear that the scope of the
        Convention is applicable to those who have been born and not 'en
        ventra sa mere'.  A child is not an independent legal person or
        entity in UK domestic law either until born. The facts do not shown
        the pregnancy is in itself a compelling circumstance.
    16. It has not been shown the direction for the appellants removal
        interferes with the progress of the pregnancy or will result in a
        disproportionate impact upon the parties. The respondent is not
        seeking to remove the appellant's wife, which she cannot do as she
        is a British citizen, and it has not been made out that family life
        between the appellant and his wife cannot be continued in Zimbabwe.
    17. The introduction of section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and
        Asylum Act 2002 also requires a balancing exercise to be conducted
        when considering Article 8 issues. In this regard the section
        provides:


         "PART 5A


         ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS


         117A Application of this Part


         (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


         (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and family
         life under Article 8, and


         (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
         Rights Act 1998.


         (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


         (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,
         and


         (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to
         the considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
         question of whether an interference with a person's right to
         respect for private and family life is justified under Article
         8(2).


         117B Article8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases:


         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.


         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and (b) are better able to
         integrate into society.


         (4)  Little weight should be given to- (a) a private life, or


         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
         established by a person at a time when the person is in the United
         Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and


         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.


    18. It is not disputed that the appellant speaks English and may in the
        future, if he succeeds with his professional qualifications and is
        able to secure employment, be self-sufficient.
    19. The appellant's leave expired on 31 March 2013. In her statement
        dated 6 July 2016 the appellant's wife confirms that they met in
        July 2013. All their time as colleges, friends, and later as
        partners and spouses has been formed at a time the appellant has
        had no lawful right to remain in the UK. His status as a student
        was precarious prior to this - see AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT
        260 (IAC). In relation to the weight to be provided to both family
        and private formed at such a time, see Rajendran (s117B - family
        life) [2016] UKUT 138 (IAC) in which it was held that (i)
        "precariousness" is a criterion of relevance to family life as well
        as private life cases is an established part of Article 8
        jurisprudence: see e.g. R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)
        and Jeunesse v Netherlands, app.no.12738/10 (GC). (ii)  The "little
        weight" provisions of s.117B(4)(a) and (5) of the Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are confined to " private life"
        established by a person at a time when their immigration status is
        unlawful or precarious. However, this does not mean that when
        answering the "public interest question" posed by s117A(2)-(3) a
        court or tribunal should disregard "precarious family life"
        criteria set out in established Article 8 jurisprudence. Given that
        ss.117A-D considerations are not exhaustive, in certain cases it
        may be an error of law for a court or tribunal to disregard
        relevant public interest considerations.
    20. Article 8 does not give a person the right to choose where they
        wish to live. It is a provision designed to prevent unwarranted
        interference by a State with a protected right. The weight given to
        the elements relied upon is little and it has not been shown this
        is a case in which, on the facts, it has been made out that
        circumstances exist that warrant a finding that the decision to
        remove is not proportionate.
    21. In relation to the appellant making an application to re-enter if
        removed, in R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM -
        Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT
        00189 (IAC) it was held that (i) Appendix FM does not include
        consideration of the question whether it would be disproportionate
        to expect an individual to return to his home country to make an
        entry clearance application to re-join family members in the U.K.
        There may be cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles
        to family life being enjoyed outside the U.K. but where temporary
        separation to enable an individual to make an application for entry
        clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for the
        individual to place before the Secretary of State evidence that
        such temporary separation will interfere disproportionately with
        protected rights.
    22. On the facts appertaining at the date of this hearing the
        respondent has made out her case that the decision is
        proportionate.
    23. When the appellant's living child is born that will represent a
        change in circumstances that may warrant a further application
        under the Rules if circumstances support the same. That is a matter
        upon which the appellant will be able to seek legal advice.


Decision

    24. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been found to have materially
        erred in law and that decision set aside. I remake the decision as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11 October 2016












