
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08978/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th November 2013                           |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                      MARTIN FITZHERBERT BENJAMIN CORT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Adio made following  a hearing at Hatton Cross on 1st October 2013.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Guyana born on 2nd December 1992.  He made
    an application for asylum on the grounds that he  was  a  gay  man  who
    would be persecuted upon return. It was accepted at  the  hearing  that
    homosexuality is illegal in Guyana and that if the claimant established
    that he is homosexual then he would succeed in his appeal.  It was  not
    arguable that he could reasonably relocate or  receive  sufficiency  of
    protection.

 3. The Secretary of State did not believe that the claimant was  gay.  She
    set out her reasons in a  lengthy  reasons  for  refusal  letter.   The
    judge, having heard oral evidence, concluded that he was.

The  Grounds of Application

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  two  grounds.
    First that the judge had failed to consider material facts  and  second
    that the judge had not given  adequate  reasons  for  arriving  at  the
    conclusion that the claimant was gay.  For example,  the  claimant  had
    given inconsistent answers as to when he realised he  was  gay  in  the
    interview. He said in his statement that he realised he was gay when he
    was 10 and at interview said it was when  he  was  11.   He  had  given
    contradictory reasons as to why he had started to enjoy  the  abuse  he
    received from his cousin and the judge had failed to resolve  conflicts
    in the evidence.  There was a further conflict  in  that  the  claimant
    stated that he tried to commit suicide when he found that a girl,  with
    whom he had had a one night stand, was pregnant with his child and  his
    evidence that he did so because he wanted to prove to everyone that  he
    was not gay. There was no evidence from the claimant's present partner.
     He had produced evidence of his activity on the internet  which  could
    easily be obtained.  The judge said that the claimant  was  not  cross-
    examined on some aspects of the witness statement and he saw no  reason
    not to accept his account but the judge ought to have identified  which
    claims made in the statement were unchallenged.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons stated in the  grounds
    by Judge Hodgkinson on 8th October 2013.

Submissions

 6. Mr Diwnycz made no submissions save to rely on  his  grounds  which  he
    acknowledged were a long albeit well  written,  disagreement  with  the
    decision.

 7. Mr Hussain submitted that the judge's conclusions  were open to him for
    the reasons which he gave.

Findings and Conclusions

 8.  There  is  no  error  of  law  in  this  determination.  The   alleged
    inconsistency in the age when the claimant realised that he was gay  is
    virtually non-existent.

 9. The original interview in relation to  the  abuse  which  the  claimant
    suffered as a child was extremely detailed. He was asked a large number
    of fairly intrusive questions and the judge was entitled to rely on his
    answers and to believe that he was telling the  truth.    There  is  no
    inconsistency in relation to  the  claimant's  feelings  following  the
    pregnancy. The judge was entitled to rely  on  the  internet  evidence.
    There was an explanation given for the absence of the partner.

10. The judge noted that the claimant had given  consistent  evidence.   He
    claimed asylum  on  arrival.   Having  heard  the  claimant  give  oral
    evidence it was entirely open to him to accept what he had been told.

11. It is unarguable that  the  assessment  of  whether  the  claimant  was
    telling the truth about his sexuality was entirely  a  matter  for  the
    judge.  The  grounds  amount  to  a  sustained  disagreement  with  the
    decision but do not establish either that he failed  to  take  relevant
    matters into account or that the overall  conclusion  was  in  any  way
    perverse.

Decision

12. The grounds do not establish any error of law.  The  claimant's  appeal
    is allowed and the challenge by the Secretary of State dismissed.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

