
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08649/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 13 February 2014                             |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                                     KK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Physsas of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  in  1977.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent made on 30 August 2013  to  remove
    by way of directions.  He was refused asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim, in summary, was that the Appellant  had  helped
    the LTTE with their intelligence work from 1996 when he was a  student.
    One of his contacts had been an LTTE member called G.   After  the  war
    ended he had worked for an NGO in Jaffna collecting goods from  Colombo
    for redistribution in the north.  At this time  he  was  continuing  to
    work for G and helped the LTTE obtain  supplies  such  as  petrol.   He
    stopped having any involvement with the LTTE in June 2009.  Soon after,
    he came to the UK on a student visa.  In November 2010 he  returned  to
    Sri Lanka for his  mother's  funeral.   Whilst  in  Sri  Lanka  he  got
    married.  G  tried  to  stop  the  marriage  because,  unknown  to  the
    Appellant, G had previously proposed to his (Appellant's)  wife.   When
    he could not stop the marriage he reported the Appellant to the CID.

 3. In November 2010 he was arrested and detained for  twelve  days  during
    which he was repeatedly questioned and ill-treated.  He was released on
    payment of a bribe.  He left through the airport, officials having been
    paid.  Were he to return he fears arrest by the authorities because  of
    his involvement  with  the  LTTE  and  because  he  was  released  from
    detention on payment of a bribe.

 4. The Respondent did not believe the historical  account,  in  particular
    that he had any connection with G or that he helped the LTTE.   It  was
    not accepted that he was arrested, detained or ill-treated.  Although a
    medical report (August 2013) had been submitted  showing  injuries,  it
    was concluded that they could have been caused in  circumstances  other
    than those claimed.  As for return, there were no risk factors.

 5. He appealed.  Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on  14  October  2013
    before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Turquet  she  dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 6. She found, in summary, that the Appellant had been inconsistent between
    his screening interview and asylum interview and later accounts  as  to
    how long he had worked for the LTTE.   Further,  that  his  account  of
    involvement with G in intelligence work was vague and unconvincing  and
    lacked credibility for reasons given at [56-63].

 7. The judge was not satisfied that the Appellant worked for the  NGO  and
    even if he did that he was at that time helping the LTTE [65-67].

 8. The judge went on to comment adversely on the lack  of  evidence  about
    the Appellant's marriage and the relationship with G.  Also, the  judge
    in considering the medical report concluded that while the scars on his
    back were done deliberately they were not inflicted in the way claimed.
     In that regard the judge did not find it credible that  the  Appellant
    would have been able to undertake a long flight back  to  the  UK  soon
    after his release, having been tortured.

 9. The judge next considered that the Appellant's  ability  to  leave  Sri
    Lanka without difficulty, even if he was with an agent, indicated  that
    he was not of adverse  interest.   Also,  that  even  if  he  had  been
    detained, his release from detention, whether or not a bribe was  paid,
    also indicated no adverse interest.  Finally the judge  concluded  that
    even if the historical account of the Appellant's activities  was  true
    he would not now be regarded as a 'threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka
    as a single state' by the authorities.

10. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by a  judge
    on 4 December 2013.

11. At the error of  law  hearing  Ms  Physsas  concentrated  on  what  she
    submitted was a significant error of fact  by  the  judge.   The  judge
    correctly noted that at screening interview the Appellant said that  he
    only helped the LTTE during his studies (which were from 1996 -  1999).
    However at asylum interview he said he ceased involvement with the LTTE
    in June 2009 shortly before he came to the UK and when he  was  working
    with the NGO.  Whilst noting that at screening interview  an  applicant
    is not expected to set  out  full  details  of  his  claim,  the  judge
    nonetheless found it reasonable to have expected him to  have  said  at
    the earliest opportunity, namely the screening interview, that  he  had
    been involved with the LTTE up until 2009 and not 1999 [55].

12. That this discrepancy weighed heavily on the judge's  adverse  view  of
    the Appellant's account is clear because she  refers  to  it  again  at
    [65].  In the context of his claim to have worked latterly for the  NGO
    she did not accept this taking as one reason: 'As  stated  earlier  the
    Appellant has been inconsistent about how long he worked for the  LTTE,
    whether it was just while he was studying or until June 2009.  This  is
    a significant discrepancy'.  Further, in casting more doubt  about  the
    claim to have been helping the LTTE in the period 2006-2009 she  states
    (at [67]):  'I  take  into  account  his  statement  in  his  screening
    interview that he only helped the LTTE during his studies'.

13. The difficulty is that the judge failed to take heed of a correction to
    the screening interview made on 28  July  2013  which  was  before  the
    asylum interview took place (and which is referred to in the  interview
    C7), in which the Appellant had made the following  correction  to  the
    screening interview at paragraph 5.3:  'I  started  to  help  the  LTTE
    during my studies and I continued even when I worked  and  until  2009.
    It is wrongly recorded'.

14. The judge made no reference to the correction, which  was  before  her.
    In failing to pay heed to that correction she failed to have regard  to
    a material piece of evidence purporting to explain  the  difference  in
    dates,  which  required  consideration  and  comment.   As   such   she
    materially erred.  The  judge's  determination  is  lengthy  and  shows
    careful analysis  with  many  of  her  adverse  findings  unchallenged.
    However, I do not agree with Mr Melvin's submission that looked at as a
    whole the judge's findings were sustainable. I agree  with  Ms  Physsas
    that the  repeated  references  to  the  discrepancy  about  the  dates
    indicated that it was a  significant  factor  in  the  judge's  finding
    against the Appellant's credibility as to his historical  account.   As
    such in my view it taints the entire determination such that it  cannot
    stand.

15. Further, the judge erred in misdirecting  herself  as  to  the  country
    guidance. She applied the guidance  in  PT  (Risk-Bribery-Release)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2002] UKAIT O344 in finding that it was  not  plausible  that
    the appellant would have been released on payment of a bribe, and if he
    was, such indicated  that  he  was  not  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities [81]. She also found that 'the fact that the appellant  was
    able to travel through the airport without problems, even  if  he  were
    with an agent, indicates that he was not of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities and did not perceive himself to be' [82].

16. First, in GJ v SSHD (post civil war returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT
    319 the Tribunal replaced all country guidance (Head note). Also, there
    was evidence from an expert that release on  payment  of  a  bribe  was
    extremely common. The Tribunal effectively accepted that assertion  (at
    [262]). Moreover, (at [170]) Treasury Counsel conceded 'that there were
    no detention facilities at the airport and that given the prevalence of
    bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka,  having  left  Sri  Lanka  without
    difficulty was not probative of  a  lack  of  adverse  interest  in  an
    individual...' At [275]  the  Tribunal  held:  '...We  take  particular
    account of [a practitioner's view] that the seriousness of any  charges
    against an individual are not determinative of whether a bribe  can  be
    paid, and that it is possible to leave through the airport even when  a
    person is being actively sought...'

17. Finally, the judge held  that  in  the  event  that  she  accepted  the
    account, he did not fall within the risk factors  in  GJ.  However,  by
    order (7 November 2013) the  Court  of  Appeal  granted  permission  to
    appeal to two of the appellants in GJ, and observed: '(i)  that,  there
    being no challenge to the finding that there is a risk  of  persecution
    in respect of individuals falling within the risk categories identified
    in paragraph 356(7)  [of  GJ],  those  falling  within  the  said  risk
    categories will still be assisted by the Country Guidance given in that
    case, but (ii) that, pending the final determination of this appeal  or
    until further order, individuals who fall outside the said risk factors
    should not for that reason alone have their claims for asylum rejected,
    whether by the respondent or on appeal to the First  tier  Tribunal  or
    the Upper Tribunal.'

18. The First tier judge promulgated her determination  before  7  November
    and thus could not have been aware of the order of the Court of Appeal.
    Nevertheless I am satisfied that its subsequent findings must relate to
    the Appellant's claim.

19. I conclude that the assessment of the Appellant's  risk  on  return  is
    flawed.

20. The determination is set aside to be heard again.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal includes the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  The decision is set aside.  The nature  or  extent  of  any
judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for  the  decision  to  be
remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the case  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal in accordance with Practice Statement paragraph  7.2  to  be  heard
afresh by that Tribunal.  No findings stand.



Signed
      Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


