

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
aA/08305/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 April 2017                       |On 9 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between


                                     r a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Evans, instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Iran.  He arrived in  the  United  Kingdom
   on 18 July 2013 and claimed asylum on 19 July 2013. His  application  for
   asylum was refused by the Respondent on 13 August 2013 and his appeal  to
   the First-tier Tribunal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Lloyd Smith on 1 October 2013. Permission to appeal to the
   Upper Tribunal was refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  on  1
   November 2013. The Appellant's application for permission  to  appeal  to
   the Upper Tribunal was not admitted on  5  December  2013  as  the  Upper
   Tribunal concluded that an extension of time was  not  justified.  On  30
   December 2013 the  Appellant  lodged  a  judicial  review  claim  in  the
   Administrative Court. On 31 January 2014 Mr Justice Baker considered  the
   application on the papers and refused permission. The  Appellant  applied
   for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal.  Lord  Justice  Beatson
   granted permission on the papers. On 19 May  2015  the  Court  of  Appeal
   ordered by consent that the appeal be allowed and  the  decision  of  the
   Upper Tribunal dated 25 November 2013 refusing to admit  the  application
   for permission to appeal be quashed and the appeal remitted to the  Upper
   Tribunal for a new decision on the application for permission to  appeal.
   On 18 June 2015 CMG  Ockelton,  Vice  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
   granted permission to appeal in the light of the decision of the Court of
   Appeal.


   The Grounds


2. The grounds for permission to appeal contend that the Appellant would  be
   questioned on return to Iran and that such questioning would  lead  to  a
   real risk of persecution. The  Appellant  cites  background  evidence  in
   support of  this  contention.  The  Appellant  argues  that  the  country
   guidance decisions in SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran  CG  [2009]
   UKIAT 00053 and BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on  return)  Iran  CG
   [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) do not prevent the Appellant's appeal being  allowed
   as new country evidence is available  and  the  Respondent's  policy  has
   changed.


   The Hearing


3. Mr Hibbs produced the case of SSH and HR  (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum
   seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT  00308.  Ms  Evans  confirmed  that  she  was
   relying on the renewed grounds to the Upper Tribunal  seeking  permission
   to appeal but conceded that the Appellant was in difficulties in  arguing
   his case on the basis of the most recent country guidance.  She  conceded
   that as the Appellant's arguments were based on  being  a  failed  asylum
   seeker and having exited illegally, in view of  the  conclusions  of  the
   Upper Tribunal in SSH she could not argue that he would face a real  risk
   of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights on return to Iran.


4. Mr Hibbs submitted that in the light of the  country  guidance  case  law
   there was no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Discussion

5.  The matter was remitted to the Upper  Tribunal  for  reconsideration  by
   the Court of Appeal by consent on the grounds that the Upper Tribunal  in
   refusing permission to appeal made an arguable error of law in failing to
   engage with new objective  material  showing  a  risk  to  failed  asylum
   seekers on return to Iran and by  failing  to  consider  whether  it  was
   appropriate to depart from Country Guidance given in SB. In the  case  of
   SSH promulgated on 10 May 2016 the Upper Tribunal considered the risk  to
   an Iranian male in respect of whom no  adverse  interest  had  previously
   been manifested by the Iranian State and concluded that there was no real
   risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights on account of  illegal
   exit or being a failed asylum seeker. Ms Evans did not advance any  other
   ground for challenging the First-tier Tribunal's decision.


6. In the circumstances in view of the decision in SB I find that the First-
   tier Tribunal did not err in law in finding that Appellant would  not  be
   at risk due to illegal exit and being a failed asylum-seeker.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated      3 MAY 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray





