
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08188/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 August 2016                         |On 01 September 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                 Joseph [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mackenzie, Counsel for Kesar & Co Solicitors,
Bromley
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born  on  30  August  1957.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 5 May 2015  which
    stated that the Appellant's further representations of 9 April 2015 did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules and
    did not amount to a fresh claim.  His appeal was heard  by  First  Tier
    Tribunal Hanes on 25 November  2015.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found  that  there  is  no  valid  appeal  on  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection or human rights grounds or alternatively if there is a valid
    appeal pursuant to Article 3 (on health grounds) and/or  Article  8  of
    ECHR it is dismissed on human rights grounds. The  First  Tier  Judge`s
    decision was promulgated on 14 December 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was made and on 19 January 2016
    Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Zucker found there to be no  error  of
    law in the decision.  An application for permission to appeal was  made
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 16 February 2016.  Her  reasons  for  finding
    there to be an arguable error of law are that although R (Waqar) v SSHD
    (Statutory appeals/paragraph 353) IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00169  appears  to
    address the point made in the Grounds  of  Appeal  regarding  paragraph
    353, the issue as to who makes the categorisation decision needs to  be
    further explored.

 3. On the day of the hearing Counsel for the  Appellant  handed  to  me  a
    judicial review decision between R (on the application of MG) and First
    Tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department IJR [2016] UKUT 00283 (IAC) and the  Presenting
    Officer handed to  me  written  submissions  together  with  that  same
    decision and a judgment by the Honorary Mr Justice Dove  sitting  as  a
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal and Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane in  the
    judicial review between R (on the application of Amin  Sharif  Hussein)
    and First Tier Tribunal (IAC) and  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department IJR/11225/2015.  That judgment was made on 9 June 2016.

The Hearing

 4. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the argument is  the  same  as
    the argument in the said case of R (on  the  application  of  MG).   He
    submitted that the Appellant in the case of MG did  not  succeed.   The
    issue  being  decided  was  whether  further  submissions  made  by  an
    Appellant amount to a fresh claim and whether under  paragraph  353  of
    the Immigration Rules the First Tier  Tribunal  should  decide  whether
    they amount to a fresh claim or the Secretary of  State  should  decide
    this.  In the case of R (on the application of MG) the  Upper  Tribunal
    held:

         "(1)     A decision that further submissions do  not  amount  to  a
             fresh claim under paragraph 353 of the  Immigration  Rules  is
             not a decision to refuse a protection or  human  rights  claim
             and so does not give rise to a right of appeal  to  the  First
             Tier Tribunal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration
             and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended  by  Section  15  of  the
             Immigration Act 2014).

         (2)  Whilst the First-tier Tribunal must determine whether  it  has
             jurisdiction to entertain an appeal, it cannot decide  whether
             a decision that further submissions do not amount to  a  fresh
             claim under paragraph 353  was  lawful  or  correct.   Such  a
             decision can only be challenged on public  law  principles  in
             judicial review proceedings."

 5. Counsel submitted that at present this is the case law which has to  be
    followed although an application for permission to appeal has been made
    against that decision.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that based  on  Counsel's  submissions
    and the decision in R (on the application of MG) the First Tier Judge's
    decision in the present case, when he found that  there  was  no  valid
    appeal on asylum or humanitarian protection  or  human  rights  grounds
    before him was correct.

Notice of Decision

 7. Based on the judicial review decision between R (on the application  of
    MG) and First  Tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  and
    Secretary of State for the Home Department IJR [2016]  UKUT  283  (IAC)
    and based on the submissions made at this hearing I find that there  is
    no material error of law in the decision by  First Tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hanes promulgated on 14 December 2015 and his decision must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1st September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

