
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08907/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision an Promulgated      |
|On 17th November 2014                         |On 30th December 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     SH
                          (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Iran  born  on  8th  March  1983.   She
    appealed against a decision dated 18th September  2013  to  remove  her
    from the United Kingdom  following  a  refusal  to  grant  her  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and protection under the European Convention.

 2. On 17th July 2014 Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Herbert OBE  refused
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  He made an adverse  credibility
    finding against her in particular that she was detained briefly in 2009
    at the same time as the journalist and anti government activist  Fariba
    Pajooh.  The appellant first came to the UK as a student  in  2009  and
    returned to Iran in 2011, 2012 and 2013.  On her last visit to Iran  on
    2nd June 2013, to see her family, she claims  she  encountered  serious
    problems and was forced  to  leave  Iran  on  2nd  September  2013  and
    travelled to the UK via Turkey.  She claimed asylum upon her arrival in
    the UK because she stated she is perceived by the  Iranian  authorities
    as a political activist.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 3. The application for permission made by the appellant  stated  that  the
    judge  did  not  take  into  account  the  evidence  presented  and  in
    particular did not take into  account  the  evidence  produced  by  the
    appellant to show that she was in detention at the same time as  Fariba
    Pajooh in 2009.  The judge had also based his credibility findings on a
    variety of misconceptions.  It was not implausible that  the  appellant
    might forget an email address as a computer would  repeatedly  remember
    an email address with auto fill. The appellant did not claim  to  be  a
    serious political activist and the Green  Movement  was  not  a  formal
    political movement with a defined structure. The return in August  2013
    was the first opportunity the  authorities  had  to  arrest  her  after
    discovering the link between her and Ms Pajooh despite  the  fact  that
    she had travelled to Iran before, and the reference  to  the  appellant
    claiming for the first time in oral evidence that she  was  blindfolded
    was erroneous. The appellant had also  provided  a  consistent  account
    with international  reports  on  the  conditions  of  detention.    The
    appellant stated that her uncle, a high ranking official, had  assisted
    her exit from Iran through using bribes. This had not been addressed by
    the judge. The judge criticised the appellant on  the  basis  that  her
    parents were able to send her a summons despite  having  attracted  the
    unwarranted attention of the authorities which he  did  not  think  was
    credible.  However corroboration was often expected and  this  was  why
    the parents, despite the risk, sent the material. The judge  placed  an
    unreasonable burden on the appellant expecting her to produce  material
    from Yahoo.

 4. An initial application for permission to appeal was  presented  to  the
    First Tier Tribunal and dismissed as merely  a  disagreement  with  the
    determination.  A renewed application  for  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on the ground that the judge's
    negative credibility findings were arguably inadequately reasoned.  The
    renewed application submitted that there was a  failure  to  apply  the
    appropriate standard of proof in his reference to 'plausibility'.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Tufan submitted that the Judge had  dealt  with  the
    documentation and  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  save  that  he
    acknowledged that there was force in the argument that  the  judge  had
    missed  the  references  to  being  blindfolded  in  the  prison.   The
    appellant's claimed stay in prison was a total fabrication.  The  judge
    did not merely adopt the previous  findings  of  Judge  Brenells  whose
    determination had also been set aside for an error of law.

 6.  I  find  that  Judge  Herbert  did  not  appear  to  engage  with  the
    documentation fully.  He cites at the start of  the  determination  the
    objective  reports  which  document  the  widespread  use  of  torture,
    arbitrary  arrest  and  false  imprisonment  particularly   for   those
    suspected of being a threat to  national  security  in  'any  shape  or
    form'. He also recorded that the government was increasingly  targeting
    journalists, academics, opposition politicians and activists  including
    women's right activists.

 7. The judge, however, proceeded to reject the appellant's  claim  on  the
    basis that she could not have  met  the  celebrated  journalist  Fariba
    Pajooh in 2009 because the journalist was not detained until August  of
    that year.  This is central to her account.  The judge does not address
    the evidence produced by the appellant in relation to  claimed  earlier
    detention of Fariba Pajooh and relies only on the  objective  material.
    He makes no reference to the appellant's evidence. (Judge Brenells  did
    give reasons  for  rejecting  her  evidence  in  this  regard  but  his
    determination was previously set aside).  It  was  incumbent  upon  the
    judge,  bearing  in  mind  he  considered  this  to  be  a  'compelling
    discrepancy' and central to the rejection of the claim,  to  deal  with
    the evidence the appellant produced.   In assessing her credibility the
    judge also did not accept that the appellant  would  forget  the  email
    address of Fariba Pajooh but did not take into account the  concept  of
    automatic refill.

 8. The judge based his rejection on the appellant's account that  she  was
    of interest on the fact that she had travelled to and from Iran without
    problem since 2009. At submitted by Mr Gayle the judge makes no mention
    of the fact that the  appellant  claims,  as  recorded  in  her  asylum
    interview to have met Fariba Pajooh in 2013 and claimed to have emailed
    her in June 2013 [AIR 21]. Nor did the judge address the issue  of  the
    uncle who bribed and facilitated her exit from Iran.

 9. The judge, although he referred to the issue, did  not  deal  with  the
    appellant's account of why the parental house was not searched, that is
    that she had lived  elsewhere.   He  further  placed  emphasis  on  her
    inability to describe Evin Prison stating that 'she  mentioned  in  the
    first time in oral evidence that  she  was  blindfolded  and  makes  no
    mention  of  this  quite  important  details  when  during  her  asylum
    interview'.  In fact at AIR 168 the appellant does make reference  when
    in Evin Prison to moving with her 'eyes closed'. It  was  also  pointed
    out that the reports indicate that prison conditions do not necessarily
    breach Article 3 and therefore it was not a  foregone  conclusion  that
    the appellant would have been ill treated in prison.

10. The judge acknowledged that the appellant was  depressed  but  rejected
    her account that it simply had not crossed her mind to obtain  evidence
    from Yahoo in relation to her account.  Finally  the  witness  who  did
    give evidence at court was simply dismissed as he did not  witness  any
    of the appellant's account directly. Their evidence was not assessed.

11. I find that there were  errors  of  law  in  the  determination,  which
    affected the credibility findings with respect  to  the  appellant  and
    these in turn run to the heart of the appeal.  I preserve none  of  the
    findings.

12. Bearing in mind that the appellant has now been put on notice to obtain
    information from Yahoo, the details and exchanges on her email  account
    dating back to the start of 2013 should be obtained.

13. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed      Date 30th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

