
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08309/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 July 2016                               |On 4th October 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                  AFRIM [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a  citizen  of  Albania.   First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge Kanagaratanam in a decision sent on 11  May  2016  dismissed  his
    appeal against a decision made by the respondent on  10  February  2016
    refusing to grant him asylum. The appellant's grounds of appeal against
    this decision were that he feared persecution from another family  with
    whom his family had conducted a blood feud. He also invoked his Article
    8 rights. When the case came before the FtT Judge it was conceded  that
    the appellant's appeal was only being maintained on Article 8  grounds,
    and the judge had before her, inter alia, a report on  the  appellant's
    two children (aged 9 and 10) by Christine Brown and  an  expert  report
    from Miss Miranda Vickers.

2.   The appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT were essentially  that  the
    judge had erred by (i) not adequately addressing the issue  of  whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the two children to leave the UK; (ii)
    by  requiring  children  to  show   "exceptional   circumstances";   by
    erroneously relying by analogy on the Article 3 health case of N  v  UK
    [2008] ECHR 453, thereby  overlooking  that  the  children  would  have
    serious difficulties in adapting to life  in  Albania  where  they  had
    never lived and when they do not speak Albanian; and (iii)  failing  to
    give proper consideration to the independent social worker's report  of
    Christine Brown.  The  grounds  also  contrasted  the  judge's  cursory
    treatment of the relevant issues with the large volume of evidence that
    had been submitted relating to  the  children's  welfare.  In  granting
    permission FtT Judge Pooler considered it arguable that the  judge  had
    misdirected herself in not bearing in mind the Article 8 rights of  the
    wife and children and the guidance given in PD and Others (Article 8  -
    conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC).

3.   I am unable to accept the appellant's submissions. First of all, I  see
    no legal error in the judge's treatment of the issue as to whether,  by
    virtue of the appellant's children being  'qualifying  children',  they
    could meet the requirement of s.117B(6) of the Immigration  Rules  that
    it was not reasonable to expect  them  to  leave  the  UK.   The  judge
    properly identified this as a relevant requirement in [14] and [15] and
    in [20] the last of which states:

         "I now consider the  full  report  of  Miss  Christine  Brown,  the
         independent social worker and expert report of Miss Miranda Vickers
         and its addendum.  A  good  deal  of  the  report  deals  with  the
         appellant's account of the circumstances while others deal with the
         expert's opinion based on her observations. I have been referred to
         several paragraphs of the report, all of which I  have  taken  into
         account but  must  consider  in  the  context  of  the  immigration
         control.  While it has been suggested that  the  two  children  may
         become fixated,  and  upon  removal  at  a  pivotal  time  into  an
         unfamiliar society, may find it different from  an  environment  in
         which they have already displayed a degree of success.   I  however
         consider the fact that that they  are  not  going  into  a  strange
         environment  but  into  a  cultural  background  in  which  several
         Albanian children.  I  consider  the  position  of  Treebhawon  and
         others [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) relating to a family  unit  and  the
         application of Section 117 but find that each case must turn on its
         own particular facts.  In this instance for the  reasons  mentioned
         and having considered the  fact  that  the  children  who  have  no
         medical issues would return with their parents to a  country  where
         there is a grandparent and surroundings familiar to  their  culture
         no hindrance to their development given the education available  in
         Albania. Much emphasis has been  put  on  the  performance  of  the
         children in school which is no doubt good.  However  in  addressing
         the overall question of reasonableness, I find that this in  itself
         is not adequate unless there is evidence that they cannot access an
         education in Albania. I do not find it a  necessary  advantage  for
         the appellant's children to assimilate to a culture in  the  United
         Kingdom.  I also  do  not  find  it  would  largely  disrupt  their
         education or state of mind if they to return to their own  cultural
         environment and extended family, and bearing mind the interests  of
         immigration control as vested in the authorities together with  the
         circumstances to which return to  in  Albania  I  do  not  find  it
         disproportionate for  these  children  to  be  removed  with  their
         parents to Albania.  For these reasons this appeal cannot succeed."

4.   I am satisfied  that  (notwithstanding  the  lack  of  clarity  in  the
    sentence ending "in which several  Albanian  children")  in  addressing
    this request the judge took account of all relevant factors. The points
    relied on in the grounds in support  of  the  claim  that  he  did  not
    essentially voice disagreement with the judge's assessment rather  than
    identifying factors overlooked or wrongly taken into account.

5.   I see nothing wrong on the part of the judge in referring at one  point
    to "exceptional" circumstances, since this was simply in the context of
    the judge accepting that  if  the  children  met  the  requirements  of
    s.117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 as amended the appellant's appeal  stood  to
    succeed because their circumstances would therefore be capable of being
    ones that would make the  refusal  decision  disproportionate.  In  any
    event, I do not consider that use of the word "exceptional" necessarily
    imports a legal test.

6.   The judge can be criticised for seeking support "by analogy"  from  the
    N v UK case where the issue was  the  very  different  one  of  persons
    seeking to argue that they could not be expelled because they would  be
    unable  to  access  medical  assistance  in  law  their  home  country.
    However, I fail to see that an error involved had  any  effect  on  the
    judge's decision.  The analogous fact relied on by the judge - that the
    country of origin (Albania) had a functioning  education  system  which
    the appellants could access, was a relevant and important one  both  in
    assessing whether it was reasonable to expect the children to return to
    Albania and in assessing the related issues of their best interests and
    the proportionality  of  the  appellant's  removal  together  with  his
    family.   Given  that  the  submissions   before   the   judge   relied
    significantly on the contention that the Albanian education system  was
    poor, it was only to be expected that the judge should devote attention
    to  that  issue.  The  judge's  assessment  -  that  it  was  not  only
    "functioning" but "of a reasonably high standard" was properly based on
    the background evidence as a whole and indeed that  particular  finding
    has not been challenged in the grounds.

7.   The grounds  allege  that  the  judge  failed  to  recognise  that  the
    children did not speak Albanian, but that was not in fact the state  of
    affairs revealed by the evidence of the appellant  himself  before  the
    judge. As recorded in [9], he and his wife would speak English to their
    children and speak in Albanian amongst themselves, and "[t]he  children
    spoke a little Albanian to their grandmother". The children  thus  have
    some grasp of the Albanian  language.   What  the  judge  did  and  was
    entitled to do was consider the issue  of  the  children's  integration
    into Albanian society by reference to  the  evidence  that  they  would
    return with Albanian parents to their country of nationality and  to  a
    family situation where they had grandparents and  cultural  ties.  That
    was a finding open to the judge on the evidence.

8.   As regards the judge's treatment of  the  independent  social  worker's
    report, the first thing to observe is that this is not a case  where  a
    judge has failed to refer to a report at all.  The judge refers  to  it
    expressly in [14] and in [20].  Further in [20] the judge engages  with
    the contents of the report and the judge's observations  upon  it  make
    clear that she was well aware that this report stated  that  return  to
    Albania would be disruptive and distressing.  It  was  entirely  within
    the range of reasonable responses for the judge  to  assess  that  this
    report was not determinative of  the  issue  before  him,  particularly
    because the  social  worker  was  considering  the  importance  to  the
    children of "present satisfactory structures" rather than the issue  of
    whether the disruption and distress caused by removal would  be  short-
    term or long term. On the judge's findings, the children would be  able
    to adapt without significant detriment to their welfare.

9.   There was a very considerable body of documentary evidence  before  the
    judge. Whilst the judge did not refer to each and every  item,  he  did
    identify key factors and pointed out in [6] - [7] that he took  all  of
    these into account.

10.  I do not consider that the judge fell foul of  the  principle  that  in
    appeals of this kind where an appellant has a dependent wife and child,
    the Article 8 rights of the family unit as a whole must be  taken  into
    account.   Not only did the judge note when referring to  Treebhawan  &
    Others [2015]  UKUT  (IAC)  that  he  considered  the  position  in  it
    "relating to a family unit" (see [20]) but in an earlier paragraph  the
    judge stated that she was "mindful of the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    children have a relationship with their cousin who is cared for by  the
    appellant's wife" ([143]).  As this reference  indicates,  the  judge's
    perspective thorough was holistic.  Indeed,  so  far  as  concerns  the
    Article 8  circumstances  of  the  family  as  a  whole,  what  was  of
    particular importance to the judge was that the children  would  return
    to Albania as a family unit.   I  do  not  consider  that  the  judge's
    assessment was in conflict with any of the basic propositions  set  out
    in PD & Others.

Notice of Decision

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal  must
    stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                          Date 4thOctober 2016

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
