
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08658/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 2nd June 2014                              |On 2nd June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy instructed by Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 25th December 1987  and
    he appealed against a decision dated 30th August 2013 to remove him  as
    an illegal entrant further to Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Act  1999  following  a  refusal  to  grant  her  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and protection under the European Convention.

 2. On 31st March  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beach  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on grounds of asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    protection under the European Convention.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made by the  appellant  and
    asserted that the judge had erred in law in the following ways.

 4. First, by finding that the appellant's account  was  vague  and  lacked
    detail.  The judge failed to engage with the evidence  in  his  witness
    statement.

 5. The judge failed to particularise  why  the  mental  health  issues  as
    stated in the Psychiatric report did not support his account  of  being
    unable to remember the name of the camp he claimed he was kept in for 5
    years.

 6. The judge had failed to give weight to the  clinical  findings  in  the
    medical report on scarring as to causation  and  consistency  with  the
    appellant's account.

 7. The judge failed to engage with counsel's submissions on the background
    evidence including the country of origin information report.

 8. The judge had made an adverse credibility finding  and  yet  failed  to
    engage with various aspects of  the  appellant's  evidence,  background
    evidence  and  counsel's  submissions  and   there   was   insufficient
    consideration of the GJ and others (Post civil war returnees) Sri Lanka
    CG [2013] UKUT 00319 regarding  risk  categories  and  the  appellant's
    profile when assessing the risk to the appellant on his return.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing, Mr Paramjorthy essentially relied on  the  grounds  for
    submission but emphasised that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account  the   appellant's   psychiatric   condition   when   assessing
    credibility.

10. Mr Deller submitted that there was force in the  judge's  finding  that
    the appellant claimed he had only been tortured in  2008  and  yet  was
    held in detention for 5 years but  noted  that  there  appeared  to  be
    little reference to  the  psychiatric  evidence  and  no  reference  to
    placing the credibility findings in the context of that evidence.

11. Neither representative  could  locate  any  reference  to  the  witness
    statement in the judge's findings.

Conclusions

12. The judge made an adverse credibility  finding  against  the  appellant
    and, in large part, based those findings on the lack of detail and  the
    vagueness of the appellant's  account.   The  judge  recorded  that  an
    appellant's bundle was submitted and Mr Paramjorthy confirmed that  his
    witness statement ran  to  numerous  paragraphs.   Not  only  was  this
    witness statement not in the file  but  was  not  referred  to  in  the
    judge's findings of the determination.  Although  the  judge  may  have
    taken this into account it was not reflected in the determination.  The
    lack of reference suggests that a  key  document  was  not  taken  into
    account and this is an error of law particularly in  the  circumstances
    where the judge made an adverse finding based on the lack of detail.

13. The judge did record that  there  was  a  psychiatric  report  from  Dr
    Balasubramaniam dated 25th November 2013 which is detailed as referring
    to the appellant's post traumatic  stress  disorder,  low  mood,  sleep
    disturbance and poor concentration and that he scored greater  than  33
    on  the  impact  of  event  scale  revised  supporting  the  diagnosis.
    However, when assessing the evidence the judge  made  no  reference  to
    this report.  It appeared that the judge considered  this  evidence  in
    the light of possible medical treatment on return but did not place the
    evidence in the context of the mental health evidence.  I find that the
    lack of reference  to  the  psychiatric  report  when  considering  the
    appellant's own evidence and thus his credibility, is an error  of  law
    which  goes  to  the  heart  of  the  findings.   Much  rested  on  the
    appellant's own evidence particularly with regard the  details  of  his
    detention and thus when assessing the evidence in the round his  mental
    health  presentation  was  of  significance.  Further  Mr   Paramjorthy
    specifically raised before the judge,  the issue of  the  consideration
    of  mental  health  issues  when  assessing  the  reliability  of   the
    appellant's evidence and this is in fact recorded in the determination.



14. The errors with regard credibility will have an impact, in turn, on the
    assessment of the further medical evidence on scarring  and  assessment
    of the .the background country material when assessing risk.

15. I find that there are errors of law in the determination  and  that  it
    should be set aside.  As the errors are fundamental to  the  assessment
    of credibility, I find that the matter should  be  reheard  before  the
    First Tier Tribunal in a hearing de novo and I  preserve  none  of  the
    findings.



Signed                                             Date 2nd June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
