
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08363/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 January 2016                       |On 09 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                   Mr YAG
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse, Counsel instructed by Supreme Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Maka
    dated 3 November 2015 in which  the  judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's decision of 20 May 2015 to  refuse  his
    claim for asylum.  The  Appellant's  nationality  is  disputed  by  the
    Respondent. The Appellant's claim is that he was born in Eritrea;  that
    he and his parents left there for Ethiopia when he was three;  that  he
    was deported from Ethiopia to Eritrea in 1999; that he was  conscripted
    into the Eritrean army; that he deserted and  made  his  way  to  Sudan
    where he then lived for 12 years; then spending further time  in  south
    Sudan, before making his way to Europe and ultimately  to  the  UK.  He
    claimed to fear serious harm from the Eritrean authorities as a  result
    of his desertion and illegal exit from Eritrea.

2.   The Respondent rejected the credibility of that claim for  reasons  set
    out in her letter of 20 May 2015, and held that the  Appellant  was  an
    Ethiopian national with no fear  of  harm  in  that  country.   In  the
    alternative, the Respondent asserted that changes in country conditions
    since the last Country Guidance case of MO  (illegal  exit  -  risk  on
    return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190 resulted in there being no real risk
    of harm to the Appellant if returned  to  Eritrea  in  any  event.  The
    Respondent relied in particular on the Home Office CIG of  March  2015,
    which relied significantly on a Danish Immigration Service Fact Finding
    Mission Report of 2014 ('the Danish FFM Report').

3.   The Appellant appealed against that decision  in  a  notice  of  appeal
    which was received by the Tribunal.   The  present  appeal  before  the
    Upper Tribunal relates to the sequence of events which then transpired,
    as the Appellant did not attend the hearing of his appeal on 27 October
    2015  at  the  Harmondsworth  hearing  centre.  In  short  it  is   the
    Appellant's case that  neither  he  nor  his  representatives  received
    notice of a hearing on that date and it is for that reason that  it  is
    necessary to go into some detail as to what correspondence was  or  was
    not issued by the Tribunal in relation to the giving of notice  of  the
    hearing.

4.   I will first describe how this matter was dealt with by the  judge  who
    dismissed the appeal in the absence of the Appellant.  At  paragraph  5
    the judge provides as follows:

         "5.  The appeal came before me for  hearing  on  27  October  2015.
             There was no-one in  attendance  for  the  Appellant  and  the
             Appellant himself did not attend.  Mr Sartorious, Home  Office
             Presenting Officer, represented the Respondent.


         6.   I considered whether or not I should determine the  appeal  in
             the Appellant's absence.  I noted the file history.  On 29 May
             2015,  notification  was  sent  to  the  Appellant   and   his
             representatives that the hearing was listed  for  25  November
             2015 with a pre-hearing  review  on  11  November  2015.   The
             Appellant returned his pre-hearing review form on 5 June 2015.
              On 26 August 2015 a notice of hearing was  sent  out  to  the
             Appellant and his representatives that the pre-hearing  review
             would now be on 13 October 2015 and the  full  hearing  on  27
             October 2015 at Harmondsworth.  There is a handwritten note on
             file that although the file copy of the notice of  hearing  is
             addressed to another Appellant the notice was 'sent out to the
             correct Appellant on 26 August 2015'.


         7.   A pre-hearing review of the case was done by Judge Nightingale
             on 14 October 2015.  [It is to be noted that this was a  paper
             CMR].  In her  directions  it  was  stated  'the  parties  are
             reminded that the substantive hearing is listed on 27  October
             2015 at Harmondsworth  hearing  centre.'   Again,  the  notice
             accompanying the directions, which had the new hearing date of
             27 October  2015  was  sent  out  to  the  Appellant  and  his
             representatives, Supreme Solicitors, on 14 October 2015.


         8.   I asked my clerk to  make  an  enquiry  with  the  Appellant's
             representatives why no-one was in attendance before  me.   His
             initial call at 10.55am was responded to with a  message  that
             the solicitor dealing with the case was not in and would  call
             back later on.  At 12.00pm I received a message via  my  clerk
             the solicitor had called and had stated  neither  he  nor  his
             client had not received [sic] notice of hearing for today.   I
             then received a fax at 12.44pm  asking  for  the  case  to  be
             adjourned as this was an administrative error by the Tribunal.


         9.   I considered all the evidence including the Procedure Rules as
             well as my own discretion.  I am satisfied a correct notice of
             hearing was served on 26 August 2015 as noted on  file  by  my
             clerk and a  further  notice  was  sent  on  14  October  2015
             following Judge Nightingale's directions.  I  did  not  accept
             the explanation given to me that neither the Appellant nor his
             solicitors had received no less than  four  separate  notices,
             which had informed them of today's hearing.


         10.  I had noted the Appellant in his reply form in June 2015  said
             he was intending to send a medical  report.   It  was  now  27
             October 2015 and there was still no medical report before me.


         11.  I considered all the evidence as well as Rule 28 and Rule 2 of
             the Procedure Rules.  I am satisfied  the  Appellant  and  his
             solicitors have had sufficient notice of  the  hearing  before
             me.  I find the Appellant has chosen not to attend.  I do  not
             accept the explanation given that there had been an  error  on
             the part of the Tribunal.  This  was  without  any  merit.   I
             determined that reasonable steps had been taken to notify  the
             Appellant and his representatives of the hearing and it was in
             the interests of justice for me to proceed."


5.   I have seen on the Tribunal file the fax referred to by  the  judge  at
    [8], sent to the First tier Tribunal on the day  of  hearing.  Although
    not set out in fill in the judge's decision, I find it of assistance to
    do so. It provides:

         "We write further to our  telephone  conversation  with  the  court
         clerk today.  The court clerk informed us today that the hearing of
         the above Appellant's asylum appeal was listed to be  heard  today,
         Tuesday 27 October 2015.  However, we have not been notified of the
         change of the hearing date and the venue  of  the  hearing  centre.
         Our client has also confirmed to us that he was not  aware  of  the
         change of the hearing date and the venue of the hearing centre.  In
         a notice  dated  29  May  2015  the  CMR  hearing  was  listed  for
         Wednesday, 11 November 2015 and the full hearing was listed  to  be
         heard on Wednesday, 25 November 2015 at IAC Hatton Cross.  This  is
         an administrative error on the part of the Tribunal Service and  we
         request the Tribunal to list the case as  previously  listed  in  a
         notice dated 29 May 2015."

6.   The judge proceeded to consider the Appellant's appeal. As part of  his
    decision to proceed in the Appellant's absence, the Judge also observed
    at [13] as follows:

         "Weighing all of this, I determined there  was  very  little  that
         could have been said to me even if the Appellant was present and if
         I were wrong on proceeding in his absence, which  would  have  cast
         doubt on what was a document of record  (asylum  interview)  anyway
         and on the outcome."


     The Judge held that the Appellant's account was not reliable,  that  he
    was a dual Ethiopian and Eritrean national, and that he would not  face
    a real risk of serious  harm  in  either  country,  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

7.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal against  that  decision,
    asserting, in summary, that:

         (i)  neither the Appellant nor the solicitor had had notice of  the
             amended date and venue of the hearing; the decision to proceed
             was procedurally unfair, and failed to take into  account,  as
             per  Karagoz v Immigration Appeal Tribunal  [2003]  EWHC  1228
             (Admin) (19 May 2003) at para 21, that  the  Appellant's  past
             compliance with the Respondent's procedures and the Tribunal's
             directions and time limits should be, but were not, taken into
             account by the Judge when deciding to proceed in his  absence;
             further, inadequate reasons had been given by  the  Judge  for
             failing to accept the assertion by the Appellant's  solicitor,
             given on the day of hearing, that  neither  had  received  the
             amended notice; see Karagoz para 30:
                  "But it is a strong step, particularly in  the  light  of
                  its consequences, not  to  accept  the  assertion  of  any
                  professional person  that  a  Notice  sent  by  post,  but
                  otherwise  than  by  Recorded  Delivery,  has   not   been
                  received. And if the Notice posted to the  solicitors  was
                  not  received,  that  may  fortify  an  assertion  by  the
                  appellant that a Notice apparently posted  to  himself  in
                  the same batch was also not received."
         (ii) the judge  erred  in  law  in  purporting  to  find  that  the
             Appellant's attendance was immaterial to the  outcome  of  the
             appeal; credibility was disputed,  and  evidence  accompanying
             the grounds of appeal sought to establish that  the  Appellant
             had, prior to the hearing,  been  in  the  process  of  making
             enquiries with the Ethiopian authorities  as  to  his  alleged
             entitlement to Ethiopian nationality, and that he was  in  the
             process of obtaining medical evidence  regarding  scarring  he
             had sustained during military service;
         (iii)    the judge erred  in  law  in  purporting  to  disapply  MO
             Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190, and the Appellant  made  reference
             to country  information  which  disputed  the  reliability  of
             assertions made in the Danish FFM report; such evidence  would
             have been provided to him if the Appellant had had  notice  of
             the appeal.

 8.  Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  those  grounds  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy on 2 December 2015. A Rule 24  response  from  the
    Respondent dated 18 December 2015 provides that "the Respondent opposes
    the Appellant's appeal.  In summary the Respondent  will  submit  inter
    alia that the Judge of the First-tier directed himself  appropriately."
    However, the reply provides at paragraph 3 that "the ground raised is a
    procedural [one] between the A and the IAC - the SSHD offers no comment
    either way".

9.    In  preparation  for  this  hearing  today  I  have   considered   the
    documentation attached to the correspondence pin in the Tribunal  file.
    I have copied the various notices of hearing for the  benefit  of  both
    parties today  and  have  heard  submissions  from  both  parties.  The
    following becomes apparent.

10.  There was indeed a notice of hearing dated 29 May  2015  on  form  IA28
    sent to the Appellant at his home address of 82 Compton House,  and  to
    Supreme Solicitors, giving notice of the original hearing dates  of  11
    November for the CMR and 25 November for the full hearing.  There was a
    blank reply notice on form IA29 which  the  Appellant  was  invited  to
    complete and return to the Tribunal.  In the file there is then a  copy
    of the completed reply notice  in  which  the  Appellant  provided  the
    relevant information for the Tribunal to case-manage the appeal.   That
    reply notice was directed to be provided to the Tribunal by 9  November
    2015.  In fact it was completed on 3 June  2015  and  received  by  the
    Tribunal as early as 5 June.  This is promptness in the extreme  in  my
    view.

11.  There are then a series of documents all dated 26  August  2015,  which
    are addressed to a completely different Appellant, Ms M N C, and  to  a
    different set  of  solicitors  (not  the  solicitors  for  the  present
    appellant).  These are:

    (i)  a form IA28 giving notice of hearing dates; CMR on 13 October 2015
         (to be conducted on the papers) and a full hearing  on  27  October
         2015 at Harmondsworth;
    (ii) a form IA31 giving directions that the appeal was to be listed  on
         the date shown on the accompanying notice of hearing;
    (iii)    a form IA41 giving notice of  adjourned  hearing  which  notes
         "the hearing of this appeal previously fixed for 11  November  2015
         has been adjourned", and a separate IA41 giving  notice  that  "the
         hearing of this appeal previously fixed for 25  November  2015  has
         been adjourned";  both said that a  new  notice  of  hearing  would
         follow in due course;
    (iv) a form IA32 giving standard directions  as  to  the  provision  of
         witness statements and bundles.


     All of those documents are addressed to Ms M N C and to her  solicitors
    and show a different appeal reference number to  that  of  the  present
    Appellant.

12.  On the face of the IA32 addressed to Ms M N C there  is  a  handwritten
    amendment which says "Notice sent out to correct Appellant on 26 August
    2015".  Significantly, there is no copy in the  Tribunal  file  of  any
    such amended notice of hearing or any  amended  notice  of  directions,
    addressed to the present Appellant dated 26 August 2015.

13.  With respect to the judge, I do not understand how in the face of  such
     documentation he can have been so satisfied to have  confidently  held
    at paragraph 9 that the Appellant had received  an  amended  notice  of
    hearing issued to him on 26 August 2015.  With respect,  I  find  these
    notices in a different appellant's name with a handwritten amendment in
    the form that I have recorded above to be  unsatisfactory  evidence  to
    demonstrate that the present Appellant was given notice  on  26  August
    2015 of the amended hearing date.

14.  The judge noted that there was a CMR or pre-hearing review  which  took
    place on the papers on 14 October 2015 by Judge Nightingale.  There are
    a series of documents which relate to  that  event.   There  are  three
    notices, each on form IA55, dated 14 October 2015, all of  which  state
    merely: "Notice. Please see attached directions". One is  marked  as  a
    file copy. It bears the addresses of the Appellant, his Solicitors, and
    the Respondent. The address of the Appellant is  crossed  out  and  'On
    file' is written by hand next to it. The address of the  Respondent  is
    crossed out and 'Email' is written by hand next to it. Another IA55  is
    addressed to the Appellant alone, and  a  third  is  addressed  to  the
    Appellant, his  solicitor,  and  the  Respondent,  this  time  with  no
    crossings out.

15.  There are two further documents bearing the date 14 October 2015.   One
    is a document entitled  "Directions"  with  the  Appellant's  name  and
    appeal reference number on it. I assume that these were the  directions
    referred to in the IA55 notices. The directions document does not  bear
    the address of the Appellant or Respondent. It is a two  page  document
    in standard form giving standard directions to both the  Appellant  and
    Respondent, to be complied with no later than 5 working days  prior  to
    the substantive hearing of the appeal. There is no  date  specified  on
    that document as to the date of any hearing, or making reference to any
    amendment to the date of hearing.

16.  There is then a separate  single  sheet  entitled  "Asylum  Pre-hearing
    Review Form" which refers to the Appellant by name and appeal reference
    number. It does not bear the address of the Appellant or Respondent. It
    seems to me to have the appearance of an  internal  Tribunal  document.
    The proforma  questions  on  it  ask  whether  the  Appellant  has  any
    dependants; if so, how many; whether the  notice  of  decision  was  on
    file; whether the notice of appeal was on file; whether  the  issue  of
    timeliness was dealt with; whether the reply notice has been  received;
    whether an oral hearing was required; how many  witnesses  were  to  be
    called; whether further documentary evidence was to be  filed;  whether
    medical or expert evidence was to be called; whether an interpreter was
    needed and in what dialect;  the  points  allocated  to  the  case  and
    whether it was suitable for the float list.  There is then  a  separate
    text box asking whether an adjournment  request  was  made  and  if  so
    whether the adjournment was granted and the reasons and  the  code  for
    such adjournment, and a note as to whether  the  case  should  be  kept
    anonymous.

17.  Although, as I note above, the appearance of this document is  that  it
    seems intended for internal Tribunal use, it is to be noted that at the
    bottom of the document, the following is written:

         "Parties are reminded that the substantive hearing  is  listed  on
         27th October 2015.

     There are then three Tribunal  addresses  given,  the  address  of  the
    Harmondsworth hearing centre is selected. The very bottom of the  gives
    the name of First tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale and the  date  of  14
    October 21014.

18.  This then appears to be the only document  dated  14  October  2015  in
    which the details of the amended date and venue of the hearing are  set
    out.  I note that it is not on a form IA28 giving notice of a  date  of
    hearing.

19.  It is to be recalled that the Appellant avers that neither he  nor  his
    Solicitors received any notice giving notice of changed date  or  venue
    of hearing. However, it is  appropriate  for  me  to  acknowledge  that
    today, Ms Isherwood for the Respondent discovers on her file a copy  of
    the "Asylum Pre-hearing Review Form" document  that  I  have  described
    above.  It appears therefore that the Tribunal had  served  a  copy  of
    that document, at least on the Respondent, on which the details of  the
    date of hearing are given.

20.  I then consider the  likelihood  of  whether  the  "Asylum  Pre-hearing
    Review Form" document had  additionally  been  sent  to  the  Appellant
    and/or his representative.


    (i)  I note that the Tribunal's  'file  copy'  of  the  IA55  dated  14
         October 2014 has the home address of the Appellant crossed out  and
         the words 'on file' written next to them.  This  gives  rise  to  a
         reasonable suspicion that no copy of any of the documents dated  14
         October 2014 were sent to the Appellant personally.


    (ii)     Further, there also seems to be evidence that  the  manner  of
         service of the 14  October  2015  documentation  was  different  in
         respect to the Appellant's solicitors, and the Respondent  -  being
         stated to be by email for the latter, but not the former.


    (iii)    I  also  note  that  the  IA55  document  makes  reference  to
         directions being attached, but that the 2 pages directions document
         itself makes no reference to any change of hearing date or venue.


    (iv) I also take into account that the "Asylum Pre-hearing Review Form"
         has the appearance of an internal document and it is not obvious to
         me that it is a form of document that would generally  be  intended
         to be served on the parties to an appeal.


21.  I form the view that there is very poor evidence of an  amended  notice
    of hearing having been sent to the Appellant and his solicitors  on  26
    August 2015, and there is additionally a lack of clarity regarding  the
    documentation of 14 October 2015 as to what was sent out, and how,  and
    to whom.  Ultimately, I form the view that there is considerable  doubt
    that the Appellant and his solicitor had  in  fact  received  the  four
    separate notices that the Judge assumed at [9] had been sent to them.

22.  I therefore turn to the actions of the Judge, and whether his  decision
    to proceed involved any procedural unfairness  amounting  to  error  of
    law.

23.  I find that had the Judge considered the  documentation  of  26  August
    and 14 October 2015 properly, this  ought  to  have  given  rise  to  a
    suspicion that the Appellant had  not  been  given  notice  of  amended
    hearing. Consequently, I find that there was no adequate  reason  given
    by the Judge for failing to take  the  assertions  of  the  Appellant's
    representatives in their letter of 27 October 2015 (that they  had  not
    had amended notice of the hearing), at face value. Such assertions were
    being given by professional persons, and there was no  adequate  reason
    given by the Judge for taking the 'strong step' (Karagoz) to disbelieve
    such assertions.

24.  Further, the Judge failed to take into account the Appellant's  earlier
    swift compliance with directions. Further, when making his  observation
    at [10] that the Appellant had failed to provide a medical  report,  he
    failed to  take  into  account  that  such  failure   could  itself  be
    explained by the Appellant not having received the  amended  notice  of
    hearing; such evidence would still have been filed in  compliance  with
    the original directions given to the Appellant if filed  and  served  5
    working days before the original hearing date of 25 November.

25.  As to whether, as suggested by  the  Judge  at  [13],  the  Appellant's
    attendance at the hearing would have been immaterial; I find that  this
    is not a finding which  can  be  sustained.  There  were  a  number  of
    credibility issues in the appeal, determination  of  which  would  have
    been assisted by  the  Appellant's  oral  evidence;  including  why  he
    appeared to say certain things in his  screening  and  SEF  interviews.
    Further, the Appellant would have sought to rely  on  medical  evidence
    and evidence of his communications with the Ethiopian  embassy  in  the
    United  Kingdom,  relevant  to  the  assessment  of   the   Appellant's
    nationality. Further,  the  Appellant  would  have  referred  to  other
    country information calling into question the reliability of the Danish
    FFM report.

26.  Further, although not the subject of submissions  before  me,  I  would
    opine that it would  take  something  more,  by  way  of  reference  to
    Ethiopian nationality law, to support the Judge's apparent  finding  at
    [56] that as the  Appellant  spoke  Amharic,  and  was  married  to  an
    Ethiopian, he was 'therefore' entitled to Ethiopian nationality. By way
    of analogy, speaking English and being married  to  a  British  citizen
    says nothing, without more, as to a  person's  entitlement  to  British
    nationality.

27.  I find that the Appellant is entitled for his  present  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal to be allowed on the basis that the  proceedings  before
    the First tier  were  vitiated  by  procedural  unfairness,  by  having
    proceeding in the absence of the Appellant.

28.  Ms Hulse for  the  Appellant  today  asks  the  Appellant's  appeal  be
    remitted to the  First-tier.   I  agree.  I  find  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 7.2(a) of the  Practice  Statement  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers of the First Tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  that
    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for  that  party's
    case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

29.  I find that the making of the First tier decision involved  the  making
    of a material error of law.


    I set aside the First tier decision.


    I remit the appeal to the First tier Tribunal for a  hearing  before  a
    Judge other than Judge Maka.


    Direction


30.  I direct that the appeal not be listed before two weeks after the  date
    of this error of law decision being served upon the  Appellant.   I  am
    not asked to make any other directions.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The reason for this order is that the Appellant is  advancing  a  protection
claim, and the merits of that claim are to be decided  fresh  by  the  First
tier. The attitudes of the Ethiopian  and/or  Eritrean  authorities  towards
the Appellant are therefore still to be determined. The  publishing  of  the
present decision of the Upper Tribunal may prejudice the Appellant.



Signed                     Date: 3.3.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
