
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08946/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd April 2016                            |On 4th May 2016               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     T D
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bisnauthsing of Kayders Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against the decision of Judge  J  Pacey
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 17th June 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female  Albanian  citizen  born  in  March  1989  who
    claimed asylum on the basis of her membership of  a  particular  social
    group.  The asylum claim was made on  25th  March  2013,  the  Claimant
    having arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely  by  lorry  on  23rd
    March 2013.  The Claimant feared return to Albania as her family  would
    kill her because she had left without their permission as she  did  not
    want to marry the  man  they  had  chosen,  and  she  also  feared  the
    traffickers who had ill-treated her.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application on 16th October 2014 and
    the Claimant appealed to the FTT, and her appeal was heard on 8th  June
    2015.

 5. The FTT found the Claimant to be credible, and noted that the Secretary
    of State had accepted that she had been trafficked.  The  FTT  referred
    to the country guidance decision AM and BM (trafficked  women)  Albania
    CG [2010] UKUT 80 and concluded that the Claimant would be at  risk  if
    returned to Albania and allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended  that  the  FTT  had  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for concluding that there was  no  sufficiency
    of protection in Albania and there was no reasonable option of internal
    relocation.

 7. The FTT had not considered the latest Country Information Guidance (the
    CIG) which focuses on the issue of trafficking and which was  published
    on 19th September 2014.  It was contended that failure to consider this
    information, which had been relied upon by the Secretary  of  State  in
    refusing the Claimant's application, amounted to a  material  error  of
    law.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bartlett of the FTT who found
    it arguable that the FTT should have considered the guidance  contained
    within the CIG which was more up-to-date than the decision  in  AM  and
    BM.

Error of Law

 9. At a hearing on 4th January 2016 I heard submissions from both  parties
    regarding error of law.  It was accepted  by  Miss  Rutherford  on  the
    Claimant's behalf that the FTT had not considered the CIG, but  it  was
    contended that  this  was  not  a  material  error,  as  even  if  that
    information had been considered and analysed, it would not have altered
    the decision of the FTT to allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

10. I set out below my conclusions and reasons for finding an error of  law
    and setting aside the decision of the FTT;

         13.  The FTT decision was prepared with care and no error of law is
             committed by making reference to the country guidance decision
             of AM and BM, which although published in 2010, still  remains
             a country guidance decision.  I set out below  paragraph  12.2
             of the IAC Practice Direction as this relates to the treatment
             of country guidance decisions;

             12.2 A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT or  the
                  IAT bearing the  letters  "CG"  shall  be  treated  as  an
                  authoritative  finding  on  the  country  guidance   issue
                  identified in the determination, based upon  the  evidence
                  before the members of the Tribunal, the  AIT  or  the  IAT
                  that determined the appeal.  As a result,  unless  it  has
                  been expressly superseded or replaced by  any  later  "CG"
                  determination, or is  inconsistent  with  other  authority
                  that is binding on the Tribunal, such a  country  guidance
                  case is authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so far  as
                  that appeal;


                  (a)  relates to the country guidance  issue  in  question;
                      and
                  (b)  depends upon the same or similar evidence.

             However, I am persuaded that the  FTT  erred  in  law  in  not
             engaging with  the  CIG  published  on  19th  September  2014,
             because this was relied upon by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
             refusing the application, and the  CIG  contains  more  recent
             information than that considered by the Tribunal in AM and BM.

         14.  Therefore the FTT had a  duty  to  consider  that  report  and
             decide  whether  any  weight  should  be   attached   to   the
             information contained therein, and  whether  that  information
             would justify departing from the guidance contained in AM  and
             BM, on the basis that there had been a significant  change  of
             circumstances  since  the  country   guidance   decision   was
             published.  I am not expressing a view as to whether there has
             been such a significant change of  circumstances,  but  in  my
             view the error made by the FTT was in not making any reference
             to the CIG when setting out findings and conclusions.

         15.  The FTT acknowledges in paragraphs 27 and 28 when  summarising
             the Secretary of State's case, that  the  Secretary  of  State
             dealt  in  detail  with  objective  evidence  in  relation  to
             sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation.   The  FTT
             did not however go on to make any findings upon that objective
             evidence, which is the evidence contained within the CIG.

         16.  Miss Rutherford accepted that the CIG was before the  FTT,  as
             it was contained within the Claimant's bundle of documents  at
             pages 132-154.  Miss Rutherford submitted that even if the FTT
             had considered that information, it would not  have  made  any
             difference to the decision, and that  may  be  the  case,  but
             equally it may not.  It is not possible to  say  without  that
             evidence being analysed and findings made thereon.   Therefore
             I conclude that the grounds relied upon by  the  Secretary  of
             State do disclose an error of law, and the error  is  material
             so that the decision of the FTT must be set aside.

11. It was common ground that there had been no challenge to  the  findings
    of fact made by the FTT, and those findings were  therefore  preserved.
    The findings  are  summarised  in  paragraph  5  of  Miss  Rutherford's
    skeleton argument dated 3rd January 2016.

12. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission, and the submissions made by both parties are  contained  in
    my error of law decision which was promulgated on 21st January 2016.

Remaking the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 22nd April 2016

Preliminary Issues

13. Mr Bisnauthsing confirmed that it was not intended to call any  further
    oral evidence although the Appellant and an Albanian  interpreter  were
    present at the hearing.  Reliance was to be placed upon the findings of
    fact made by the FTT.

14. Mr Mills was supplied with a copy of my error of law decision  that  he
    had not previously seen, and was given an opportunity to  consider  the
    contents thereof.

15. Mr Mills advised that no reliance  was  now  placed  upon  the  CIG  of
    September 2014, because a new country  guidance  decision,  TD  and  AD
    (trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) had been published on 9th
    February 2016, after the error of law decision had been promulgated.

16. Mr Mills submitted copies of the most recent  Country  Information  and
    Guidance  on  Albania,  dated  9th  September  2015  in   relation   to
    trafficking, and April 2016  in  relation  to  women  fearing  domestic
    violence.  However Mr Mills advised, that  in  the  main  he  would  be
    relying upon the guidance given in TD and AD.

17. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

The Secretary of State's Oral Submissions

18. Mr Mills  indicated  that  he  was  basing  his  submissions  upon  the
    preserved findings of  fact  made  by  the  FTT,  which  had  not  been
    challenged.  It was therefore accepted  that  the  Claimant  could  not
    return to her home area, and  that  she  suffered  with  mental  health
    problems, in particular PTSD, and severe depression, and  there  was  a
    significant suicide risk.

19. Mr Mills submitted that the question to be considered and  answered  by
    the Tribunal, was whether the improvements made by the  Albanian  State
    to support trafficked women, were sufficient to allow the  Claimant  to
    reasonably relocate within Albania, so that there was no real  risk  to
    her from her family, or the individuals who had trafficked her when she
    was in the Netherlands.

20. Mr Mills  submitted  that  the  objective  evidence,  and  the  country
    guidance case law indicated that in general there was a sufficiency  of
    protection in Albania, although the Claimant's particular circumstances
    must be considered, and in particular her mental health  problems.   It
    was contended that the Appellant would not be at  real  risk  from  the
    traffickers, who were based in the Netherlands rather than in Albania.

21. I was asked to note that shelters were available  for  the  victims  of
    trafficking, and that it was a  matter  for  the  Tribunal  to  decide,
    whether the support offered to this Claimant  would  be  adequate.   Mr
    Mills made particular reference to paragraphs 82, 97, 100, and  101  of
    TD and AD.

22. As to the position when the Claimant left a shelter,  I  was  asked  to
    find that it was difficult  to  assess  what  the  position  would  be,
    although Mr Mills observed that the Claimant is well educated, she does
    not have an illegitimate child, she is from the north of Albania,  with
    no family support.

23. Overall, it was submitted that I  could  conclude  that  there  was  no
    reasonable internal relocation option available to  the  Claimant,  but
    equally the objective and country  guidance  evidence,  could  indicate
    that there was a reasonable internal relocation option and  sufficiency
    of protection.

The Claimant's Oral Submissions

24. Mr Bisnauthsing agreed that the issues to be decided by  the  Tribunal,
    were whether  there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  available  in
    Albania, and  a  reasonable  internal  relocation  option,  as  it  was
    accepted that the Claimant would be at risk if  returned  to  her  home
    area.

25. I was asked to find that the background  evidence  indicated  that  the
    shelters provided in Albania for the victims of  trafficking  would  be
    inadequate, in the Claimant's case, because she is a vulnerable person.

26. It was submitted, with reference to the domestic violence CIG of  April
    2016, that the situation had not improved, and section 7.2.2  confirmed
    that  Albania  did  not  meet   the   Council   of   Europe   Taskforce
    Recommendations for  national  women's  helpline  and  women's  shelter
    provision.

27. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions

28. In order to succeed with her appeal in relation to  her  asylum  claim,
    the Claimant must prove that there is a real risk of persecution for  a
    Convention reason, if she  is  returned  to  Albania.   The  Convention
    reason in this case is the Claimant's membership of a particular social
    group.  The standard of proof is a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,
    which is a lower standard than a balance of probability.

29. The findings of fact made by the FTT which were not challenged and  are
    preserved are summarised in paragraph 5 of a skeleton argument prepared
    by Miss Rutherford of Counsel, who  represented  the  Claimant  at  the
    error of law hearing on 4th January 2016 and are set out below;

         (a)  Her identity is correct.

         (b)  That she entered into a secret relationship  with  a  Catholic
             man in Albania.

         (c)  That her father discovered the  relationship  and  ill-treated
             her as a consequence.

         (d)  That her father arranged a marriage for her to  an  older  man
             and that she was forced to become engaged to him.

         (e)  That she fled Albania in order to  avoid  entering  into  that
             marriage.

         (f)  That following her arrest in the Netherlands she contacted her
             family but her father made it clear that she had brought shame
             upon the family and ruined his reputation.  He told  her  that
             if she returned he would happily kill her out of honour.

         (g)  That she fell into the hands  of  people  traffickers  in  the
             Netherlands.

         (h)  She was forced into prostitution.

         (i)  That she escaped and travelled to the UK.

         (j)  That she has relatives throughout Albania and her  traffickers
             told her that they have contacts  in  Albania  and  that  they
             would locate her if she returned there.

         (k)  If she returned to her home area she would be at risk from her
             family.

         (l)  That she is suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder  and
             severe depression and that if she is faced with being returned
             to Albania the possibility that she might  commit  suicide  is
             significant.

         (m)  That her mental health problems have  been  triggered  by  her
             past experiences and that her presence in the UK has led to an
             improvement in her condition and that her  return  to  Albania
             would be detrimental to her health.

30. In deciding this appeal, I have  taken  into  account  the  documentary
    evidence provided to the  Tribunal,  which  consists  of  a  Claimant's
    bundle comprising 62 pages, and a Respondent's bundle with  Annexes  A,
    G.

31. I have also considered the updated background evidence submitted by  Mr
    Mills, and TD and AD and I set out below paragraphs (d), (e),  and  (h)
    of the headnote to that decision;

         (d)  In the  past  few  years  the  Albanian  government  has  made
             significant efforts to improve its  response  to  trafficking.
             This includes widening the scope  of  legislation,  publishing
             the Standard Operating Procedures, implementing  an  effective
             National Referral Mechanism, appointing a new Anti-trafficking
             Co-ordinator,  and  providing  training  to  law   enforcement
             officials.  There is in general a Horvath-standard sufficiency
             of protection, but it will not be  effective  in  every  case.
             When considering whether or not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
             protection  for  a  victim  of  trafficking   her   particular
             circumstances must be considered.

         (e)  There is now in place a reception and reintegration  programme
             for victims of trafficking.  Returning victims of  trafficking
             are able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases'
             may be able to stay there for up  to  2  years.   During  this
             initial  period  after  return  victims  of  trafficking   are
             supported and protected.  Unless the individual has particular
             vulnerabilities such as physical or mental health issues, this
             option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable; whether it
             is must be determined on a case by case basis.

         (h)  Trafficked women  from  Albania  may  well  be  members  of  a
             particular social group on that account alone.   Whether  they
             are at risk of persecution on account of such  membership  and
             whether they will be able to access sufficiency of  protection
             from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual
             circumstances including but not limited to the following:

             (1)  The social status and economic standing of her family.

             (2)  The level of education of the victim  of  trafficking  or
                  her family.

             (3)  The victim of trafficking's state of health, particularly
                  her mental health.

             (4)  The presence of an illegitimate child.

             (5)  The area of origin.

             (6)  Age.

             (7)  What support network will be available.

32. I conclude that the Claimant may be at risk if she relocated to  Tirana
    and was not resident in a shelter.  This is because the  older  man  to
    whom she was forced to become engaged is  from  Tirana.   The  Claimant
    went to university in Tirana and met the man with whom she had a secret
    relationship, but this relationship was discovered by  her  family  who
    live in a village in northern Albania, and she was beaten by her father
    as a result of this.

33. I do not find that the background evidence, or  the  country  guidance,
    indicates that the Claimant, as a single woman without family  support,
    suffering with mental health problems, would not be at risk  in  Tirana
    if she did not have the protection of living in a shelter.

34. The medical evidence in the form of a report by Dr Callaway dated  18th
    June 2014, indicates that the Claimant was attending  regular  sessions
    with a specialised therapist at a rape and  sexual  abuse  centre.   Dr
    Callaway is her general practitioner and had increased  anti-depressant
    medication the Claimant was receiving.

35. Dr Cohen who I accept is an expert in  her  field,  prepared  a  report
    dated 12th December 2014.  She concluded that the Claimant suffers from
    PTSD and depression as a result of the violence she suffered  from  her
    father, and being  forced  into  prostitution  in  the  Netherlands  by
    traffickers.  Dr Cohen concludes at paragraph 57:

         57.  In my opinion she is need of specialist psychological  therapy
             for her PTSD and depression, and these conditions most  likely
             relate to her past experiences of both domestic  violence  and
             trafficking into prostitution.

36.  The  Upper  Tribunal  stress  in  TD  and  AD  that   the   particular
    circumstances of a Claimant must be considered, and one of the  factors
    that must be carefully considered is the Claimant's mental health.  The
    Tribunal stated in paragraph 101;

         101. Taking all of the evidence in the round we are satisfied  that
             there is a basic level of healthcare provided in the shelters,
             but that there must remain  concerns  about  the  quality  and
             extent of  it,  particularly  in  relation  to  mental  health
             treatment.  On the evidence before us, such care is limited to
             the prescription  of  anti-depressants  and  where  available,
             counselling by shelter staff who have no  formal  training  in
             psychiatry or psychology.

37. Background  evidence  and  guidance  indicates  that  there  may  be  a
    sufficiency of protection and a reasonable internal  relocation  option
    for an individual, in a shelter if returned to  Albania,  depending  on
    the particular circumstances of that individual.  I do  not  find  that
    this option would be a reasonable option for the Claimant, because  she
    does have particular vulnerabilities, such as significant mental health
    issues.

38. In this case it is common ground  that  the  Claimant  would  be  alone
    without any family support, and in fact she would be at risk  from  her
    father.  She has significant mental health issues and needs, and I find
    that the background evidence and country guidance,  does  not  indicate
    that the mental health treatment required  by  the  Claimant  would  be
    provided in those shelters.

39. As to life  in  Albania  after  leaving  a  shelter  I  set  out  below
    paragraphs (f) and (g) of the headnote to  TD and AD;

         (f)  Once asked to leave the shelter a victim  of  trafficking  can
             live on her own.   In  doing  so  she  will  face  significant
             challenges including, but not limited to,  stigma,  isolation,
             financial  hardship  and  uncertainty,  a  sense  of  physical
             insecurity and the subjective fear of being  found  either  by
             their families or former traffickers.  Some  women  will  have
             the capacity  to  negotiate  these  challenges  without  undue
             hardship.  There will however be victims of  trafficking  with
             characteristics,  such  as  mental  illness  or  psychological
             scarring, for whom living alone in these  circumstances  would
             not be reasonable.  Whether a particular Appellant falls  into
             that category will call for a careful assessment  of  all  the
             circumstances.

         (g)  Re-trafficking is a reality.  Whether that risks exists for an
             individual Claimant will turn in part on the factors that  led
             to the initial trafficking, and on her personal circumstances,
             including her background, age, and her willingness and ability
             to seek help  from  the  authorities.   For  a  proportion  of
             victims of trafficking, their situations may  mean  that  they
             are especially vulnerable to re-trafficking, or  being  forced
             into other exploitative situations.

40. The Claimant was found to be credible by the FTT, her evidence was that
    the traffickers in the Netherlands had contacts  in  Albania  and  they
    told her that they would be able to locate her if she returned there.

41. It is extremely difficult to ascertain where the Claimant could  safely
    relocate if she left a shelter.  The FTT finding  that  she  could  not
    return to her home area in the north of Albania has been preserved, and
    I conclude that the Claimant cannot safely relocate to Tirana,  because
    her former fianc� is from that city,  and  the  relationship  that  she
    previously carried on there was discovered by her family which  led  to
    ill-treatment.

42. The Claimant would face the challenges of stigma, isolation,  financial
    hardship and uncertainty, and I  find  because  of  her  mental  health
    problems, she will not be able to negotiate  these  challenges  without
    undue hardship.   The  medical  evidence  produced  on  behalf  of  the
    Claimant has not been challenged, and makes reference to  the  risk  of
    suicide, and the  need  for  specialised  counselling  because  of  the
    experiences she has suffered.

43. I therefore conclude, that  the  Claimant  has  proved,  to  the  lower
    standard of a reasonable degree of likelihood, that if she was returned
    to Albania, there  would  be  no  sufficiency  of  protection,  and  no
    reasonable internal relocation option.  As  it  is  accepted  that  the
    Claimant would be at risk in her home area, I find that she is entitled
    to a grant of asylum on the basis of her  membership  of  a  particular
    social group.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.  I allow  the  Claimant's  appeal
on asylum grounds.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity order pursuant to Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Claimant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 26th April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
No fee has been paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 26th April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
