
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08337/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8 April 2015                      |On 17 April 2015                     |
|Prepared on 8 April 2015             |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    N. M.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Cameroon who entered  the  United
         Kingdom as a visitor on 18 December 2013. She applied  on  16  June
         2014 for a variation of her leave on  the  basis  that  she  was  a
         refugee. That application was refused on 6  October  2014,  and  in
         consequence a removal decision was made in relation to her.

      2. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal  against  those  immigration
         decisions and  her  appeal  was  dismissed  by  decision  of  Judge
         Buchanan, promulgated on 8 December 2014.

      3.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, as drafted, raised two complaints;  that  the
         Judge had failed to adequately address her claim to be a member  of
         a particular social group, and, that the Article 8 appeal had  been
         dismissed summarily without adequate findings. That application was
         granted by Judge Levin on 9 January 2015 on the basis that although
         there was no merit in the first ground, the second was arguable.

      4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on 20 January  2015.  Neither
         party has formally applied for  permission  to  rely  upon  further
         evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
         Rules 2008.

      5. Thus the matter comes before me.

    Adjournment

      6. By Notice of Hearing dated 23  February  2015  the  Upper  Tribunal
         notified the Appellant, and her  representatives,  by  first  class
         post  of  the  listing  of  her  hearing  for  8  April  2015.  The
         Appellant's copy was sent to the only address she has ever provided
         to  the  Tribunal  as  her  home,  and  the  copy   sent   to   her
         representative was sent to his  professional  address.  Neither  of
         those Notices were returned through the dead letter system, and  on
         the evidence before me I am satisfied  that  service  was  effected
         thereby.

      7. Neither the Appellant  nor  her  representative  attended  for  the
         appeal.  No  request  for  an  adjournment  was  lodged,   and   no
         explanation for their non attendance was provided before the appeal
         was called on for hearing.

      8. In the light  of  their  non-attendance  my  clerk  made  telephone
         enquiry of the Appellant's representative in  the  application  for
         permission to appeal. This prompted a fax  confirming  that  he  no
         longer represented the Appellant, and had transferred her  file  to
         the firm that he  believed  were  her  new  representatives  on  27
         February 2015.

      9. Further telephone enquiries of these  representatives,  a  firm  of
         solicitors, resulted in confirmation by Mr Grant (a partner in that
         firm) that the firm had never formally accepted instructions to act
         for  the  Appellant.  Attempts  to  contact  her  to   obtain   her
         instructions, and to make an application on her  behalf  for  Legal
         Aid had failed, and thus they did not act for her.

     10. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the Appellant  was  served
         with notice of the hearing, and that she has failed to  attend  the
         hearing, and has failed to offer any explanation for that  failure.
         She has made no application for an adjournment of the hearing,  and
         no application has been  made  on  her  behalf  by  either  of  the
         representatives with whom she has been in contact.

     11. In those circumstances I am not satisfied that the Tribunal  should
         adjourn the hearing of the appeal of its own motion. To do so would
         not appear to serve any useful purpose. I am satisfied that  it  is
         appropriate to proceed with  the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
         Appellant.

    Ground 1

     12. There is no grant of permission to appeal in relation to ground  1.
         I deal with it however for the sake of completeness. Put shortly it
         is entirely misconceived. The Judge rejected as untrue, for reasons
         that are not challenged, the Appellant's account of her reasons for
         claiming asylum. There were  good  grounds  for  doing  so,  as  he
         explained in his decision, given  the  emails  that  were  said  to
         contain the death threats uttered against her by her  husband  were
         addressed in a name other than the one the  Appellant  claimed  was
         her own. In the circumstances there was no basis  left  upon  which
         the Judge could find, as the Appellant  claimed,  that  she  was  a
         member of a particular social group at risk of persecution  in  the
         event of return to the Cameroon.

    Ground 2

     13. The second ground complains about the approach taken to the Article
         8 appeal.  As  the  grounds  accept  the  Appellant  had  not  been
         delivered of any child at the date  of  the  hearing.  That  baby's
         birth was not due until January 2015. (Even if the  baby  had  been
         born before the hearing, the baby would have been removed with  the
         Appellant, and so her removal would not have  had  any  consequence
         for the "family life" enjoyed with her baby.)

     14. The Appellant denied any "family life" in the UK at the date of the
         hearing with anyone then living in the UK, in particular the father
         of her baby. (She must have conceived that baby  in  the  UK.)  Her
         Article 8 appeal could only therefore be approached at the date  of
         the hearing on the basis of her reliance upon such  "private  life"
         as she had established since arrival in December 2013 as a visitor.



     15. The Appellant had however offered no evidence to suggest  that  she
         had established  a  "private  life"  in  the  UK  of  any  material
         consequence. In the circumstances there was no  material  error  in
         the Judge's approach to the Article 8  appeal,  because  there  was
         never any merit in it. The Judge did not make express reference  to
         ss117A-D of the 2002 Act,  but  it  would  not  have  assisted  the
         Appellant if he had done  so.  He  would  have  been  compelled  to
         conclude that any "private life" she relied upon  had  been  formed
         whilst  her  immigration  status  was  precarious,  and  he   would
         therefore have been compelled to give  it  little  weight.  In  the
         circumstances I can see no basis upon which any  Tribunal  properly
         directed could have concluded  that  the  Appellant's  removal  was
         disproportionate to the public interest in her removal.




    DECISION

         The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 8 December 2014 contains no error of law in the dismissal of the
         Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside and
         remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.






    Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

    Dated 8 April 2015






    Direction regarding anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is
         granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
         proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
         direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
         Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
         being brought for contempt of court.






    Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

    Dated 8 April 2015


