
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08449/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Decision Sent                |
|On 20 January 2014                            |On 17 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     S B
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford instructed by HRS Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born  on  16  May  1976.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 February 2012 together with  her
    son.  On 10 May 2012 she claimed asylum.  The basis of the  appellant's
    claim was that after she came to the UK she had a relationship with her
    cousin which resulted in her becoming pregnant.   Her  second  son  was
    born on 7 November 2012 in the UK.  The appellant feared  that  if  she
    returned to Pakistan then her husband would kill her  because  she  had
    had a baby by another man whilst in the UK.  In addition,  she  claimed
    that she was separated from her husband in Pakistan because of domestic
    violence.

 3. On 16 August 2013, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim
    for asylum, for humanitarian protection  and  on  the  basis  that  her
    removal would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.  On that date, the Secretary of
    State made a decision refusing to vary the appellant's leave  to  enter
    as a visitor.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing
    on 7 October 2013, Judge Page dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  all
    grounds.  He rejected the appellant's evidence that she  had  been  the
    subject of domestic violence in Pakistan and that her relationship with
    her husband had broken down and they had separated.  Further, the judge
    rejected the appellant's account that she had had a  relationship  with
    her  cousin  in  the  UK  and  as  a  result   had   become   pregnant.
    Consequently, the judge was not satisfied that  the  appellant  was  at
    risk on return to Pakistan and so he dismissed  her  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and also under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  in
    essence on two grounds.  First, the judge had erred in law  in  failing
    to adjourn  the  appeal  at  the  request  of  the  appellant  who  was
    unrepresented at the hearing.  Secondly, the judge failed to take  into
    account the country guidance in relation to the position  of  women  in
    Pakistan, in particular the case of KA and Others (Domestic violence  -
    risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 00216 (IAC).

 6. On 31 October 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  J  Grant-Hutchison)
    granted the appellant permission to  appeal.   Thus,  the  appeal  came
    before me.

The Submissions

 7. First, Ms Radford, who represented the appellant, submitted that  Judge
    Page had been wrong in law not to adjourn the hearing in order to allow
    the appellant to seek legal representation.  She submitted, relying  on
    the Court of Appeal's decision in SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 184 that the issue was not whether it was open  to  Judge  Page  to
    refuse the adjournment but rather whether the proceedings  were,  as  a
    result, unfair.  Ms Radford, in essence, made two  discrete  arguments.
    First, she submitted that it was not the  appellant's  fault  that  her
    legal representatives had only told her  one  working  day  before  the
    hearing that they were unable to represent her.  Ms  Radford  submitted
    that the judge was required to do more than satisfy himself, as he  had
    set out in para 21, that the appellant had told the Home Office all the
    reasons why she was claiming asylum.  Ms Radford submitted that it  was
    incumbent upon Judge Page to make  further  enquiry  of  the  appellant
    about the prospect of the  appellant  obtaining  legal  representation,
    including appealing against the  refusal  of  legal  aid.   Ms  Radford
    submitted that it could not be fair  to  continue  with  the  appellant
    acting in person given  that  the  respondent  was  represented  by  an
    experienced Presenting Officer.  Ms Radford relied on the fact that the
    appellant would not have had time to prepare her case and also she  had
    with her her baby who was distracting.  Further, Ms  Radford  submitted
    that there were a  number  of  matters  raised  by  the  judge  in  his
    determination  which,  if  the  appellant  had  been  represented,  her
    representative could have dealt with, including  the  country  guidance
    case of KA and Others which  the  appellant  would  have  had  enormous
    difficulty in dealing with.

 8. Secondly, Ms Radford submitted that the  judge  had  erred  in  law  by
    assessing the appellant's credibility in the absence of the  background
    evidence, in particular in  relation  to  the  prevalence  of  domestic
    violence in Pakistan.  Ms  Radford  pointed  out  that  the  judge  had
    specifically declined to  "embark  upon  a  detailed  analysis  of  the
    evidence as to  the  current  situation  in  Pakistan"  (see  para  35)
    because, in his  judgment,  the  appeal  turned  upon  the  appellant's
    credibility and that if her account  were  true  she  was  at  risk  on
    return.

 9. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that there had  been
    no procedural unfairness.  He submitted that in order  to  adjourn  the
    appeal, the judge would have had to speculate that the appellant  would
    be able to obtain legal aid as the appellant had stated she  could  not
    (at least then) afford "private representation".  Mr Richards submitted
    that the judge had no other option but to proceed with the hearing.  He
    submitted that the judge allowed the appellant to put her case and  the
    judge simply did not believe her.  Mr Richards submitted that the judge
    had given ample reasoning as to why he did not accept the appellant was
    a witness of truth.

10. Secondly,  he  submitted  that  the  judge  clearly  had  in  mind  the
    background material with regard to domestic violence and KA and  Others
    which had been supplied in the respondent's bundle.

Discussion

11. The judge dealt with the appellant's application to adjourn the hearing
    at paras 19-21 as follows:

         "19. At the start of the hearing the appellant asked for  her  case
             to be  adjourned  so  that  she  could  find  a  solicitor  to
             represent her.  She had believed a solicitor  would  represent
             her but she had learned on Friday 4 October that she would not
             be granted legal aid.  I noted that a Senior Immigration Judge
             had refused this application on 20 September 2013  giving  the
             reason  that  no  legal  representative  had  agreed  to  act.
             Crowley & Company Solicitors wrote  on  6  September  2013  to
             advise that they  had  lodged  an  appeal  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant on a pro bono basis  and  asked  that  the  Tribunal
             records be amended as they were no longer instructed  by  her.
             The solicitor took the view that her case had a  50  per  cent
             chance of success.  She was dependent  on  legal  aid  as  she
             could not afford private representation.

         20.   Paragraph  21(2)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
             (Procedure) Rules 2005 requires that the  Tribunal  shall  not
             adjourn a hearing of an appeal on the application of  a  party
             unless satisfied that the appeal cannot  otherwise  be  justly
             determined.

         21.  I asked the appellant if she was satisfied that she  had  told
             the Home Office all of the reasons why she was claiming asylum
             and she confirmed that she  was  satisfied.   The  appellant's
             case was not complex and did not require any  legal  research.
             I was content that the  appellant's  asylum  interviews  could
             stand as her  evidence-in-chief  and  that  the  appeal  could
             justly be determined without an adjournment;  particularly  in
             these circumstances as legal aid had been refused.  I  refused
             the application to adjourn."

12. At para 22 the judge referred to how the hearing proceeded, given  that
    the appellant had a young baby with her as follows:

         "22. The appellant amplified the contents of her  asylum  claim  in
             evidence before me, in  a  hearing  where  the  appellant  was
             granted breaks when necessary to look  after  her  baby.   The
             hearing proceeded without difficulty."

13. I accept that the central issue is one of fairness,  whether  reflected
    in rule 21(2) of the First-tier Tribunal's Procedure  Rules  -  whether
    the appeal "cannot otherwise be justly determined" - or as a matter  of
    common law fairness (see AK (Iran) v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  941  per
    Sedley LJ at [25] and SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284  per
    Moses LJ at [13]).

14. To the extent that Ms Radford's submission  embraces  the  notion  that
    there is an  inherent  inequality  of  arms  where  the  respondent  is
    represented but the appellant is  not  in  an  appeal,  I  reject  that
    submission.  Nothing in the Procedure Rules or in  AK  (Iran)  supports
    such a proposition.  In AK, Sedley stated (at [25]):

         "There is...no inalienable right to representation."

15. Each case must necessarily turn upon its own circumstances.  It is  the
    common  experience  in  immigration  and  asylum  appeals  that  in   a
    substantial number of cases an appellant is not represented  but,  even
    without that representation, the appeal proceedings are patently  fair.
    The mere fact that the appellant had, as she claims, only been informed
    one working day before the hearing that she would  not  be  represented
    does not inevitably mean that the proceedings were unfair  because  she
    was not  able  properly  to  represent  herself  with,  to  the  extent
    necessary, the assistance of the judge to present her appeal.   To  the
    extent that it is suggested that the  judge  was  required  to  enquire
    whether the appellant would be able to obtain legal aid  and  therefore
    legal representation in the immediate future, the fact of the matter is
    that  she  did  not.   There  is  no  evidence  that   her   (previous)
    representatives, Crowley &  Co  were  seeking  to  appeal  against  the
    refusal of the grant of legal aid.  It is also noteworthy that  Crowley
    & Co wrote to the Tribunal  on  6  September  2013  indicating  to  the
    Tribunal that they were no longer  instructed  by  the  appellant.   It
    seems that the appellant  was  aware  that  representatives  (who  were
    Crowley & Co throughout) could not represent her  when  in  her  signed
    "Reply Notice" to the Tribunal dated 18 September 2013 she stated that:



          "My solicitor has withdrawn from my case.  I need  an  adjournment
         of 28 days to find a new  representative  and  obtain  CLR  for  my
         application."

16. The judge enquired of the appellant whether there was any aspect of her
    claim that she had not told the Home  Office  and  she  confirmed  that
    there was not.  It was pure speculation whether  the  appellant,  given
    that  she  told  the  judge  she  could   not   then   obtain   private
    representation, would be able to obtain legal aid for representation in
    the immediate future.  The judge took into account that  the  appellant
    had a young baby with her and, as he pointed out  in  para  22  of  his
    determination, he granted breaks in order for  the  appellant  to  look
    after  the  baby  and,  he  records,  the  hearing  proceeded  "without
    difficulty".  Even though the appellant in her witness  statement  says
    that her son was in her arms throughout and at one point he  fell  down
    which  was  distracting,  given  that  the  judge  was  alive  to   the
    difficulties faced by the appellant of representing  herself  with  her
    young baby present, I am not persuaded that the appellant was unable to
    represent herself.

17. This was not an obviously complex case which turned upon  the  question
    of the appellant's credibility.  In these  circumstances,  it  was  not
    inherently unfair for the judge to refuse the  appellant's  application
    for an adjournment and to proceed in the absence of representation.

18. Additionally, Ms Radford submits that the appellant was, in effect, put
    at a disadvantage during the hearing in  giving  her  evidence  and  in
    dealing with the issues raised.  Initially, Ms Radford (on the basis of
    the grounds) submitted  that  the  judge  had  acted  unfairly  by  not
    allowing the  appellant  to  make  any  closing  submissions.   In  her
    statement, the appellant (at para 2) states that she does not  remember
    being asked to make any arguments in support of her claim.  Having read
    the judge's Record of Proceedings, Ms Radford accepted that  she  could
    no longer rely on this as the appellant had clearly made submissions on
    her case at the end of the hearing.  I see no basis for suggesting that
    the judge conducted the hearing other than in a wholly fair manner.

19. In her submissions, Ms Radford sought to identify a number of  passages
    in the judge's determination which, she submitted, if the appellant had
    been represented, could have been dealt with by the representative  and
    therefore, in the absence of representation, the hearing was unfair.

20. Although Ms Radford did  not  seek  to  argue  that  these  matters  in
    themselves amounted to an error of law, taken with  the  second  ground
    upon which Ms Radford seeks to rely, namely the failure to consider the
    background evidence in the country guidance case of KA and Others, I am
    satisfied that the judge's decision cannot stand.

21. First, in para 35 the judge states that: "I  can  safely  discount  any
    possibility of the appellant's evidence about getting pregnant  by  her
    cousin [MB] being true."

22. To support that conclusion, the judge  essentially  relied  upon  three
    reasons.  First, he relied upon discrepancies in the  appellant's  oral
    evidence concerning her cousin's name which she initially (consistently
    with her interview) gives as "BM" and then, when asked why he had  less
    names than her husband, she said his name was "BMMN" (see paras 26  and
    37-38).  Secondly, the judge  doubted  that  the  claimed  relationship
    between the appellant and her cousin took place as he  did  not  accept
    that it is plausible that her cousin would be  painting  her  brother's
    house (which is where she claims that she conceived her child)  because
    her cousin did not live in the same area as her brother but lived  some
    distance away.  Thirdly, in para 36 the judge rejected the  appellant's
    evidence that her husband had last entered the UK in 2005 on the  basis
    that:

         "Her evidence is not conclusive of that because I did not find  the
         appellant to be a credible witness in describing the  circumstances
         in which she became pregnant".

23. The judge then continued:

         "I am not satisfied to the low standard of proof that she has had a
         baby in the United Kingdom fathered  by  her  cousin  [BM].   If  I
         cannot be satisfied to the low standard of proof of  her  basis  of
         claim then I cannot be satisfied that the appellant  has  told  the
         truth in claiming that her marriage  to  her  husband  is  over  by
         reason of domestic violence or that he  is  in  Pakistan  where  he
         would do her harm upon return.  So it  follows  that  I  cannot  be
         satisfied that he is not the father either."

24. In my judgment, those latter two reasons and the progression to  reason
    that he doubted the appellant's claim in para 36  cannot  stand  up  to
    scrutiny.

25. First, it is not inherently implausible that even  if  the  appellant's
    cousin lived "some distance away" (which is  in  any  event  vague  and
    undefined) that he would not be present in the house of the appellant's
    brother painting it at his request.  It does not appear that this issue
    was explored with the appellant in her evidence.  It  was  not,  in  my
    judgment, an adequate reason to doubt the core of her claim based  upon
    a sexual relationship with her cousin.

26. Secondly, it was pure speculation to infer that because the appellant's
    husband had been granted entry clearance in the past, then despite  the
    appellant's evidence to the contrary, he could have been in the  UK  in
    2012 and so could have been the father of the appellant's child.

27. Thirdly, if these reasons were insufficient to  doubt  the  appellant's
    evidence about her relationship with her  cousin,  it  did  not  follow
    (even if it could otherwise) that the  appellant's  evidence  that  her
    marriage to her husband was over as a result of domestic  violence  was
    not a matter on which she was to be  believed.   The  only  independent
    reason justifying that finding is at para 42 where  the  judge  doubted
    that, if the appellant were a victim of domestic violence, her  husband
    would have given her permission to bring her first son to the  UK  with
    her.  This was not a matter which appears  to  have  been  put  to  the
    appellant in her oral evidence.

28. In addition, the judge made  his  adverse  finding,  in  particular  in
    relation to her claim to be the subject of domestic  violence,  without
    any reference to the background evidence as set out in KA  and  Others.
    The background evidence was certainly a relevant matter which  a  judge
    should  take  into  account  in  assessing  the   credibility   of   an
    individual's account.

29. It may be, despite the consistency of the background evidence with  the
    core of an individual's claim, that  an  individual's  evidence  is  so
    unworthy  of  credit  due  to,  for  example  patent  and  inexplicable
    inconsistencies or obvious untruths that the individual is a person who
    cannot be believed on any issue and a judge would be entitled,  despite
    the consistency with the background evidence, to reject the appellant's
    account.  Here, however, the judge's reasoning that led him  to  reject
    the appellant's account is not sufficiently robust to  fall  into  that
    category of case.  In other words, the  background  evidence  may  have
    made a difference to the judge's conclusion on  whether  the  appellant
    had established a significant part of her account, namely that she  was
    the subject of domestic violence in Pakistan.

30. For these reasons, although I  do  not  accept  that  the  judge  acted
    unfairly in refusing the appellant's request for an adjournment  to  be
    legally represented, his reasoning is inadequate to sustain his adverse
    credibility  finding.   To  that  extent,  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    decision involved the making of an error of law and it cannot stand.

31. Both representatives agreed that, if an error of law were  established,
    this was an appropriate case to remit to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    order that the appeal can be heard de novo.

32. Having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement
    and to the extent and nature of fact finding  required,  I  agree  that
    that is the appropriate disposal of this appeal.

Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

34. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Page) de novo.





                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

