
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08467/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2017                            |On 7 February 2017            |
|Decision given orally                         |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smyth, Kesar & Co Solicitors (Tonbridge)
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. In a decision promulgated 25 February 2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hunter dismissed on all grounds an appeal by the appellant,  who  is  a
    national of Iraq, where he was born in 1990.  He also made an anonymity
    order.

 2. There is a long procedural history which in summary is as follows.  The
    appellant arrived here in  July  2007  and  sought  asylum,  which  was
    refused  but  he  was  given  discretionary  leave  due  to  his   age.
    Application was made the following year for variation  of  that  leave,
    which was refused by the Secretary  of  State  in  February  2010.   An
    appeal against that decision was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on 1 August 2010.  Application for permission to appeal  that  decision
    was refused.

 3. The appellant made further representations to the Secretary  of  State,
    which were refused on 10 February 2014, apparently because of  argument
    over the lawfulness of that decision having regard  to  Ahmadi  (s.  47
    decision: validity; Sapkota) Afghanistan [2012] UKUT  147  (IAC).   The
    Secretary of State issued  a  supplementary  decision  letter  dated  7
    October 2014.  It is the appeal against  that  decision  which  is  now
    before me.

 4. Permission to appeal the decision of FtTJ Hunter  was  granted  on  the
    renewed application for reasons given in the decision of UTJ Frances on
    11 June 2015.  Following a hearing  on  3  August  2015,  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Alis issued his decision giving reasons for finding that
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hunter was infected by  error
    and set a date for the remaking of the decision before him.

 5. On 22 September 2015 DUTJ Alis remade that  decision  and  for  reasons
    given in his decision promulgated 5 October 2015 (and  dated  the  same
    day), he explained that he had set aside the earlier decision  by  FtTJ
    Hunter save for the decision under Article 8  which  was  unchallenged.
    He  remade  the  decisions  in  the  appeal  on  asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and Articles 2 and 3 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  and
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  Although it was  unnecessary  for
    him to do so, he upheld the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    respect of Article 8.  Nothing turns on that.  It has been conceded  by
    Mr Smyth that Article 8 is not pursued.

 6. The matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on 12 November  2015,
    in relation to an application for permission to appeal to the Court  of
    Appeal dated 21 October  2015.   Her  provisional  view  was  that  the
    circumstances of the case fell within Rule 45(1)(b)  having  regard  to
    the promulgation of the country guidance decision in AA (Article 15(c))
    Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) during the interregnum between  hearing
    the appeal and promulgation of the decisions of  DUTJ  Alis;  decision.
    The provisional view expressed by UTJ Reeds was that had DUTJ Alis been
    aware of the country guidance case, he would have applied  the  country
    guidance decision in AA Iraq.

 7. I am not sure that I have a complete correspondence file but it appears
    that the appellant's representatives wrote to the Upper Tribunal on  12
    November 2015.  UTJ Reeds made a further decision dated 14  April  2016
    in which she refers  to  an  application  by  the  appellant  dated  12
    November 2015 although this may have been an error and she intended  to
    refer to the application for permission to appeal  that  triggered  her
    first decision.  In summary, she refined her  earlier  decision  of  12
    November 2015.  She observed that as no proposal had been  received  to
    the contrary she gave directions in terms that  the  decision  of  DUTJ
    Alis should be set aside and that the appeal be listed before the Upper
    Tribunal on a date to be fixed.  Other directions were  given  for  the
    steps to be taken by the parties.

 8. The appeal was listed before UTJ Eshun on 9 June 2016.   She  adjourned
    that hearing although issued a decision and  directions  dated  9  June
    2016 clarifying that DUTJ Alis' decision of 3 August 2015 finding error
    of law was included in the set aside decision by UTJ Reeds.

 9. On 20 June 2016 the appellant's  solicitors  took  the  first  step  in
    judicial review proceedings by  issuing  a  pre-action-protocol  letter
    essentially complaining about the  absence  of  reasons  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal for the decision to set aside the decision  finding  error  of
    law as opposed to the remaking.  There was  also  a  challenge  to  the
    power of UTJ Reeds to  set  aside  the  decision  of  DUTJ  Alis.   The
    judicial proceedings have not been pursued and do not  require  further
    consideration.

10. The appeal was then listed for  hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Goldstein on 13 July 2016.  He has since retired and it is unclear what
    occurred at hearing.

11. The matter came before me as Principal Resident Judge for review of the
    file and I wrote to the parties in the following terms  on  8  November
    2016:

         "The file in this case has been brought to my attention.  You  will
         be aware that the appeal has a considerable history.   The  present
         status is that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
         the appeal on eight grounds is unchallenged but that other  aspects
         of the decision are the subject  of  an  appeal  to  the  Tribunal.
         Permission  has  been  given  but  there  has  been  no   effective
         determination.  Judge Goldstein heard the appeal on  13  July  2016
         but  retired  shortly  afterwards  without  apparently  making  any
         determination and I am afraid it is  impracticable  to  obtain  one
         from him.  One of the  key  questions  is  whether  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  adequately  directed  itself  on  the  law  of   internal
         relocation.  I have considered the decision and I am bound  to  say
         that there does appear to be considerable merit in this point.   In
         addition there was the difficulty of the emergence of  new  country
         guidance at precisely the same time as Judge Alis, the most  recent
         person  to  consider  the  appeal  substantively,  was  making  his
         decision.  In the circumstances the most pragmatic solution may  be
         to detect error of law without much ado as suggested above and  set
         the First-tier Tribunal's decision aside and remit  for  a  further
         hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  which  all  relevant
         matters can be addressed in the light of the current circumstances.
          Your submissions on this course of action will  be  considered  if
         received within fourteen days of the date of this letter."

12. The appellant's solicitors responded to that letter.  It  appears  they
    asked for a copy of my letter to be resent.  I am not sure why, but  on
    3 January 2017 they wrote to say this:

         "We agree that the most pragmatic solution given the history of the
         case including the retirement of Judge Goldstein may  be  to  remit
         the appeal for a further hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
         However, we should emphasise that as a Kurd from Kirkuk our  client
         has previously been accepted by the respondent to be at risk in his
         home area  (which  is  consistent  with  the  most  recent  country
         guidance AA).  Therefore we would ask for a direction  to  be  made
         that the sole issue for the First-tier Tribunal to determine is the
         reasonableness of internal relocation."

13. Unfortunately my letter does not seem to have reached  Ms  Holmes,  who
    has represented the respondent today.  After giving her the opportunity
    of considering my letter and conferring with Mr Smyth on behalf of  the
    appellant the parties agree that my proposed course is one that  should
    be adopted.  They both accept that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
    when considering the option of internal flight or internal relocation.

14. Accordingly I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal insofar
    as that issue alone is concerned.  In the light of the findings of fact
    which need to be made and assessed, I  am  satisfied  that  the  better
    course is for the case to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    the decision to be remade.  For  the  avoidance  of  any  doubt  it  is
    accepted by the Secretary of State, as acknowledged by Ms Holmes,  that
    there is no challenge to the finding that the  appellant  would  be  at
    risk of harm in his home area and that the issue to  be  considered  by
    the First-tier Tribunal is that of  internal  relocation  elsewhere  in
    Iraq.


Signed        [pic]             Date:      06 February 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

