
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08934/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 March 2016                         |On 12 April  2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    A S A
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Pickering, Counsel, instructed by Parker
                    Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fisher (the judge), promulgated on 5  October  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal was against  the
    Respondent's decision of 27 May 2015, refusing a protection claim  made
    on 9 February 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a Yemeni national who was previously resident in UAE.

The judge's decision

 3. The judge found that the Appellant's UAE residence permit  had  not  in
    fact been revoked by the authorities there, as claimed (paragraph  20).
    There was no country information to suggest that  the  UAE  and  Yemeni
    authorities provided strong support to each other (paragraph 21).

 4. Having noted the Presenting  Officer's  position  that  the  Respondent
    would seek to return the Appellant to UAE only, the  judge  found  that
    the residence permit for that country had lapsed due to the Appellant's
    time away. However,  he  found  that  the  Appellant  could  renew  the
    document without  great  difficulty  (paragraph  23).  The  Appellant's
    credibility was damaged by his failure to disclose information  to  the
    United Kingdom immigration authorities (paragraph 24). In paragraph  25
    the judge found that the Appellant had had "some involvement  with,  or
    support for" the Southern Movement. The claimed detention in Yemen  was
    rejected, as was the claimed escape from that country to  UAE.  It  was
    concluded that the Appellant  was  not  at  risk  in  either  potential
    removal destination. An  argument  based  upon  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive was rejected in paragraph 27.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. In her original concise grounds, Miss Pickering argued that  the  judge
    erred in speculating that the Appellant could renew his  UAE  residence
    permit and in  failing  to  give  reasons  for  rejecting  the  claimed
    detention in Yemen.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the first ground only by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dineen on 29 October 2015.

The hearing before me

 7. Miss Pickering applied to rely on ground two of her  original  grounds.
    There was no opposition to this from  Mr  Dewison  and  I  granted  the
    application.

 8. Miss Pickering also sought to amend her  grounds  by  adding  a  third,
    based upon Article 15(c). I refused this application. First, there  was
    no reason why it had not been included in the original grounds. Second,
    much of the evidence relied on by Miss  Pickering  in  support  of  her
    putative argument post-dates the judge's decision. Third, in any event,
    it appears as  though  the  potential  for  application  Article  15(c)
    relates to the north of Yemen, whereas the  Appellant  originates  from
    the south.

 9. Miss Pickering relied on her two grounds. There was no evidence  before
    the judge as to how the Appellant would renew the permit.  It  was  not
    that straightforward to do. In respect of ground  two,  there  were  no
    reasons on the detention issue.  That  was  a  material  error.  I  was
    referred to paragraph 20 of the RFRL.

10. Mr Dewison relied on the Respondent's rule 24 response. The Appellant's
    core account had been rejected by the judge and so  the  detention  was
    also rejected. The Appellant left Yemen on his own passport and was not
    ejected from the country. In terms of the  UAE  permit,  there  was  no
    evidence from the Appellant to show why he could not renew it.  He  had
    family there and had had permits in the past.

Decision on error of law

11. There are no material errors in the judge's decision.

12. The judge was entirely justified in findings that the  UAE  permit  had
    not been cancelled or revoked by the authorities. That finding  is  not
    challenged by the Appellant.

13. The judge was correct to find that the permit had lapsed because of the
    Appellant's time away from the UAE. In my view,  it  was  open  to  the
    judge then to conclude that the Appellant would be able  to  renew  the
    permit, or at least conclude that there were no  significant  obstacles
    in his path, given his previous residence, the presence of  his  family
    in UAE, and the lack of any adverse interest in him by the authorities.



14. The flaw in Miss Pickering's argument is that it was for the  Appellant
    to adduce evidence of any material difficulties in renewing the permit.
    He had a permit previously, which had not been revoked.  There  was  no
    indication on the face of the evidence before the judge  that  problems
    would ensue if and when a renewal application was made. Miss  Pickering
    suggested that such problems might exist, but there is nothing  in  the
    grounds to that effect, and in  any  event  I  am  not  satisfied  that
    relevant evidence was cited to the judge.

15. Even if it were said that the judge was speculating about  the  renewal
    of the permit, there is no material error  because  the  burden  rested
    with the Appellant.

16. In light of the above and the judge's findings as a whole, it was  open
    to him to conclude that there was no risk to the Appellant on return to
    UAE. That country  was  of  course  the  Appellant's  former  place  of
    habitual residence. On this basis alone,  the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    going to fail (the renewal of the UAE permit  being  an  administrative
    matter going only to the issue of feasibility of return there).

17. Turning to the detention issue. It is right that there are  no  express
    reasons given for the rejection of the claimed detention, and  this  is
    an error. Is it material?

18. I agree with Mr Dewison that the judge had rejected the other  specific
    core elements of the account, such as the manner of his departure  from
    Yemen: on his own passport and without being  expelled  by  the  Yemeni
    authorities, or being of adverse attention to the UAE authorities.  The
    claimed detention was part and parcel of a fabricated account, and  the
    judge rejected the entirety of the specific account put forward to her,
    including the detention.

19. It is of course right that the judge accepted that  the  Appellant  had
    had "some involvement with, or support for" the Southern Movement. This
    is a somewhat generalised finding. It does not follow that as a  result
    of the finding, the specific  aspects  of  the  claimed  detention  and
    escape, etc., therefore  became  credible.  The  nature  and  level  of
    Southern Movement support is not set out in any detail.  That  lack  of
    particularity is not challenged in the grounds. Having  looked  at  the
    country information (including that cited in paragraph 20 of the RFRL),
    there is nothing to indicate that those who are simply  supporters  are
    routinely targeted, or indeed that there is  necessarily  a  reasonably
    likelihood of this occurring.

20. In view of the above, I conclude that the error is not material.

21. The Appellant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the judge therefore stands.

Anonymity

22. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant from serious harm, having regard to the interests of  justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                       Date:  31 March 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date:  31 March 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
