
[pic]
IAC-CH-AP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08249/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th August 2015                  |On 16th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                    miss liyanage Niluka Sanjeewani silva
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Aghayere, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a 37 year  old  Sri  Lankan  national  who  appeals  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  her  appeal  against  a
    refusal of asylum.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal set out in detail the Appellant's case  between
    [4] and 16, the evidence and submissions between  [17]  and  [37],  the
    standard and burden of proof at [38], the contra case between [39]  and
    [47], and country background  evidence  between  [48]  and  [51].   The
    consideration of the parties' positions is detailed.  No  issue  as  to
    the accuracy of the judge's understanding of either  party's  case  was
    made before me.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. In summary the Appellant's claim is that in 2005  following  successful
    studies in Sri Lanka she was appointed as a project  assistant  to  the
    Vocational Training Authority of Sri Lanka which operated  as  part  of
    the Ministry of Youth Affairs and  Skills  Development.   In  2010  the
    project that she was working on, largely funded by the  South  Koreans,
    ground to a halt.  At the time  she  contacted  and  told  trade  union
    officials that as a result  of  conversations  with  her  director  and
    having overheard some of his telephone calls, it was her view that  the
    project had ground to a halt because funds were being diverted to Basil
    Rajapaksa, a government minister involved in the  economic  development
    of Sri Lanka and brother of the then Prime Minister, Mahinda Rajapaksa.
     At the Tribunal hearing the Appellant added that on refelction she now
    thought the interview  with  the  trade  union,  rather  than  being  a
    response to her expressed dissatisfaction with work,  was because  "the
    Trade Union were sent to her by the politicians to find  out  what  she
    knew".

 4. There was no official investigation or action taken as a result of  her
    disclosure but some months after the project had  closed  and  she  had
    been moved  to  other  work,  this  time  in  the  government  planning
    department, she received sporadic telephone calls of a non-specific but
    threatening character.  Between 2010 and July 2012 she was involved  in
    various other government departments  and  finding  that  she  did  not
    advance left employment in July 2012, and successfully  obtained  entry
    clearance as a student to the United Kingdom.  She arrived in the UK in
    October 2012 and her student visa was valid until 21st  May  2014.   On
    21st May 2014 she applied for asylum on the basis that she had recently
    been advised by her parents that the police had visited their  property
    knowing that she was going to come back and telling them that when  she
    did she had to come to the police station and until  she  returned  and
    reported to the police station her father  had  to  go  to  the  police
    station every Sunday to report.  That visit took place on 9th May 2014.
     Since then the Appellant claims that two summonses  have  been  issued
    requiring her to report at the Kadawatha  Magistrates'  Court  on  27th
    June 2014 and 5th September 2015 and following  the  non-appearance  on
    5th September 2014, a warrant was issued  by  the  Magistrates'  Court.
    Confirmation of that position is set out in a letter from a Sri  Lankan
    attorney, who has attached copies of the relevant summonses and  arrest
    warrant.

 5. Between [52] and [85] the judge sets out what he made of  the  evidence
    and the arguments.  At  [60] to  [63]:

         "60. The appellant's claim to be a whistle-blower is at  the  heart
             of her claim.  Her answers  at  interview  and  her  statement
             describe  events  but  do  not   disclose   any   unauthorised
             disclosure  of  information.   She  became  aware  of  corrupt
             activities by the President's brother, because  she  overheard
             telephone conversations and was informed why the  project  she
             was involved with was being closed down.  She claimed she told
             members of her Trade Union and was interviewed.  She has never
             claimed that she released this  information  into  the  public
             domain e.g. by informing the press or media or any  individual
             outside her workplace.  If this  was  whistle-blowing  it  was
             very limited in nature.

          61.  The  appellant  was  not  confronted  by  any  individual  in
             government (Minister or Senior  Civil  Servant)  and  she  was
             interviewed very briefly by Trade Union members.  She was  not
             reprimanded, disciplined or dismissed.   Importantly  she  was
             not interviewed by the police or any person  in  the  security
             services.  Although she claims that  she  was  transferred  to
             another part of the organisation this is hardly surprising  as
             she was employed as a project assistant and the  project  upon
             which she was working had been wound down.

         62.  The appellant claimed she left her job and came to the  UK  to
             further her education.  She undertook an  MBA  course  at  the
             University of Sunderland and obtained her degree in April 2014
             (see MBA certificate at page 66 of A's bundle).

         63.  The appellant claims that she booked her  flight  how  in  May
             2014 and was informed by her family that the  government  knew
             about her impending return to Sri Lanka and police had visited
             her home asking for her.   She  was  asked  at  her  Screening
             Interview on 21 May 2014 whether she was subject to an  arrest
             warrant or wanted by any law enforcement agency for an offence
             in any country.  She replied 'I don't know' (SI 5.2).  At  her
             appeal hearing she produced a  document  purporting  to  be  a
             Warrant of Arrest issued by a Judge at Kadawatha  Magistrates'
             Court.  It is dated 5 September 2014.   The  appellant  claims
             she was not told by her  father  about  this  warrant  or  two
             summonses addressed to her dated 9 June  2014  and  14  August
             2014 requiring her to attend court  on  27  June  2014  and  5
             September 2014.  The summonses were addressed to  her  at  her
             home address."

 6. The judge goes on to look at the documentary evidence brought  forward,
    and importantly and correctly, does so before drawing  any  conclusions
    as to the Appellant's credibility.  Difficulties with the  summons  and
    warrant identified  include the following:

          a) The summonses dates show they are issued after the police  had
             apparently visited the property on 9th May, and had been  told
             that she was not in Sri Lanka,

          b) The documents show that they had been "served" to her  at  her
             home address, i.e. her parents' address,

          c) Her lack of knowledge of the summonses having been issued,  as
             well as the fact of the warrant, by the time of her  interview
             on 16th September 2014, when  she  was  in  contact  with  her
             family,

          d) The inconsistency between the issue of and chronology  of  the
             summonses and warrants  with  the  information  that  she  had
             received from her father,

          e) The explanation that  her father had not mentioned  either  of
             the summonses to her to prevent worry begin incoherent when he
             had told her  of the police visit and  of  his  obligation  to
             report , and  undermined  by   his  failure  to   provide  any
             evidence in support of her appeal,

          f) The failure of the Appellant's mother, in her letter  for  the
             appeal, to mention police visits, summons or warrant.

 7. At [67] the judge found it undermining of her account  that  no  action
    had been taken against her for four years, and  that  the  summons  was
    issued in June 2014, i.e. three weeks after the Appellant  had  claimed
    asylum.  The judge considers at [68] the  evidence  of  the  attorney's
    letter.  The fact that it is dated 28th  November,  and  the  illegible
    signatures on the documents attached are undermining.

 8. The grounds assert that the  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    "limited whistle-blower" and that it was incumbent upon him  to  assess
    risk based on that positive finding of fact. Looking at the decision in
    the round I am satisfied that the judge did not find that the Appellant
    was a whistle-blower, limited or otherwise. Reading the decision  as  a
    whole I am satisfied that all the judge is doing at paragraph  [60]  is
    merely drawing attention  to  the  limited  scope  of  the  Appellant's
    claimed activity.

 9.  The  judge's  considerations  are  clearly  couched  in  language   of
    assessment rather than concluded findings; at [67], "if her account  is
    true ....", at [70], where the judge refers to the Appellant's apparent
    ability to continue working for the government  department  "where  she
    claims to have been a whistle-blower" for  more  than  one  year  after
    being interviewed by her trade union.

10. The judge continues to review evidence  through  to  [73]  and  reminds
    himself of the relevant test set out  in  the  case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed
    (starred) [2002] UKIAT 00439, a position which  I  pause  to  note  was
    confirmed in the case of PJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1011,
    before concluding at [75]:

          "75. The documentary evidence in the form of warrant and summonses
         are not documents upon which reliance can be placed."

11. Taking account of the limited character and quality  of  the  evidence,
    the difficulties identified by the judge that is a  finding  consistent
    with the jurisprudence. It was not significantly challenged and was not
    a matter upon which permission was granted.

12. If any doubt remained in  the  Appellant's  mind  that  the  judge  had
    rejected her claim to be a whistle-blower,  it  is  conclusively  dealt
    with at [76],

         76. "... the Appellant's core story  about  her  being  a  whistle-
         blower and receiving anonymous threats by telephone, is not  to  be
         relied upon.  I conclude that her core story  is  not  a  true  and
         accurate account of events."

13. That is not undermined by  the judge also writing at [76],

         "76. I also accept that she had been  interviewed  by  Trade  Union
         Representatives.  However I do not accept that  such  an  interview
         amounted to harassment or persecution.  It  is  apparent  from  her
         evidence that she  had  never  been  arrested  or  interrogated  in
         connection with whistle-blowing and she had not  spoken  to  anyone
         outside work about the corruption at high level in  the  government
         department where she worked."

    All the judge is doing is rejecting the Appellant's  late  evidence  at
    the Tribunal hearing, that the interview with the trade union  resulted
    ([21] refers), because "the  Trade  Union  were  sent  to  her  by  the
    politicians to find out what she knew" rather than being a response  to
    her expressed dissatisfaction with work.

14. The judge under a heading "Conclusions", reasserts   between  [77]  and
    [88], that the Appellant has not established that she has been harassed
    or threatened for whistle-blowing, or been  sought  by  the  police  or
    faces criminal sanctions. Further  that  he  does  not  accept  that  a
    warrant has been issued for her arrest, or that she will face any trial
    on return.

     15. The grounds go  to  extremes   when  asserting  that  the   judge's
         finding at [82],

         "82. I take the view that there is  no  reliable  evidence  showing
         that the Appellant is a whistle-blower within the usual meaning  of
         that expression or that an arrest warrant has been  issued  against
         her",

    can be read in  the  context of the  decision  as  a  whole,  including
    [60],  to show that the judge found that the Appellant was  in  fact  a
    limited whistle-blower, and that he  overlooked assessing risk on  that
    basis.

16. The decision is a lengthy and detailed consideration of the Appellant's
    claim, which was fully understood by the judge.  The assessment of  the
    Appellant's credibility is correctly undertaken through the lens of the
    documentary evidence produced, and bearing in mind the extent and state
    of the evidence as a whole.  The challenge is a narrow one  which  does
    not encompass the judges findings and reasoning in other respects.

17. If the Judge, by inference, did accept that the Appellant had,  to  the
    low standard of proof, told the Trades  Union  that  she  believed  her
    project  folded  because  of  the  diversion  of  money  to  the   then
    president's brother, it is clear that the judge thought  that  if  that
    asserted revelation held any significance, in terms of whistle  blowing
    so as to impute a perception of anti government activity, the Appellant
    would have suffered adverse consequences at the time. The  judge  found
    that she did not because she  stayed  in  the  same  department  for  a
    considerable period after.  He did not believe her  account  of  having
    received any threatening phone calls. To the contrary the  judge  noted
    the evidence was that she continued to enjoy a government position  for
    years.   The judge found  that  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  facing
    consequences now, as evidenced by the  documents,  was  not  made  out.
    There was no past persecution, and the evidence of  future  persecution
    was predicated on unreliable  evidence,  so  that  even  on  the  lower
    standard of proof, risk on return was not established.

18. In context the judge's use of the words whistle blowing is  his  merely
    picking up  on  the  words  used  by  the  Appellant  to  describe  her
    activities. The grounds finesse the use of the words  "whistle  blower"
    as a term of  art,  but  in  doing  so  are  misconceived  because  the
    fundamental point is that the judge examined all the evidence and  made
    sustainable findings of fact, correctly self directed and found no risk
    on return. The adverse credibility findings are rooted in the  evidence
    and are cogent, to the point that the judge's  conclusion  is  properly
    open on the evidence.

19. The grounds seek to impute an error arising from nuance  and  inference
    available because of, at worst, infelicitous drafting, and they do  not
    withstand a full consideration of the decision. For  those  reasons  in
    the event that I were  remaking  the  decision  so  as  to  remedy  the
    infelicitous drafting my conclusion would be the same.

20. The decision dismissing the appeal is  not  vitiated  by  any  material
    error of law and stands.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
