
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08872/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Sent         |
|On 25th June 2013                               |On 3rd July 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                              GLADMORE DLAMINI
                          (no Order for anonymity)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr J Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Zimbabwe, born on  15th  June  1981.
    He entered the UK illegally on 12th April 2001, but did not  apply  for
    asylum until 13th July 2012.  That  application  was  refused  for  the
    reasons given in the Respondent's letter of 14th September  2012.   The
    Appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal A W Khan (the Judge) on 30th  October  2012.   He  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights
    grounds for the reasons given in his determination dated  9th  November
    2012.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on  4th
    January 2013 such permission was granted.

 2. The appeal first came before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  on
    14th May 2013.  On that occasion it was found that there was  an  error
    of law in the decision of the  Judge  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    written Decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy dated 14th May
    2013.  However, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy,  although  he
    decided to set aside the decision of the  Judge,  did  not  proceed  to
    remake the decision but instead adjourned the hearing for the  decision
    to be remade on the basis that the findings of the  Judge  set  out  at
    paragraphs 12 to 17 inclusive of his Determination be preserved.   That
    is the matter which comes before me today

The Hearing

 3. At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both  parties.   Mr  Singh
    addressed me first when he argued that it was safe for the Appellant to
    return to Zimbabwe.  It was now more than ten years since the Appellant
    had left Zimbabwe and the authorities would have no  interest  in  him.
    He had no political profile, and had not been politically active in the
    UK.  Even taking the Appellant's case at its highest,  he  was  not  at
    risk on return to his home town of Masvingo.  Following the decision in
    CM (EM country guidance; disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059
    (IAC) it was also safe for the  Appellant  to  relocate  to  Harare  or
    Bulawayo.

 4. In response, the Appellant, who was unrepresented,  said  that  he  had
    been active in the MDC at the time that he had  left  school,  and  was
    opposed to ZANU-PF.  Therefore it would not be safe for him  to  return
    to Masvingo.  He had been born in Bulawayo, but  now  had  no  home  or
    family there.  These comments also applied to Harare.

Findings and Reasons

 5. I must decide this appeal in accordance with the findings of the  Judge
    made at paragraphs  12  to  17  inclusive  of  his  Determination.   To
    summarise, those findings were that the Appellant  had  fabricated  his
    account of being involved in political activities with the  MDC  whilst
    living in Zimbabwe, and the Judge found that the  Appellant  had  never
    had any political involvement in Zimbabwe, nor in the  UK.   The  Judge
    went on to  find  that  the  Appellant  was  not  homosexual,  and  had
    fabricated a false asylum claim that he was.  The Appellant  had  never
    had any problems whilst living in Zimbabwe on account of the fact  that
    he was gay.

 6. I must now apply this matrix of facts to the relevant Country  Guidance
    cases.

 7. The current Country Guidance case is that of CM, the relevant parts  of
    which state as follows:

    (1)  As a general  matter,  there  is  significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
         00083.  In particular, the  evidence  does  not  show  that,  as  a
         general matter, the return of  a  failed  asylum  seeker  from  the
         United Kingdom, having no significant MDC profile, would result  in
         that person facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty  to
         the ZANU-PF.

    (2)  The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of  a
         person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South.  Such a person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever might be necessary to demonstrate such loyalty.

    (3)  The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural  areas  and
         there may be reasons why a particular individual, although at first
         sight appearing to  fall  within  the  category  described  in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.

    (4)   In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to   rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
          A person may, however, be able to show that his or her village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.

    (5)   A  returnee  to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a low density  or  medium  density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

    (6)  A returnee to Bulawayo will in  general  not  suffer  the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.

 8. The Appellant last lived in a town called  Masvingo  which  is  situate
    roughly half way between Harare and  Bulawayo.   He  has  no  political
    profile at all, and no connection to the MDC.  He would  not  therefore
    have to face a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the  ZANU-
    PF.  The Appellant has been absent  from  Zimbabwe  for  a  significant
    time, but he will not be returning to an area  where  he  might  be  at
    risk.  There was no evidence before me that the Appellant  will  return
    to an area that is under the sway of a ZANU-PF chief or the  like.   In
    any event, it will be safe for a person of the Appellant's  profile  to
    return to both Harare and Bulawayo.  I accept that the Appellant has no
    family nor home in  either  city,  but  the  economy  of  Zimbabwe  has
    markedly improved in recent times, and there was no  evidence  that  it
    would be unreasonable by way  of  being  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    Appellant to relocate to those cities.

 9. I therefore find that the Appellant is not at risk on return.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law and that decision has been  set  aside.


I  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  dismissing  it   on   asylum,
humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  There has  been
no application that I should vary that order and I do not do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
