
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA082262015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2016                              |On 17 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                                     MW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Halliday Reeves, Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, MW, is a male citizen of Eritrea born in 1981.  On 8 May
    2015 the respondent refused the appellant's application for asylum  and
    made directions for his removal from the United Kingdom.  The appellant
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hands)
    which, in a decision promulgated on  7  September  2015  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claimed that he had been arrested on three  occasions  by
    the authorities in Eritrea and that he had left the country  illegally.
    He claimed to fear persecution from the Eritrean authorities on account
    of his imputed political opinion.  Judge Hands rejected the appellant's
    claim in its entirety finding that he was not  a  credible  witness  at
    all.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, the decision of the  judge  is
    challenged on the basis of an inconsistent finding as  regards  illegal
    exit.  At [24] the judge began to consider  the  question  of  risk  on
    return.  She noted that;

         "... at best [the appellant] has left Eritrea illegally and  served
         a number of  years  in  military  service  for  which  he  received
         remuneration and was able to live a reasonably normal life in  that
         he could form relationships from which he has  had  three  children
         ... it is not reasonably  likely  he  is  wanted  by  the  Eritrean
         authorities for this reason."

 4. At [25], the judge went on to comment, "the question remains  therefore
    did the appellant leave Eritrea illegally and, if he did, would  he  be
    able to establish he is pro-government on his return?"   The  appellant
    argues that these two paragraphs contain inconsistent reasoning on  the
    part of the judge; she has found that the appellant left illegally  and
    then asks herself whether he has in fact done so.  The  ground  has  no
    merit.  It is absolutely clear that at [24] the judge is not  making  a
    finding of  fact  as  to  illegal  exit  but  simply  setting  out  the
    appellant's case at its highest ("at best, he has left ...").   It  was
    the appellant's case that he had left illegally; all the judge is doing
    at [25] is determining whether or not he did in fact do so.

 5. The second ground of appeal complains that the  judge  has  placed  too
    much reliance upon a Danish Report to the effect that the appellant  MO
    (illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00190  (IAC)
    finding that the appellant  would  be  able  to  pay  the  2%  tax  for
    returning Eritreans and thereby avoid persecution.  It is asserted that
    the Danish Report is unreliable  and  that  the  Danish  government  no
    longer relies upon it.

 6. I find that this ground also lacks merit.  The judge quotes at [130] of
    MO at [25]:

         "Given the foregoing we consider that if a decision-maker is  faced
         with an Eritrean asylum claimant  whose  evidence  has  been  found
         wholly incredible (save in relation  to  sex  -self-evidently-  and
         possibly age, date of departure from Eritrea and health), it cannot
         be simply assumed that such a person would be perceived  on  return
         to have committed an act of disloyalty merely by virtue  of  having
         claimed asylum in the UK. Unlike the  position  when  it  comes  to
         deciding whether a person has exited illegally (where  we  consider
         that the categories have reduced considerably and so  it  would  be
         exceptional at least for a person of or approaching draft age to be
         considered to have left lawfully) the position in respect  of  this
         issue is that  a very significant number of  Eritreans are  likely,
         on Professor Kibreab's evidence, to be able to at least  show  they
         have been pro-government  -  e.g.  by  paying  the  2%  tax  and/or
         attending pro-government meetings."

 7. I find the judge's  reasoning  is  clear  although  her  expression  is
    sometimes infelicitous and she occasionally  attributes  the  incorrect
    gender to the appellant.  First, at [27] she makes clear  (despite  the
    unfortunate double negative) that she believed the  appellant  had  not
    proved that he had left Eritrea illegally.  She  reached  that  finding
    because she found the  appellant  not  credible  in  any  part  of  his
    account.  The relevance therefore of [130] of MO  is  to  consider  the
    position of those who will not face persecution on return because  they
    have left illegally but may have committed an act of disloyalty to  the
    Eritrean government "merely by virtue of having claimed asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom."  The  position  of  those  individuals  was  that  the
    Tribunal in MO found that they would be able to show that they had been
    pro-government either by paying  the  2%  tax  and  or  attending  pro-
    government meetings.  The judge dealt with this  issue  because  it  is
    beyond dispute that the appellant has  claimed  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge has not stated that the  appellant  could  overcome
    the problems posed by an illegal exit  by  paying  the  2%  tax  and/or
    attending meetings but he could overcome  any  problems  posed  by  his
    having claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.  I  acknowledge  that  the
    wording of [26] is problematic but, read as a  whole,  I  am  satisfied
    that it was the primary finding of Judge Hands that the  appellant  had
    not proved that he had left Eritrea  illegally.   That  was  a  finding
    based not merely upon the (negative) fact that the appellant was not  a
    reliable witness and had therefore not proved his case but also on  the
    rather  unusual  circumstances  that  he  had  completed  his  national
    service, had obtained a  university  degree  and  had  worked  for  the
    Eritrean government.

 8. In the circumstances, I have concluded that the judge did  not  err  in
    law such that her decision falls to be set aside.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 1 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
