
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08031/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2016                  |On 7 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  MR. A K A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:  Ms M Knorr, counsel instructed by Wilsons Solicitors LLP
      Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           ______________________
                             DECISION & REASONS
                           ______________________



1.    In my decision and reasons dated 4 February 2016  [appended]  I  found
that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Walters had materially  erred  in  law
in dismissing the Appellant's appeal and I adjourned the appeal for  hearing
before me on 18 February 2016.



Hearing

2.    At the outset of the hearing Ms Knorr stated that the Appellant  would
not be giving evidence, in line with the medical reports.  She  then  called
Mr Mark Fish, the Appellant's psychotherapist and Director of Room to  Heal,
to give evidence. He adopted his statements at AB 99 dated 20 May  2015  and
SB pages 2-3 dated 28 August 2015  and  15-16  dated  13  October  2015.  In
response to supplementary questions from Ms Knorr, Mr Fish said  that  since
the hearing before the First tier Tribunal and his appeal  being  dismissed,
the Appellant had been attending Room to Heal much more sporadically with  a
period when he was not  coming  at  all.  The  Appellant  became  incredibly
suicidal and they contacted the CMHT and re-referred him and since  then  he
understood the Appellant has been having fortnightly sessions with the  CMHT
for half an hour to see how he is and whether  the  medication  is  working.
The Appellant stopped those sessions in December and is now back at Room  to
Heal  full  time.  His  clinical  psychologist,  Dr  McCarthy  has  recently
referred him to the Institute of  Psychotrauma  and  he  is  waiting  on  an
appointment there. He confirmed  that  the  Appellant  is  currently  taking
200mg of Sertraline & 10 mg of Olanzapine daily.

3.    Mr Fish said that he had worked pretty closely with the Appellant  for
two and a half  years,  both  in  individual  therapy  and  intensive  group
retreats where a group of members go  off  on  retreat  and  have  intensive
therapy to help them detail some of their most  difficult  issues.  He  said
that details of the events in Nigeria have come out and  that  when  someone
talks about this over a protracted period of time there is an obvious  sense
of whether someone is telling the truth or not or whether they want  to  say
something that is not the case.  He  said  that  the  Appellant  is  a  very
emotional man and the experiences he articulates are not just verbal but  he
physically goes through the experience in that he starts crying and  he  has
great difficulty speaking but finds his way back because he wants people  to
understand what has happened to him. There was no doubt  in  his  mind  that
what he says is what has happened to him.

4.    In terms of his ability to cope if he were to be returned to  Nigeria,
Mr Fish explained that his view of the Appellant's likely inability to  cope
is based on what happened when the Appellant learned he might  move  out  of
London and the threat of that was such that he ended up in day hospital,  so
strong was the feeling of suicidality and he knows the  Appellant's  anxiety
about return is that amplified one  hundredfold.  He  said  that  return  is
something unthinkable for the Appellant and that  it  was  hard  to  have  a
meaningful conversation with him as he goes into paroxysms of  fear  if  the
subject is even broached. This is why he was so distressed after his  appeal
was dismissed as it meant return and the loss of the support he  has  gained
over the last few years. He believes it will result in his death  as  he  is
absolutely convinced wherever he would be that Boko  Haram  would  find  him
and kill him in a horrible way.

5.    Mr Fish was then asked if it would make a  difference  if  there  were
mental health services available in Nigeria and he said  that  he  does  not
know if there are mental health services in Nigeria, but he was pretty  sure
the Appellant would never get to them because the level of his  anxiety  and
fear even if they existed would prevent him from engaging with them  in  any
meaningful way. He explained that when  things  happen  here  the  Appellant
alternates between a catatonic state and he locks himself away  because  his
anxiety is intimately related to the threat of return.  It  makes  no  sense
that he would engage there.

Mr Fish stated that they had worked hard for  a  couple  of  years  now  and
still despite their best efforts, any  kind  of  destabilizing  factor  will
knock him right over again in such a way he becomes extremely suicidal.  His
way of coping is to put himself in lockdown  until  something  abates.  CMHT
visit him at home and take him to hospital. His response is a high  extreme.
When he came late this morning Mr Fish was very worried  the  Appellant  had
gone into lockdown in  fear  of  coming  to  court  for  fear  of  something
negative happening.

6.    Mr Fish was then asked about the impact of his  detention  and  sexual
assault and whether  this  was  significant  in  terms  of  the  Appellant's
vulnerabilities and he  said  it  is  extremely  significant  in  that,  his
understanding of what happened in terms of the rape took the Appellant  back
into his experiences in Nigeria. Therefore, it was traumatizing in  his  own
right and re-traumatizing and that both events were  catastrophic.  He  said
for the Appellant that coming to the  UK  was  fundamentally  about  seeking
sanctuary from what happened in Nigeria and he cannot understand it.

He came for sanctuary and hoped he would find  it  eventually.  It  confuses
him to the point of thinking that he has already given up with  the  system.
In the group on Tuesday he was talking, in  a  "numbed-out"  way  about  the
fact he had this hearing today and there was no sense  for  him  that  there
could be any positive outcome in that his life has already been  taken  from
him. That means there is a still a lot of work to do with him.

7.    Mr Fish was then cross-examined by Mr Jarvis.  He  confirmed  that  he
was working with the Appellant when he attempted to commit suicide in  2014.
He did not know what medication he was taking at that time but he does  know
the antidepressant has been changed and he has  been  on  them  for  several
years. Mr Fish was asked to comment on the fact that in the period after  he
was hospitalized the Appellant went to Helen Bamber Foundation/Room to  Heal
and whether this meant that the Appellant realizes what is best for him  and
seeks help. Mr Fish responded that what that tells you is that he  was  very
close to going under the water completely and with the help of the  CMHT  he
was able to bring his head above the water and then access help. He has  the
benefit of familiarity in that the Appellant sees him (for therapy) and  the
same support group each time.  Mr  Fish  was  asked  about  the  Appellant's
catatonic periods and the last time the  Appellant  experienced  that  state
and he responded that catatonic was not really the right word, it  was  more
that he becomes locked down, which was the state he went into  post  refusal
in May/June 2015.

8.    When asked if the Appellant would have killed himself if the CMHT  had
not intervened, Mr Fish responded that he might  have  done.  He  said  that
Room to Heal have worked in tandem with the CMHT since  September  2013  and
it was quite unusual to do this. Mr Fish was asked  whether  the  fact  that
the Appellant had  a  Church  in  Lagos  might  mean  they  would  help  the
Appellant if returned to Nigeria and he responded that the impact of  return
would mean the Appellant would not be able to access such support  and  that
his relationship with the church had been compromised by the bombing of  the
Church. The Appellant says despairingly that there is nobody there.

9.    When asked about the suicide attempt in 2014  and  whether  it  was  a
genuine attempt to take his own life or a cry for help, Mr  Fish  said  that
he did not know in all honesty but he thought that when people  get  into  a
state like that it may be either of those two and even if it is  the  lesser
one it can become the greater one. The most important thing  about  it  from
his perspective is that the Appellant goes to a place of  no  resources  and
can  end  up  doing  something  irrational.  Mr  Fish  was  asked  from  his
experience and relationship with the  Appellant  whether  he  had  seen  any
improvement in his mental health and coping strategies and he  replied  that
when something happens eg the threat of accommodation being taken away,  the
Appellant returns to that place of no resource and suicidality.

10.   There was no re-examination. Mr Jarvis then asked for a short time  to
consider the Respondent's  position.  Upon  my  return  to  court  after  30
minutes, Mr Jarvis stated that the evidence  was  compelling.  Mr  Fish  has
worked with the Appellant for a long time and said  nothing  that  he  could
challenge. Therefore, he accepted that there was a real risk of  suicide  by
the Appellant if returned to Nigeria and that he had established an  Article
3 risk on this basis. He did not accept that there was a  domestic  risk  of
an Article 3 breach due to measures that would be put in place, but  it  was
reasonably likely that there would be an article 3 breach in  terms  of  the
Appellant's ability  to  cope  on  return.  Consequently,  he  conceded  the
article 3 claim.

11.   Ms Knorr then indicated that  she  continued  to  pursue  the  refugee
claim because Dr Robertson has said that only the grant of  ILR  would  work
in terms of stability for  the  Appellant,  albeit  she  accepted  that  the
length of leave granted was a matter for the Home Office. She said that  she
had discussed this with Mr Jarvis and that submissions would be  limited  to
the refugee claim.

Submissions

12.   Mr Jarvis based his submissions on the refusal decision letter  of  27
September 2014. He submitted that it was relatively neutral and did  not  go
into extensive criticism of the Appellant's claim. It was the  Secretary  of
State's case that something has happened as the  medical  evidence  strongly
indicates trauma, but this was not a  consequence  of  Boko  Haram.  In  any
event, any risk the Appellant considers he would be subject to  was  limited
to the home area of Kano and he successfully relocated to Lagos for 2  years
before leaving the country. The Appellant said that he  had  received  phone
calls even though he changed his SIM card.  For  the  Appellant  to  suggest
that he would now be at risk on return in terms of threatening  calls  would
be high speculation: there has not been a suggestion of threat in the UK  by
any form of group.  Even  the  existence  of  threatening  calls  would  not
constitute persecution because there are  too  many  constituent  parts.  In
respect of the expert report of Dr Schulz, she does not go so far as to  say
the perpetrators were Boko Haram or would be able  to  contact  him  in  the
southern part of the country or Lagos. In respect  of  the  evidence  of  Dr
Maloney, Mr Jarvis adopted the refusal letter  and  it  was  his  submission
that ultimately Dr Maloney is using terminology such as  "consistent"  which
has a wide degree of possibility and does not lend extra weight to  risk  on
return today. He submitted that purely in the context of the  refugee  claim
there was no risk to the Appellant by a particular group. In respect of  his
concession, he stated that this was confined  to  the  suicide  risk  viz  J
[2005[ EWCA Civ 629 and Y & Z [2009] EWCA Civ 362 but not Sufi  and  Elmi  v
United Kingdom (App nos. 8319/07 and 11449/07) in the  context  of  Nigeria,
albeit he accepted that an Article 3 breach can occur as  a  consequence  of
destitution.

13.   In her submissions, Ms Knorr relied  upon  her  skeleton  argument  at
[41] and informed me that the trial of the Appellant's civil claim had  been
stayed because of the decline in the Appellant's mental health.  In  respect
of the refugee claim, she submitted that, once it was reconsidered in  2013,
no serious credibility points were taken. The points were  made  that  there
is no evidence it is Boko Haram  who  has  pursued  the  Appellant  but  she
submitted that the Appellant's consistent evidence is evidence  and  certain
things about the attacks he has suffered mean it is genuine in light of  the
expert evidence and cf the skeleton argument. She submitted  that  his  fear
was not of one specific group because they are very disparate and that  Boko
Haram is an umbrella term for Islamist groups. The Appellant does  not  know
if they are sent  by  Boko  Haram  but  what  he  knows  is  that  they  are
persecuting him because he was part of their group and he left -  the  group
he was involved with pre-date Boko Haram. Ms Knorr submitted that  this  was
crucial to understanding the nature of the threats  the  Appellant  received
and the physical attacks he has suffered and that it was entirely  plausible
that someone who is in those Islamist  groups  and  decided  not  to  go  on
training courses which were clearly radicalization would  be  targeted.  The
Appellant left the group and switched  religion  to  Christianity.  He  told
them he was leaving and  did  not  want  to  go  on  these  trips.  This  is
confirmed by the  expert  report.  The  Appellant  suffered  two  incredibly
violent attacks when he went to his area. Dr Moloney's  scarring  report  is
very careful and obviously follows the Istanbul protocol and gives  a  clear
view as to alternative causes. It is necessary to look at the  report  along
with what the Appellant says happened. It is not merely the  scarring  which
is consistent but the most compelling aspects of the  report  are  7.16-7.18
and the fact that this is complex scarring typical of repeat lacerations  in
certain areas with sharp objects. This scarring is highly consistent with  a
very violent attack. See also 7.18 which again  describes  the  scarring  as
typical. The length of the lacerations indicates attack with a  large  knife
or machete.

14.   The country expert Dr Schulze  supports  the  Appellant's  claim.  She
basically says all of this is plausible and that the way Boko Haram  operate
is that there are criminal elements under this loose coalition of  different
groups working together. It is plausible  that  these  attacks  against  the
Appellant are carried out by Boko Haram  or  criminal  groups  operating  on
their behalf. It is possible that these were random  criminal  acts  but  we
say it is far more likely he was targeted by them,  given  that  there  were
two violent attacks in quick succession and  the  Appellant  was  told  that
they were from Boko Haram and were deliberately  targeting  him  and  blamed
him  for  the  death  of  the  Boko  Haram  leader.  The  Appellant  is  not
responsible but he is a defector and could be blamed. If  the  Appellant  is
believed and there is no reason to disbelieve him, then he  has  an  intense
fear of this group for a reason. She submitted that  7.23  of  Dr  Moloney's
report detailed scarring from a gorging injury on  his  back,  which  is  an
area rarely exposed and was highly consistent with a chisel.

15.   In respect of the question of whether or not the Appellant's  fear  is
objectively  well-founded,  Ms  Knorr  submitted  that  the  Appellant   had
received threatening phone calls in Hausa, which is the language  spoken  by
those from Boko  Haram  and  they  said  they  were  from  Boko  Haram.  She
submitted that the Respondent had made no real attempt to  engage  with  the
evidence and it was all entirely plausible. The Appellant was  targeted  for
a period of 5 years, even when he moved  away  from  his  home  area  in  an
attempt to relocate. There was nothing to support the suggestion  that  Boko
Haram would no longer be interested in him. Ms Knorr  invited  me  to  adopt
the approach at paragraph 339K of the Rules in respect of past  persecution,
that there needed to be good  reasons  to  show  persecution  would  not  be
repeated. In Dr Schulze's opinion, the Appellant will  be  at  risk  in  his
home area of Kano.

16.   In respect of the issue of internal  relocation,  Ms  Knorr  submitted
that the Respondent's Article 3 concession deals  with  internal  relocation
in that the Appellant would be so unwell he would not now be in  a  position
to internally relocate. Even if he were to  internally  relocate  there  are
networks of communication because people move around Nigeria and  there  are
informal networks, perhaps not the moment he steps off  the  plane  but  the
expert says they will find out eventually because news travels and  that  is
the way communication works there: C16 section  7.  Even  if  the  Appellant
were to reconnect with the Church in Lagos  state  near  the  Benin  border,
Boko Haram have links with the people he knew. The idea  he  would  not  see
anyone he knows ever is just not  plausible  or  reasonable.  The  Appellant
received threatening phone calls despite changing his SIM card. Even if  one
gets a pay as you go phone, one has to give one's  ID  and  fingerprints  to
the phone companies. At section 4 C13-C14 Dr Schulze knew  someone  who  was
getting threatening messages on her mobile phone. If those calls were to re-
start, it is absolutely clear the Appellant would not be able to  cope  with
them and that because of his particular vulnerabilities -  it  is  necessary
to assess persecution in light of his particular circumstances - even if  he
did not go back North and even if  he  was  not  physically  attacked,  that
persistent threat would be persecutory. The detention, assault  and  support
network to explore his traumas means that he is  extremely  vulnerable.  The
Appellant's sense of safety was so  undermined  by  the  sexual  assault  in
detention because he thought he was in a safe place and  it  was  shattered.
In those circumstances the Appellant could not cope with threatening  calls.
He would be at risk anywhere. Even if one looks at it from  the  perspective
of Kano he would clearly come across people he knew. He would  be  destitute
cf. AA (Uganda) [2008] EWCA Civ 579 where the Court of Appeal found  that  a
person's particular vulnerabilities meant  that  she  could  not  internally
relocate.

Decision

17.   I announced my decision to allow the appeal on refugee grounds at  the
hearing, whilst the Appellant was present, in light of  his  fragile  mental
state, which has now been expressly accepted by the Respondent in  conceding
that he would be  at  risk  of  suicide  if  forcibly  removed  to  Nigeria,
contrary to Article 3 of ECHR. I now  give  my  reasons  for  reaching  this
decision.

18.   The Respondent's case, put  simply,  is  that  she  accepts  that  the
Appellant has suffered trauma as the result of an attack, but this  was  not
by Boko Haram. Even if it was, the Appellant could internally relocate  from
his home area of Kano. It was not accepted that the Appellant  would  be  at
risk on return as he has not received any threatening telephone calls  since
he came to the United Kingdom and in any event, threatening telephone  calls
do not amount to persecution.

19.   I do not accept the Respondent's contentions,  for  the  reasons  that
follow. The medical evidence in the form of a scarring report by Dr  Moloney
is clear that the scars that the Appellant bears are "typical" of  what  one
might expect from lacerations produced by a repeated  chopping  or  slashing
with a sharp object [RB B12-13 at 7.34]. The length of the  scars  indicates
an attack with a large knife or machete. The  scarring  on  the  Appellant's
back is "... highly consistent with an intentional attack with a chisel,  as
described." Dr Moloney concluded that overall, the scarring  was  consistent
with two assaults although,  of  course,  he  was  unable  to  say  who  was
responsible for those assaults.

20.   The Appellant's  psychiatric  presentation  is  also  consistent  with
having been subjected  to  traumatic  events,  albeit  it  is  not  entirely
possible to separate out the trauma resulting from the  attacks  in  Nigeria
and the trauma resulting from the serious sexual assault that  he  sustained
whilst in immigration detention at Harmondsworth IRC. In her  report  of  25
May 2015, Mary Robertson, Chartered  and  Consultant  Clinical  Psychologist
found that the Appellant is suffering from PTSD,  with  symptoms  commencing
whilst he was in Nigeria and worsening following  his  detention  and  again
after he was raped in detention: AB 55-56. She found he was  also  suffering
from Major Depressive Disorder and Panic Disorder and was at a high risk  of
suicide and/psychotic breakdown. In his written reports and letters  and  in
his oral  evidence,  Mr  Fish,  the  Appellant's  treating  therapist  since
September  2013  noted  the  consistency  in  the  Appellant's  account   of
traumatic events in Nigeria and expressly stated that he  had  no  doubt  in
his mind that what the Appellant says happened to him is what happened.

21.   The country evidence also  corroborates  the  Appellant's  account  in
that: (i) Boko Haram are particularly active in Kano, the  Appellant's  home
area; (ii) the country expert, Dr Schulze,  confirms  that  the  Appellant's
account is plausible in its material respects viz his  account  of  Mohammed
Yusuf giving lectures to AYF members and others; his account of AYF  members
travelling to Yemen and Saudi Arabia; that his mother's Church was  targeted
and that the attack on Professor Leo was consistent with an attack  by  Boko
Haram on a Christian target; his account of receiving threatening  telephone
calls following  his conversion to Christianity was  plausible  and  it  was
plausible that the  appellant  was  targeted  in  Lagos  by  Boko  Haram  or
associated criminal groups [RB Annex C].

22.   I have assessed the credibility of the Appellant's  account  in  light
of the expert and background evidence, as I am required to  do  cf.  Mibanga
[2005] EWCA Civ 367 and I find that his account  is  credible;  that  it  is
supported in its material respects by reliable expert and  country  evidence
and  that  there  is  a  serious  possibility  or  a  reasonable  degree  of
likelihood that the Appellant's account of past persecution is true.

23.   The question is whether  there  is  a  serious  possibility  that  the
Appellant would face persecution if returned to Nigeria  on  account  either
of his conversion to Christianity or as a  member  of  a  particular  social
group viz former members of the AYF/Muslim Congress. Paragraph 339K  of  the
Immigration Rules provides that: "The fact that a person  has  already  been
subject to persecution or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of  such
persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication  of  the
person's well-founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering  serious
harm, unless there are good reasons to consider  that  such  persecution  or
serious harm will not be repeated." I find that there is a  real  risk  that
the Appellant would again be subjected to threatening telephone calls and  a
concomitant risk of serious attack by elements associated  with  Boko  Haram
if he were to be returned to Kano. Whilst it is the case that the  Appellant
left Kano in 2007,  he  was  subjected  to  violent  attacks  in  April  and
December 2011 when he returned to Kano, during which his attackers spoke  in
Hausa and said that he deserved to die because he had reported them  to  the
police and their leader was now  dead.  I  find  that  there  is  a  serious
possibility that at least some if not  all  of  those  responsible  for  the
attacks on the Appellant in 2011 remain in Kano and remain part  of  one  of
many disparate groups that constitute Boko Haram.

24.   I further find that the Appellant's subjective fear of persecution  in
Kano is likely to be exacerbated by the fact  that  his  mother  was  killed
when her Church was bombed by elements from Boko Haram on 25  December  2011
and by the subsequent bomb attack by elements from Boko Haram  which  killed
his mentor, Mr Leo on 28 April 2012. Both these incidents  are  corroborated
by the background evidence at AB  414-418,  423-424.  Consequently,  I  find
that the Appellant's fear  of  persecution  in  Kano  is  objectively  well-
founded. I find, on  the  evidence,  that  there  are  no  good  reasons  to
consider that the persecution the Appellant experienced  in  the  past  will
not be repeated.

25.   I further find that the Nigerian authorities  are  unable  to  provide
sufficient protection: they have failed to do so in the  past  and  this  is
supported by the background evidence at AB 348, 354-357,  373-374,  377-378,
379-381, 384-385, 389-401, which also indicates that they have a poor  track
record  for  prosecuting  offenders  and  have  been  implicated  in   abuse
themselves: AB 346-347, 349, 369, 374, 378, 382].

26.   Mr Jarvis submitted, in line with the Respondent's  refusal  decision,
that the Appellant could safely internally relocate because he had  done  so
before, when he left Kano for  Lagos.  I  do  not  accept  this  submission.
Firstly, it is clear that the Appellant left Kano for Lagos in  2007,  after
his conversion to Christianity but prior to receiving telephone threats  and
prior to the attacks on him in 2011 when he returned to Kano  to  visit  his
mother and his mentor, his college lecturer, Mr  Leo.  Therefore,  the  fact
that the Appellant was living in an entirely different part of  Nigeria  did
not prevent him being traced  via  his  mobile  telephone,  even  though  he
changed  his  SIM  card.  Moreover,  his  house  was  broken  into  and  his
possessions destroyed on 9 April 2012 and the Appellant states that  he  was
followed by a vehicle that he recognized because it was present at the  time
when  he  was  attacked  in  Kano.  The  Appellant  continued   to   receive
threatening telephone calls until he left Nigeria, even though  he  did  not
return home and stayed in his Church until he left. I  accept  Dr  Schulze's
opinion that it is plausible that the Appellant was  targeted  in  Lagos  by
Boko Haram or associated criminal  elements  and  I  find  that  this  could
happen again, given the disparate nature of Boko  Haram  and  the  extensive
informal communication network which  means  that  he  would,  in  time,  be
located: RB C16.

27.   Secondly,  I  accept  Ms  Knorr's  submission  that  the  Respondent's
concession that there is  a  real  risk  that  the  Appellant  would  commit
suicide if returned to Nigeria, contrary to Article 3 of ECHR,  is  material
to consideration of whether or not it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the
Appellant to internally relocate in that he is simply too unwell to  do  so.
In AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49, Baroness Hale cited with approval  an  extract
from the UNHCR intervention in that case which provides at [20]:

    "... the correct approach when considering the  reasonableness  of  IRA
    [internal relocation alternative] is to assess all the circumstances of
    the individual's case holistically and with specific reference  to  the
    individual's personal  circumstances  (including  past  persecution  or
    fear thereof, psychological and health  condition,  family  and  social
    situation, and survival capacities). This assessment is to be  made  in
    the context of the conditions in the  place  of  relocation  (including
    basic human rights,  security  conditions,  socio-economic  conditions,
    accommodation, access to health care facilities), in order to determine
    the impact on that individual of settling  in  the  proposed  place  of
    relocation and whether the individual could live  a  relatively  normal
    life without undue hardship."

Her Ladyship also expressly stated that there was little  between  this  and
the test set out  by  Lord  Bingham  at  [5]  of  the  judgment.  Mr  Jarvis
expressly accepts that removal of the Appellant would amount to a breach  of
Article 3 of ECHR due to serious possibility that he would  commit  suicide.
This clearly impacts upon his  survival  capacity,  due  to  his  very  poor
psychological health. The Appellant has no family members or  close  friends
or associates to whom he could turn for assistance, his mother  having  died
in the bombing of her Church on 25 December 2011 and his mentor also  having
been killed in a bomb attack.

28.   The only other place in Nigeria to which he could be said  to  have  a
connection is Lagos, however, he was previously traced there by  Boko  Haram
or associated elements and whilst he has a connection with a  Church  there,
I do not find that on the evidence that the Church could properly  meet  his
basic human rights in that, whilst the Church might be able to  provide  him
with accommodation as it did previously, it would be unable to  provide  him
with security, protection against Boko Haram or access to  the  health  care
and support network the Appellant currently receives in the United  Kingdom.
I also take account in this respect the  view  expressed  by  the  Court  of
Appeal in AA (Uganda) [2008] EWCA Civ  579  at  [13]  that:  "There  was  no
evidence from which Immigration Judge Coker  could  properly  conclude  that
the church would make a difference to AA's life in Kampala  that  offset  or
protected her from the dangers described in Dr Nelson's report."  For  these
reasons I find that it would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to expect  the
Appellant to internally relocate.

29.   With regard to the Appellant's civil claim arising out of the  serious
sexual assault he suffered whilst being held  in  immigration  detention  at
Harmondsworth IRC, this was raised as a matter before me in the  context  of
Article 6 of ECHR and removal of the Appellant.  In  light  of  my  findings
above, it is not necessary for me to determine this  aspect  of  the  appeal
but I do express deep concern: (i) that the Appellant was held in  detention
despite having experienced violent assaults in  Nigeria  which  amounted  to
Article 3 ill-treatment and was clearly a traumatized and vulnerable  person
and (ii) that the Secretary of State failed to fulfil even  the  most  basic
duty of care towards him in that he was subjected to a most  serious  sexual
assault whilst in detention and the perpetrators have not  been  brought  to
justice. Those responsible for treating and caring for the  Appellant  since
that  time  are  clear  that  this  experience  has  effectively  both   re-
traumatised him and exacerbated his pre-existing trauma. It is to  be  hoped
that in time and with the ongoing support of Mr Fish and Room to  Heal  that
the Appellant is able to recover to the extent  of  being  able  to  live  a
relatively normal life. In these exceptional circumstances  and  bearing  in
mind the concession by Mr Jarvis, properly made in my view, that removal  to
Nigeria would be contrary to Article 3 of ECHR owing to the serious risk  of
suicide, I would request that when considering the issue of  the  length  of
leave to be granted to this Appellant  that  the  Secretary  of  State  give
consideration to the grant of ILR, in-line with the  recommendation  by  his
Consultant Clinical Psychologist, Mary Robertson.

Decision

30.   The appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention.

31.   The appeal is allowed on the basis that removal of  the  Appellant  to
Nigeria would be contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

28 February 2016

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08031/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2016                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  MR. A KA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                      v


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                           ______________________
                             DECISION & REASONS
                           ______________________


1.    The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on [ ] 1977.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 9 September  2012  with  a  visit  visa,  but  when
stopped and questioned by  Immigration  Officers  upon  arrival  he  claimed
asylum on the basis that if he returned to Nigeria he would  be  killed  (by
Boko Haram). He was detained under the auspices of the DFT,  interviewed  on
18 September 2012 and his  claim  was  refused  on  24  September  2012  and
certified as clearly unfounded under section 94 of  the  NIAA  2002.  On  27
September 2012 the Appellant was  subjected  to  a  serious  sexual  assault
whilst in the showers at Harmondsworth  IRC,  which  he  did  not  initially
disclose to anyone. His  solicitors  challenged  the  certification  of  his
appeal by way of judicial  review  and  ultimately  on  14  June  2013,  the
judicial review was withdrawn on the basis that  the  Respondent  agreed  to
consider representations as a fresh asylum claim and if refused  to  provide
the Appellant with the right of in-country appeal.  On  25  September  2013,
the Appellant's solicitors lodged a civil claim for wrongful  detention  and
failure by the Respondent to investigate the Appellant's allegation of  rape
and failure to offer him appropriate support.

2.    The Respondent subsequently made a further decision  on  27  September
2014, refusing to grant the Appellant asylum. He  appealed  and  his  appeal
came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Walters for hearing on  2  June
2015. It was agreed by the  parties  that  the  Appellant  is  a  vulnerable
witness within the meaning of the Joint Presidential Guidance in respect  of
child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellants and although the  Appellant
wished to give evidence he would not be subject  to  cross-examination.  The
Appellant's evidence was essentially  confined  to  adopting  his  interview
record and statements. The Appellant's counsellor  and  psychotherapist,  Mr
Mark Fish, also gave evidence that inter alia he sees  the  Appellant  on  a
weekly basis for individual psychotherapy; that he has  severe  and  chronic
PTSD and had attempted suicide in July 2014.

3.    In a decision dated  31  July  2015,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
dismissed the appeal because, in essence, whilst he accepted  at  [74]  that
the Appellant had a subjective fear of being killed,  this  belief  was  not
genuine at the time he left Nigeria [75].  The  Judge  further  accepted  at
[76] that the Appellant has scars consistent with two  machete  attacks  but
he did not accept that they were caused in the manner and by the persons  he
described. He found that the Appellant could internally  relocate  [98]  and
that there would be sufficiency of protection  available  to  him  from  the
Nigerian authorities [99]. He accepted that the  Appellant  had  been  raped
whilst in Harmondsworth IRC [110] but he did not find that his mental  state
reached the threshold required for Article 3 to be engaged  [120]  and  that
it would be proportionate to remove him to Nigeria [135].

4.    An application for permission to appeal was made on  13  August  2015.
The grounds in support of the application are substantial and  detailed  and
submit that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred:  (i)  in  his  credibility
findings, which were not sustainable in light of the evidence and  were  not
significantly challenged in the refusal or  at  the  hearing  and  that  the
Judge had erred in failing to take into  account  the  medical  and  country
expert evidence in making credibility findings; that the  Judge  had  failed
to make findings on relevant matters;  (ii)  in  his  findings  on  internal
relocation, which had  been  infected  by  the  Judge's  flawed  credibility
findings and the Judge failed to make findings on a material issue  viz  the
threatening telephone calls from Boko  Haram  and  the  Appellant's  extreme
vulnerability which, in light of the medical evidence,  would  preclude  him
from internally relocating; (iii) in assessing  sufficiency  of  protection,
given that the objective evidence clearly  demonstrated  that  the  Nigerian
State is unable to offer effective protection; (iv) in his consideration  of
Article 3 and the risk of suicide, in respect of which the Judge  failed  to
provide reasons for finding that the threshold  was  not  met;  (v)  in  his
assessment of Article 8, in  that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  account  of
material  considerations  viz  the  undisputed  medical  evidence  that  the
Appellant would be unfit to support himself  or  access  treatment  and  the
Judge failed to take account of the fact that the Appellant  was  raped  and
the impact upon him in assessing proportionality; (vi) in his assessment  of
Articles 5 and 6 of ECHR, which give rise to procedural  obligations  whilst
his civil claim and investigations into his rape in detention are ongoing.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by  Designated  First  Tier  Tribunal
Judge Zucker on 25 August 2015, on the basis that it was arguable  that  the
Judge had failed to follow the guidance in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ  367  and
having found that the Appellant genuinely believes there to  be  a  risk  to
him on  return  even  if  not  objectively  well  founded,  failed  to  have
sufficient regard to the risk of suicide. He did  not  exclude  any  of  the
other grounds from being advanced. The Respondent  filed  a  brief  rule  24
notice on 9 September 2015, by way of a holding letter pending  instructions
on the civil claim.

Hearing

6.    At the hearing before me, I indicated that I had taken  a  preliminary
view that it was arguable that Grounds 1-5 of the grounds of  appeal  showed
that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  made  material  errors  of  law.  Ms
Knorr then addressed me in respect of Ground 6  and  served  copies  of  the
decisions in Quaquah [2000] HRLR 325 per Turner J; AA (Uganda)  [2008]  EWCA
Civ 579 and HJ (Iran) [2006] EWCA Civ 1796. She submitted that  the  Judge's
reasoning was at [137] and [138] and his reasons for rejecting  this  aspect
of the case were that: (i) the Appellant has given detailed instructions  to
solicitors in the UK; (ii) he could have skype conferences  with  them  from
Nigeria; (iii) he could give oral evidence in  civil  proceedings  by  video
link via the British High Commission in  Nigeria.  She  submitted  that  the
Judge failed to engage with the  contents  of  the  Appellant's  solicitor's
statement, that it would be "extremely difficult" to  properly  conduct  the
civil proceedings with him  in  Nigeria  and  that  this  had  infected  his
consideration of the issue and  he  assumed  that  the  Appellant  would  be
simply in the same equivalent  position  in  Nigeria.  This  fails  to  take
account of the undisputed evidence that the Appellant  would  be  unable  to
support himself and would be in a state of complete mental  breakdown  given
what his solicitor said about the difficulties. There was no  evidence  from
any party that he would be provided with resources to use a video link.  The
Judge further failed to consider the equality of arms point -  how  would  a
Home Office psychologist be able to assess him  in  Nigeria?  It  was  clear
that statements needed to be prepared and that psychological  reports  would
be  needed  from  both  parties.  She  further  submitted  that  the   civil
proceedings are important and raise public interest issues as the  Appellant
was subjected to a serious sexual assault in detention  and  the  manner  in
which the Home Office have dealt with that required scrutiny. She  submitted
that detention has had a devastating effect on his mental health and  it  is
his right to be able to bring those proceedings and hold the Home Office  to
account.

7.    In response, Mr Tufan drew my attention to the judgment by  the  House
of Lords in Ullah [2004] UKHL 26 and submitted  that  an  Article  5  and  6
claim would have to reach a  very  high  standard.  He  submitted  that  the
letter from the Appellant's MP shows he has pursued an NVQ level 2 and  thus
he clearly had the ability to pursue  a  course  of  study.  In  respect  of
Ground 1, he submitted that credibility findings are for a  Judge  to  make;
that Judges can agree with the reasons for refusal letter and find  no  ring
of truth. He submitted that the Judge has done considerably more  than  that
and has given reasons for his credibility findings. He submitted that  there
was  nothing  irrational  about  these  findings  which  were   sufficiently
reasoned. In respect of Ground 2 and the issue of  internal  relocation,  he
submitted that Nigeria is a very large country.  The  Judge  concluded  Boko
Haram had no interest  in  this  Appellant  and  that  he  could  reasonably
relocate elsewhere and  there  was  nothing  wrong  with  this  finding.  In
respect of Ground 3  and  the  assertion  that  the  Judge  made  errors  in
assessing sufficiency of protection, he submitted that Boko  Haram  were  in
the east of the country and were not even all powerful in Muslim  areas  and
this finding was open to  the  Judge.  In  respect  of  Ground  4,  and  the
assertion that the Judge made errors in his consideration of article  3  and
the suicide risk, he submitted that J  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  629  distinguished
between foreign and home cases. He submitted that this covers  the  position
in the UK and en route to Nigeria. The Judge did refer to J and the case  of
KH [2009] EWCA Civ 1354 in the Court of Appeal where Aitkens LJ  and  Sedley
LJ concluded it would have to be a very exceptional case indeed to  succeed.
In respect of Ground 5 and the arguments in respect of Article  8  of  ECHR,
he submitted that the case needs to be exceptional and  the  Judge  referred
to KH (op cit) and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. Ms Knorr then responded.

Hearing

8.    I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters did  err  materially  in
law. I announced my decision at the hearing and I now give my reasons:

8.1.  It is clear from the substantial medical evidence submitted  that  the
Appellant is indeed a vulnerable witness and he  is  suffering  from  severe
and chronic PTSD and is suicidal. The  Judge  expressly  accepted  that  the
Appellant had scars consistent with two machete attacks in Nigeria [76]  and
that he had been raped whilst incarcerated in Harmondsworth IRC [110].  This
then was the context in which the credibility findings were to be  made  and
I find that the substance of the first ground of appeal is made out in  that
the Judge  did  not  correctly  direct  himself  with  regard  to  a  proper
assessment of credibility in the light of the  medical  and  country  expert
evidence cf. Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

8.2.   I  agree  with  Ms  Knorr  that  the  Judge's  findings  on  internal
relocation were infected by his flawed credibility findings. I further  find
that the Judge  failed  to  make  findings  on  a  material  issue  viz  the
threatening telephone calls from Boko Haram  and  that  he  failed  to  take
account of the Appellant's extreme vulnerability  which,  in  light  of  the
medical evidence, would preclude him from internally relocating.

8.3.  In respect of Ground 3 and the Judge's assessment of  the  sufficiency
of protection,  I  find  that  the  Judge  failed  to  properly  assess  the
background evidence before him at [99]-[100].  Whilst  the  authorities  may
well be interested in information about Boko Haram it does  not  necessarily
follow that they would be able to provide  the  Appellant  with  protection.
Further, the Judge's assertion that the  country  evidence  shows  that  the
Nigerian State is able to offer effective protection, he failed  to  specify
which documents substantiated his finding in this respect and  this  is  not
borne out by the background evidence cited  by  Ms  Knorr  at  [29]  of  the
grounds of appeal.

8.4.  In respect of Ground 4 and the Judge's consideration of Article 3  and
the risk of suicide, whilst the threshold is a high one and  I  accept  that
the Judge correctly directed himself in respect of the relevant  caselaw,  I
agree with Ms Knorr that  the  Judge  failed  to  provide  reasons  for  his
finding that the Appellant's  "present  mental  state"  did  not  reach  the
threshold, given the clear medical evidence before him as to  the  level  of
trauma and vulnerability  and  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  already
attempted  suicide.  In  these  circumstances,  I  find  that  reasons  were
required as to why the Judge considered that the threshold was  not  met  on
the facts of the case.

8.5.  I further find that the Judge erred in his  assessment  of  Article  8
and the proportionality of removal, in that he failed  to  take  account  of
material  considerations  viz  the  undisputed  medical  evidence  that  the
Appellant would be unfit to support  himself  or  access  treatment  and  he
further failed to take account of the fact that the Appellant was raped  and
the impact of that upon his mental health in assessing proportionality.

8.6.  Lastly, I find for the reasons set out in Ms Knorr's oral  submissions
recorded at [6] above, that the Judge erred in his assessment of Articles  5
and 6 of ECHR, which give rise to procedural obligations  whilst  his  civil
claim and  investigations  into  his  rape  in  detention  are  ongoing.  In
particular, the Judge erred in distinguishing the cases of MS (Ivory  Coast)
[2007] EWCA Civ 133 and MH (Morocco) [2010] UKUT 439  (IAC)  simply  on  the
basis that they concerned the desirability of the grant of  a  short  period
of leave to  prevent  the  removal  of  a  person  involved  in  family  law
proceedings, given that the issue here is comparable in light of the  public
interest inherent in the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  raped  whilst  in
detention under the auspices of the Home Office.

8.7.  For the avoidance of doubt, I do not accept that  the  fact  that  the
Appellant was able to participate in a part time course  of  study  detracts
from the fact  that  he  has  been  assessed  by  medical  professionals  as
suffering from complex PTSD. There is no evidence that this has  caused  him
to be intellectually impaired.

9.    After I had announced my decision Ms Knorr submitted that attempts  to
expedite the proceedings in  the  Upper  Tribunal  due  to  the  Appellant's
deteriorating mental health had so far failed and she urged  me  to  adjourn
the appeal to be heard at the first available opportunity. Mr Tufan  had  no
objection to this proposed course of action.

Decision

10.   I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Walters  erred  materially  in
law. I adjourn the appeal to be listed before me for hearing on Thursday  18
February 2016 at 10 am with a two hour time estimate. The only  direction  I
make is that any updating evidence, including any updated skeleton  argument
is to be served by Monday 15 February 2015 at 4pm.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

4 February 2016

