
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08479/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 April 2016                      |On 14 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss F Ireson, Sentinel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born on [ ] 1999.   He  appealed
    against the respondent's decision dated  4  June  2015  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N Amin in a determination promulgated on 3 December 2015
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was at first refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Astle on 2 January 2016 and  subsequently  allowed  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Bruce stating that all grounds are arguable, in  particular  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  give  due  weight  to  the
    appellant's young age and  in  misconstruing  the  evidence  about  the
    extent of his father's involvement in the incident  which  is  said  to
    have sparked a blood feud, and that the RALON  report  was  capable  of
    lending support to the appellant's account.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in his determination made  the  following
    findings which I set out in summary. He starts off with stating that in
    assessing the appellant's claim for asylum, he had given  consideration
    to the UNHCR Guidelines and policies and  procedures  in  dealing  with
    unaccompanied children seeking asylum. He has given great attention  to
    the appellant's claim understanding that the appellant is a  minor  and
    that the problem of proof is compounded in the  case  of  children.  He
    also  had  regard  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and the UN Convention on the Rights of  the  Child
    1990.

 4. The Judge relied on the country  guidance  case  of  EH  (Blood  feuds)
    Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 and accepted that a family member involved
    in a blood feud constitutes a particular social group.   He  stated  at
    paragraph 45 that the appellant relied on an attack  on  him  in  March
    2014 and stated that even if the attack occurred,  which  he  does  not
    believe, that it was from the [D] family.  The appellant was  not  able
    to identify the perpetrators and he merely speculated  that  they  were
    from that particular family.  Therefore,  his  evidence  that  the  [D]
    family attacked him because of a blood feud, is based on speculation.

 5.  More  importantly,  the  Judge  said  that  the  appellant   gave   an
    inconsistent account of the weapon that was used in the attack.  In his
    evidence form he claimed that during this attack one of  the  attackers
    took out a gun which he pointed  at  him.   At  his  asylum  interview,
    however, the appellant claimed that the man attempted to harm him  with
    a weapon but he did not know what he pulled out and he was unsure if it
    was a knife or a gun.  The Judge opined that  this  was  a  significant
    event and one that the appellant feared  and  therefore  the  appellant
    should have known whether it was a gun or some other kind of weapon.

 6. The Judge said that when this inconsistency of the weapon  was  put  to
    him, the appellant tried to blame the discrepancy on the solicitors and
    did not accept it. The Judge totally rejected the explanation  for  the
    material inconsistencies on this issue and  said  that  the  solicitors
    have no real role to play in the answers that the appellant  gives.  At
    paragraph 14 the Judge stated having the  opportunity  of  hearing  and
    observing the appellant he finds at the outset that he does not believe
    that there is a blood feud against this appellant from the [D]  family.



 7. The appellant claimed, the Judge said, that his father is the cousin of
    [XM] (the opposing blood feud family) and due to that relationship  and
    because it is perceived that his father assisted the [M] family with  a
    land dispute, the appellant's family became involved in the blood feud.
    There was no evidence to  show  the  relationship  of  the  appellant's
    father or the appellant with the [M] family.  The Judge found  that  he
    considered the report  by  the  British  Embassy  in  Tirana  where  it
    confirmed that there was a murder on 17 February 2014 of [BD]  and  the
    perpetrator of this  murder  was  identified  as  [XSM]  who  has  been
    arrested and charged with  the  premeditated  murder  and  the  illegal
    possession of fire arms and a criminal investigation has started.

 8. The Judge noted that none of these names of the persons who  have  been
    charged with the murder include the appellant's  father.   The  embassy
    response makes it clear that there is no  mention  of  the  appellant's
    father [XB] in the murder. The Judge found that there is a  blood  feud
    following the murder on 18 February  2014  but  the  appellant  or  his
    family have no involvement in this blood feud. He then  considered  the
    case of EH and stated that applying the guidance in the case there  has
    only been one killing in the claimed blood feud which was  in  February
    2014. There have been no further killings and the perpetrator, a member
    of the [M] family, had been arrested by the police and is in detention.
     He then concludes that he does not find that one incident is enough to
    conclude there is an active blood feud. He stated  that  the  appellant
    has not provided evidence of his family's relationship to [XM] and  the
    evidence provided does not support this assertion.

 9. The Judge did not accept that the appellant has  provided  evidence  to
    demonstrate the existence of an active blood feud  against  [D]  family
    and therefore he rejected the appellant's claim that the appellant  was
    in any way involved in any blood feud. He further found that there is a
    sufficiency of protection from the appellant on his return  to  Albania
    and cited the COI Report on Albania which states that  the  authorities
    are now tackling the crimes committed by blood feuds.  The  Judge  also
    considered that the  appellant  can  relocate  within  Albania  on  his
    return.

10. Specifically the Judge notes, in this regard is that the appellant  was
    returned to Albania once before after he had left the country  and  re-
    settled with his maternal uncle in Albania. The  appellant  managed  to
    leave again and come to the United Kingdom.  The Judge then said he can
    return and relocate anywhere in Albania because he speaks the language.
     He said that the  appellant  has  shown  considerable  resilience  and
    ability by travelling on his own as a minor  on  two  occasions  in  an
    attempt to come to the United Kingdom and the appellant can resettle in
    any surroundings with ease.  The Judge dismissed the appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds.

11. The renewed grounds of appeal state  that  there  are  material  errors
    within  the  determination,   which   individually   and   collectively
    demonstrate that the Judge's decision is unsustainable.

12. A former response dated 9  January  2015,  the  RALON  response,  is  a
    crucial document which supports the core of the appellant's account  of
    a murder having taken place in Albania, in the appellant's  home  area.
    It states that one of the protagonist, the murderer, is in  prison  and
    thus not an achievable blood feud target.  It is clear  from  paragraph
    53 of the determination that  the  Judge  accepts  that  a  blood  feud
    exists. The Judge does not  accept  that  the  appellant's  family  are
    involved in the blood feud  but  with  all  due  respect,  the  reasons
    provided, by the Judge for that conclusion, does not stand up to proper
    scrutiny.

13. The discrepancy as to the type of weapon that was used on the attack on
    the appellant can be explained because the appellant at the date of the
    incident was 14 years of age and is currently 16.  The  Judge  did  not
    make proper allowance for the age of  the  appellant  when  making  his
    decision. The Judge's finding that RALON response does not support  the
    appellant's account irrational.  The appellant's evidence was that  his
    father had left the family home and although he had spoken to his  wife
    on a couple of occasions neither she nor the appellant  knew  where  he
    was.  The response given by the  appellant  was  that  the  appellant's
    father was coming and going out of Albania, not  that  he  was  at  the
    family home.

14. The Judge does not accept that the  appellant  or  his  family  is  the
    target of a blood feud and dismissed the appellant's appeal.

15. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Miss Ireson on behalf of the appellant said  that  the  Judge
    accepted that there is a blood feud,  at  paragraph  53.   The  Judge's
    treatment of the RALON response was not safe.  The Judge has  not  made
    express findings and the approach has been flawed and the evidence  has
    been misconstrued.

16. The father was involved in the blood dispute  because  it  was  a  land
    dispute between the two families. The appellant's father  was  involved
    in the land dispute, in that he helped the  opposing  family  with  the
    land dispute, and not the murder.  The appellant's case  was  that  his
    father went into hiding.  He never said that he left the  country,  and
    that is  a  material  error.  The  appellant's  age  was  not  properly
    considered.  The Judge does not actively engage with the fact that  the
    appellant is a child.  The inconsistent evidence as to whether there  a
    gun or a knife is down to the appellant's age because in his  statement
    he said there has been a weapon which was used. The appellant was in  a
    very stressful situation at the  time  and  this  was  not  taken  into
    account by the Judge.

17. Miss Fijiwala submitted that the Judge has made it very  clear  in  his
    determination that he is dealing with a minor.  At the determination at
    paragraph 1, she referred to the fact that he is dealing with a  minor.
    She also  referred  to  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  and  properly  directed
    herself. The  Judge  made  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the
    appellant which were open to her and clear reasons were given.

18. The appellant had knowledge of this murder  because  the  newspaper  in
    which this was reported was produced by  the  appellant.   It  must  be
    noted that there was no  mention  of  the  appellant's  father  or  the
    appellant's father's family at all in this newspapers  article.   There
    is no evidence that the appellant's father is a cousin, as claimed.

19. In reply,  Miss  Ireson  said  that  the  findings  by  the  Judge  are
    perfunctory which she made in the alternative.   She  referred  to  her
    skeleton argument which I have taken into account.

Is there a material error of law in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal

20. I have take into  account  the  determination,  the  arguments  of  the
    parties, the skeleton argument and I find that the Judge  has  made  no
    material error of law in the determination. The Judge was very clear in
    her determination that he appreciated that the appellant is a child  of
    16 years of age and  his  appeal  must  be  heard  according  to  UNCHR
    guidelines.  There is absolutely no merit  to  the  argument  that  the
    Judge did not consider the appellant's appeal on the basis that he is a
    child. The Judge gave anxious scrutiny  to  the  evidence  because  the
    appellant was a child.    The  Judge  did  not  only  not  believe  the
    appellant's claim that he was attacked but gave other good reasons  for
    not finding the appellant credible taking into account that  he  was  a
    child.

21. The Judge stated that the inconsistency about the weapon that he claims
    to have been attacked with, as to whether it was a gun or  a  knife  is
    not something that the appellant should have been  inconsistent  about.
    The appellant even at the age of 14 must know the difference between  a
    knife and a gun.  The appellant, the Judge noted, is someone who has  a
    great deal of initiative because he previously travelled abroad and had
    to be returned to Albania. The Judge noted that this is the second time
    he has left [Albania] and came to the United Kingdom. This demonstrated
    to the Judge that the appellant  was  a  person  of  maturity  and  was
    entitled to find that it is not credible that this appellant would know
    the difference between a gun or a knife or would not  remember  whether
    it was a gun or a knife. The more credible explanation for this is that
    as the newspaper report about the killing mentions  a  gun  and  not  a
    knife, the appellant subsequently has tried to be consistent  with  the
    evidence in the newspaper about the killing.

22. The Judge found that the RALON report states that  a  murder  did  take
    place and that [SM] was arrested and charged with  premeditated  murder
    and illegal possession of a fire arm, and a criminal investigation  has
    started which shows that the murderer is now in jail. This  information
    is in the public domain. He however found that  there  is  no  evidence
    that connects the appellant or his father to this information which was
    in the newspaper.  This  also  demonstrates  that  the  authorities  in
    Albania are investigating and prosecuting murders due to blood feuds.

23. The Judge found this is the case there is no link with a report in  the
    public domain of a murder that took place in the appellant's home  area
    and the appellant's claim that his father is  somehow  related  to  the
    parties even though his name has not been mentioned in the report.  The
    appellant claims that the role of his father in the blood feud is  that
    he has been perceived by the opposing family to have helped  the  other
    family in the  land  dispute  between  them.   There  was  no  credible
    evidence produced by the appellant  that  his  father  was  even  in  a
    position to influence or assist a party when it came to  the  title  of
    lands. A blood feud of necessity must have the spilling  of  blood  and
    there is no evidence that any blood  was  spilled  by  the  appellant's
    father such as the appellant's father to be involved in a blood feud.

24. The Judge took into account  the  indicia  which  must  be  taken  into
    account as set out in the case of EH where it states  that  first  what
    must be decided is whether the dispute can be characterised as a  blood
    feud at all.  The Judge was entitled to find on the evidence that there
    is no blood feud in which the appellant's father or  the  appellant  is
    involved in.

25. The Judge makes an error when he found  that  there  is  a  blood  feud
    between the [M] family and the [D] family.  It was  not  his  place  to
    make such a finding because whether or not there is  an  ongoing  blood
    feud between the [M]s and the [D]s is of no relevance  in  this  appeal
    because  he  found  that  the  appellant  and  his  father   have   not
    demonstrated that they have any connection with these two families,  at
    all.  There is no credible evidence that they are related to any one of
    these families. However, I find that this error is not material and  it
    does not go to any of the issues which would make the determination not
    safe.

26. Furthermore, the Judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  a  child  and
    children are not targeted in blood feuds. The  appellant's  explanation
    was rejected by the Judge that he was targeted because even  though  he
    was a child "he looked old enough".  The Judge  was  entitled  to  find
    that given the appellant's father's name is not in the press report  of
    this particular blood feud, the appellant who was a child of  14  could
    hardly be a target. The Judge also found in the  alternative  that  the
    appellant can be returned to Albania and  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection as background evidence states that Albania is now protecting
    victims of blood feuds.

27. I find there has been no error of law in the determination  in  respect
    of the findings made by the Judge on the evidence before  her.  I  also
    find that the Judge's conclusion  that  the  appellant  can  return  to
    Albania because when he was previously returned once before he  settled
    in with his uncle and he could do this again because there is no  blood
    feud against him. The Judge was also entitled to find that even  though
    the appellant  is  a  child,  he  has  proved  to  be  of  considerable
    resilience, adaptability and fortitude by travelling as a minor on  two
    occasions to come to the United Kingdom. The Judge was entitled to find
    that he can now go back to Albania and resettle into  his  surroundings
    with ease as he did before.  There is no material error of  law  and  I
    uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.  I  also  find  that  no
    differently constituted Tribunal would come to a  different  conclusion
    on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

28. I therefore uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  I
    dismiss this appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 11th day of April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 11th day of April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

