
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08447/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Reasons and Decision Promulgated     |
|On 3 December 2015                   |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                               MR AHMED MEIRZA
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Hacker, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who appeals  with  permission
    against  the  determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Feeney
    promulgated on 3 March 2015  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State made on to remove
    him from the United  Kingdom  and  refuse  to  grant  him  humanitarian
    protection under article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted the appellant permission  to  appeal
    stating that it is arguable that the Judge who had a  large  amount  of
    expert medical evidence before her which had not been available at  the
    appellant's previous appeal, failed to give sufficient  weight  to  the
    fact that the medical report had not merely been commissioned  for  the
    purposes of an appeal hearing but was evidence of a chronic and serious
    mental  health  disorder  but  instead  made  presumptions  about   the
    appellant's abilities.

First-tier Tribunal findings

 3. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Feeney  sitting.   The
    Judge made the following findings.

        i) For the  hearing  the  appellant's  representatives  provided  a
           bundle of 430 pages [26];

       ii) the appellant did not give evidence at the  hearing.  He  relied
           upon the letter from Doctor Idit dated  16  January  2015.  This
           letter explained that because of the appellant's current  mental
           state, he would not be able to tolerate giving evidence  in  the
           Court and that cross examination could place too much stress  on
           him. There were no other witnesses. [30];

      iii) I have taken my starting point the previous history, the various
           appeals and determination in terms of Devaseelan [2002]  UK  IAT
           00702. The new evidence since that date is  limited  to  medical
           evidence which states that the appellant had been suffering from
           PTSD. I have been directed to particular passages in the medical
           report of Doctor Malkin [AB 305, AB 331, AB 213 and AB  305].  I
           take into account the observations made by  Doctor  Malkin  that
           inconsistencies in the appellant's account are  attributable  to
           his illness. [84]

       iv) I accept that he is being treated for PTSD since his arrival  in
           the UK and is now been prescribed medication [86];

        v) it is asserted that the  PTSD  effects  his  ability  to  recall
           information and may  account  for  the  inconsistencies  in  his
           narrative. I do not accept it  credible  that  his  inconsistent
           accounts are due to his mental health disorder [87];

       vi) in reaching this decision I take into account that he is in fact
           been able to remember and share information with the  healthcare
           professionals involved in his care. Consequently, he should have
           been able to provide the same information to  those  responsible
           for handling an asylum claim  to  help  his  case.  Instead  the
           information he provided did not suggest exposure to  any  trauma
           to the point of his departure [88];

      vii) in making this particular finding I have taken into account  the
           different relationships that as a patient he might have with his
           own doctors as opposed to the relationship he  might  have  with
           figures  of  authority  and  that  he  might  have   been   less
           forthcoming with the latter. Nonetheless, I find that  he  would
           have been able to engage with the  authorities  because  he  has
           shown that he is able to do so in respect of other matters  such
           as his ability to approach the Afghan Embassy for a passport and
           his ability to engage with United Kingdom officials with a  view
           to ensuring he secured appropriate social  entitlement  benefits
           and suitable medical care. I consequently find that his  ability
           to approach and engage with others is not as limited as he would
           like me to believe. [89];

     viii) I also take into account that  he  has  in  fact  been  able  to
           provide historic information  about  his  personal  history  and
           circumstances around his arrival to the UK. But in contrast  has
           been unable to provide details of  other  matters  pertinent  to
           explain when pressed, for example the  incidence  of  trauma  he
           described to his doctors.  I  have  taken  into  account  Doctor
           Malkin's observation that this can be the result of PTSD  but  I
           do not accept as credible that he would have made no mention  of
           the trauma at all despite having been given  many  opportunities
           in which to do so [19]:

       ix) I consider the first test in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 [2005]
           IMM AR 409 where the Court of Appeal established six stage  test
           in cases concerning a breach of  Article  3.  I  find  that  the
           appellant's illness has not attained a minimum level of severity
           and required. I do not accept as credible that the appellant has
           suffered ill-treatment in Afghanistan or  that  he  has  been  a
           witness to the ill-treatment of others. I rely on  the  previous
           Immigration Judges findings. [93, 94]:

        x) I also considered the two suicides attempts. In relation to  the
           first attempt that took place on 6 February 2012,  I  note  that
           the appellant had not been taking his medication at the relevant
           time.  I  also  note  that   notwithstanding   the   appellant's
           description of "flashbacks to  previous  traumatic  experiences"
           the notes from the doctor's report  faxed  on  6  February  2012
           states "... He denied suicidal ideation" and "was not  deluded",
           he was fully orientated". [95]:

       xi) in relation to the overdose which  took  place  on  20  February
           2012. I take into account that the appellant was  released  soon
           thereafter. I find that his release is inconsistent with someone
           who is suspected of having a severe condition and of wanting  to
           take his own life. I also note  that  he  has  been  allowed  to
           collect and be responsible for taking his on  medication  and  I
           find this is inconsistent with someone who is considered  to  be
           at risk of taking an overdose of prescribed medication. [96]:

      xii) a note from 31  July  2012  (after  the  two  attempted  suicide
           attempts) states that "he believes if he harms himself and  sees
           blood, he will feel better within. Otherwise no major  delusions
           observed".

     xiii) Other incidents of self-harm were described.  I  also  note  the
           incidents of self-harm were self-reported whilst  he  was  being
           detained. Significantly they occurred in 2011 and I am told that
           his condition has since improved. [98]:

      xiv) Doctor Malkin reports that the appellant's condition appears  to
           be stable and he has shown signs of improvement. He has  had  no
           recent admissions to  psychiatric  hospitals  and  it  has  been
           suggested that he attends on a voluntary basis. He is  presently
           being treated by a GP and is seeking  guidance  from  his  Imam.
           [99]:

       xv) I note the doctors suggest that coping strategies are diminished
           in times of stress  and  that  a  return  will  present  such  a
           stressful situation as he will be returned to a place  where  he
           experienced trauma. I have taken this into account but I do  not
           accept as credible  that  he  did  experienced  trauma  of  ill-
           treatment as suggested. I note the adverse credibility  findings
           made in the previous appeal. It follows that I find he will  not
           be returned to a place of  previous  trauma  and  so  is  coping
           strategies will not be diminished  in  the  way  that  has  been
           suggested. [101]:

      xvi) I consider the second test in J. I find that the  minimum  level
           of severity has not been attained in this case. I  have  however
           considered any connection between the incidence of self-harm and
           removal. I find there is a connection between the self-harm  and
           the hearings. This is referred  to  by  the  respondent  in  her
           refusal letter and referred to by the appellant's own doctors. I
           agree with his observations and find there is a link between the
           episodes of increased anxiety and upcoming hearings but I do not
           accept there is a direct connection  between  the  incidence  of
           self-harm and with removal itself. [103, 104]:

     xvii) I consider the third test in J and do  not  find  the  appellant
           satisfies this test. I note that the findings  made  during  the
           previous  appeal.  When  assessing  the  appellant's  case,  the
           Immigration Judge concluded that the appellant was  not  a  real
           risk of persecution or other serious harm were he to  return  to
           Afghanistan.  I  have  considered  whether  the   new   evidence
           regarding his mental health changes this position and I find  it
           does not for the reasons set out above. [106]:

    xviii) the Judge considered the fourth and the  fifth  test  in  J  and
           stated that the appellant does  not  meet  the  requirements  in
           those two tests either.

      xix) I also take into account the decision in N v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA
           Civ 1369 and Bensaid. I find for the reasons stated  above  that
           the appellant has not demonstrated a likelihood of treatment  of
           such severity as to outweigh the findings in N.

       xx) I am asked to consider the implications of  KH  (Afghanistan)  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  1354
           where it was stated "the truth is that the  presence  of  mental
           illness amongst failed asylum seekers cannot really be  regarded
           as exceptional. Sadly, even asylum seekers with  mental  illness
           who  have  no  families  can  hardly  be   regarded   as   "very
           exceptional".  If  this  case  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  very
           exceptional one, there will inevitably be cases, which  will  be
           indistinguishable. A person with no  family  would  have  to  be
           equated with a person who has a family  but  whose  members  are
           unwilling or unable to look after him or  her.  I  cannot  think
           that Baroness Hale had such a wide category in  mind.  In  order
           for a case  to  be  "very  exceptional"  it  would  have  to  be
           exceptional inside the class of persons  with  mental  illnesses
           without family support. Perhaps a very old or very young  person
           would qualify were hardly an orderly adult".

The grounds of appeal

 4. The grounds of appeal  state  the  following  which  I  summarise.  The
    challenge to the  determination  is  threefold:  the  Judge  failed  to
    consider for the medical evidence rendering her  reasons  provided  for
    rejecting said evidence as unsustainable;  this  in  turn  led  to  the
    subsequent assessment under J as flawed. This  appeal  was  the  second
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant's first appeal  in
    February 2011 was rejected  of  the  bases  that  his  account  of  the
    treatment was not accepted and negative findings were made  in  respect
    of  the  appellant's  credibility  on  the  basis   that   there   were
    inconsistencies and contradictions that had not been addressed, and  he
    could not explain. The cumulative effect was  that  the  appellant  was
    found  to  be  incredible.  Since  the  appeal  and   those   findings,
    significant further evidence was obtained, namely  a  detailed  witness
    statement of the appellant and an independent medical report.

 5. In the case of Mibanga with his SS HD [2005] EW CA CAV 367,  the  Court
    of Appeal emphasised the importance  of  considering  medical  evidence
    relevant to credibility as part of the process of reaching a conclusion
    as to credibility. The Tribunal rejected the  appellant's  account  and
    further rejected the medical evidence, significantly the expert  report
    of chartered clinical psychologist Dr Anne Milkin. It is axiomatic that
    should the first-tier Tribunal assess the new evidence  and  thus  make
    adverse credibility findings that those findings  should  underpin  any
    assessment under J.

 6. The medical evidence before the Tribunal consisted of  some  130  pages
    including medical records and  significantly  the  expert  psychologist
    report of Ann Milkin. It is submitted that the expert  report  met  the
    test for medical evidence set out in JL (medical reports - credibility)
    China [2013] UKUT 00145 IAC. Accordingly, particular weight  should  be
    given to medical evidence that satisfies this threshold. Owing  to  the
    significant authority on the use  of  medical  reports,  the  appellant
    meets the threshold in the headnotes of the case.

 7. The Judge has not addressed  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  in  his
    witness statement nor the  independent  expert  report  of  Doctor  Ann
    Milkin. The Judge did not make reference  to  the  appellant's  witness
    statement in the determination and why he stated at paragraph  84  that
    the new evidence since the last appeal was limited to medical evidence.
    He failed to mention the detailed witness statement  of  the  appellant
    which constituted new evidence.

 8. At paragraph 86 of  the  determination,  the  Judge  accepts  that  the
    appellant is being treated for PTSD and yet has failed to  address  why
    she accepts that the appellant is receiving treatment for PTSD but  not
    the cause for such a diagnosis. The  Judges  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for her findings on this point despite accepting  the  relevant
    facts that the appellant has been treated for PTSD and depression  over
    a sustained period of time, there are two earlier diagnosis of PTSD and
    that the appellant will not have continued to be treated of a period of
    four years at a Centre which is a leading clinic for the  treatment  of
    inter-alia PTSD if the basis for such a diagnosis was a falsehood.

 9. The Upper Tribunal has emphasised that while the Judge is  entitled  to
    reject the clinical diagnosis supported by expert evidence,  she  "must
    give clear reasons for doing so which engage adequately with a  medical
    opinion representing the Judgement of a  professional  psychiatrist  on
    what he has seen of  the  appellant".  The  case  of  NBN  (psychiatric
    evidence discrepancies) Albania [2010] UKUT 279 IAC refers.  The  Judge
    has not given clear cogent reasons when rejecting the medical  evidence
    as was required of her.  The  Judge  provided  inadequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the material evidence.

10. The First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  following  Bensaid  v  United
    Kingdom [2001] AC Article 8 and Article 3 could be engaged  in  a  case
    involving mental illness, but as in that case, the  appellant  has  not
    shown any  exceptional  circumstances.  The  Tribunal  found  that  the
    medical treatment was available in Zimbabwe  and  the  appellant  could
    return to be with his family.

11. The Judge has provided inadequate reasons for rejecting  this  material
    evidence and in  failing  to  provide  clear  and  cogent  reasons  for
    departing from the medical evidence,  thus  supporting  the  contention
    that the evidence was not addressed with the  appropriate  care  as  is
    required.

Respondent's Rule 24 response

12. By way of a reply to the grant pursuant  to  Rule  24,  the  respondent
    stated the following which I summarise. The  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal directed himself appropriately. The  grounds  argue  that  the
    Judge failed to take into account  the  further  medical  evidence  and
    failed to give adequate  reasons  for  discounting  that  evidence.  At
    paragraph 84, the Judge  takes  as  his  starting  point  the  previous
    determination relating to the appellant and  then  expressly  turns  to
    look at the medical evidence that postdates it. It is  clear  from  the
    determination that the Judge made  findings  in  relation  to  the  new
    medical evidence and relied on by appellant from paragraphs 88 and  91.
    The Judge gave numerous reasons for rejecting the expert  evidence  and
    the suggestion that the Judge failed to give sufficient weight  to  the
    Report is merely a disagreement with  the  outcome.  There  is  nothing
    disclosed in the reasoning in paragraph 88 and 91  that  suggests  that
    the Judge did not follow the guidance outlined in the case of Mabanga.

Decision as to whether determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved
the making of an error of law?

13. I have given careful consideration to the determination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to ascertain if there are any  material  errors  of
    law. The Judge in a detailed and well-reasoned determination  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal. The Judge cited the relevant jurisprudence  and
    was  properly  guided  by  it.  The  appellant's  complaint  about  the
    determination has no valid legal bases but is a mere disagreement  with
    the Judge's findings of facts and the conclusions that he  came  to  on
    those facts.

14. In his determination, the Judge accurately states that in line with the
    case of  Devassleen,  the  previous  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be his starting point in the appeal. The  previous  Judge
    did not find the appellant credible and did not find credible his claim
    that he  was  persecuted  or  had  witnessed  any  traumatic  event  in
    Afghanistan. That is the position from which the Judge  considered  the
    evidence which was not before the previous First-tier Tribunal in  this
    appeal. The Judge correctly identified that the evidence which was  not
    before the previous Judge,  was  the  medical  evidence.  There  is  no
    complaint against the Judge  that  he  did  not  consider  the  medical
    evidence provided by the appellant. The complaint is that the Judge did
    not agree with the appellant's view on how the medical evidence  should
    have been considered and the conclusions reached.

15. A complaint is made that the Judge did not  refer  to  the  appellant's
    witness statement, in the determination. This is not borne out  because
    at paragraph 26 of the  determination,  the  Judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant has provided a bundle documents of 430  pages  and  "included
    within the bundle was the appellant's  witness  statement".  Therefore,
    the Judge considered all the evidence in the round. It is not incumbent
    on the Judge to set out each piece of evidence in his determination.

16.  The  Judge  took  into  account  the  appellant's   claim   that   the
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence at  the  previous  Tribunal
    were due to his PTSD and  said,  Doctor  Malkin's  observation  reveals
    that. The Judge give cogent reasons for why he did not accept that  the
    appellant's diagnosis of PTSD would have led to the inconsistencies  in
    the evidence at the previous hearing.

17. In reaching his decision, the Judge stated that the PTSD cannot explain
    the inconsistencies in the evidence and took into account at  paragraph
    88 that the appellant is in fact able to remember and share information
    with the healthcare professionals involved in his  care.  Consequently,
    he should have been able to  provide  the  same  information  to  those
    responsible for handling an asylum claim to help his case. Instead  the
    information he provided did not suggest exposure to any  trauma  up  to
    the point of his departure. This  is  a  perfectly  sustainable  reason
    because if the appellant was able to share information with his medical
    care professionals, there was no reason why he could not share it  with
    the immigration officials.

18. The Judge also took into account at paragraph 98 that the appellant may
    have a different relationship with his own doctors as  opposed  to  the
    relationship he might have with figures in authority and that he  might
    have been less forthcoming with the latter. Nonetheless the Judge found
    that he would have been able to engage with the authorities because  he
    has shown that he is able to do so in respect of other matters such  as
    his ability to approach the Afghan  Embassy  for  a  passport  and  his
    ability to engage with United Kingdom officials with a view to ensuring
    he secured appropriate social entitlement benefits and suitable medical
    care. The judge was entitled to find that his ability to  approach  and
    engage with others is not as limited as he  would  like  the  Judge  to
    believe.

19. The other reason given by the Judge for why the appellant's PTSD cannot
    explain the inconsistencies in his evidence before the previous  Judge,
    was at paragraph 19. He stated that the appellant has in fact been able
    to  provide  historic  information  about  his  personal  history   and
    circumstances around his arrival to the UK. But in  contrast  has  been
    unable to provide details of other matters pertinent  to  explain  when
    pressed, for example the  incidence  of  trauma  he  described  to  his
    doctors. The Judge was entitled to find that there was no evidence that
    PTSD leads to selective memory which depends on who the appellant talks
    to. The Judge said also did not find credible that the appellant  would
    have made no mention of the trauma he  suffered,  despite  having  been
    given many opportunities in which to do so. The Judge therefore did not
    accept the new  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  that  his  PTSD
    explained the inconsistencies  in  his  evidence  before  the  previous
    Judge. These are sustainable findings and there  is  no  perversity  in
    them.

20. Having made this finding, the Judge was then entitled to  rely  on  the
    findings of the previous Judge in his determination who found that  the
    appellant had not witnessed any incident of trauma in  Afghanistan  for
    him to be traumatised. The Judge  correctly  found  that  the  previous
    Judges adverse credibility findings are his starting point.  There  was
    no credible evidence which persuaded the Judge otherwise.

21. The Judge had regard to the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  in  respect  of
    mental health relevant to  Article  3  and  Article  8  in  respect  of
    physical and moral integrity. He referred to the leading case  of  N  v
    Secretary of State for the home Department [2005] UK HL 31 where it was
    held by  the  House  of  Lords  that  there  must  be  shown  that  the
    appellant's medical condition has reached such a  critical  state  that
    there are compelling and humanitarian grounds for not removing  him  or
    her to a place which lacks the medical and social services which he  or
    she would need in order to prevent acute suffering. The House of  Lords
    approach was confirmed by the European Court of Human Rights. The Judge
    was therefore aware of  the  standard  against  which  the  appellant's
    appeal has to be assessed and recognised that the threshold to  succeed
    under Article 3 on medical grounds is very high.

22. The Judge took into account the case of  Bensaid  where  the  applicant
    suffered from long-term schizophrenia and it was argued on  his  behalf
    that his condition would seriously deteriorate if he  returned  to  his
    home country because of difficulties in obtaining suitable  medication.
    It was found that while in principle this could engage  Article  3  the
    Court found that there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
    claimant should succeed.

23. Similarly, the Judge found that in this case there are  no  exceptional
    circumstances and the appellant's appeal fails to  establish  his  case
    under Article 3 and Article 8 of the ECHR  in  respect  of  his  mental
    health problems.

24. The Judge in making this decision  gave  proper  consideration  to  the
    expert medical report of Doctor  Malkin  and  the  appellant's  witness
    statement. Doctor Malkin's reports state that the appellant's condition
    appears to be stable and has shown signs of improvement. He has had  no
    recent admissions to psychiatric hospitals and it has been suggested to
    him that he attends on a voluntary basis. He is presently being treated
    by a GP and is seeking guidance from his Imam.

25. The Judge also took into account the decision in AE and  FE  [2002]  UK
    IAT  05237  where  it  was  stated  that  all  those  involved  in  the
    appellant's medical care in preparation of  medical  reports,  accepted
    the appellant's account put to them as truthful and found the events he
    described as having occurred to be causative  of  psychiatric  illness.
    The history taken by his doctor's records for the  appellant  has  told
    them. They have accepted his account but by him as truthful. The  Judge
    stated that it is for him to decide issues  regarding  the  appellant's
    credibility with regard to causative incidents and the Judge found that
    he does not accept that the appellant has any psychiatric  or  physical
    condition as a result of  his  claim  problems  or  of  any  trauma  in
    Afghanistan. The Judge was entitled to find that the medical fraternity
    was not in a position to find the appellant credible or otherwise.  The
    previous Judge who heard the  appellant's  appeal  and  heard  all  the
    evidence found the appellant not to be credible.

26. The Judge also took into account that even after  the  appellant's  two
    suicide attempts, not only was he released after the second attempt, he
    was given medication  to  self-medicate  which  demonstrated  that  the
    authorities did not have any  concerns  about  the  appellant's  future
    suicidal tendencies. These are sustainable finding that  the  appellant
    is not a suicide risk presently  and  that  even  if  he  is  that  his
    condition could not be managed in transit. The  Judge  correctly  found
    that the appellant can return on the non-detained route if he  chooses.
    The Judge correctly found that the appellant  is  being  removed  to  a
    place where he has not demonstrated  that  he  experienced  a  specific
    trauma.

27. The appellant submitted that the expert report met the test for medical
    evidence set out in JL (medical reports  -  credibility)  China  [2013]
    UKUT 00145 IAC and stated that the appellant meets the tests in J.  The
    Judge however resoundingly found otherwise. He considered each test  in
    J and for good reasons found that the appellant was not captured by any
    one of them.

28. The Judge was aware as the low quality of the  treatment  available  to
    Afghan nationals  with  mental  disabilities  and  found  that  medical
    facilities in Afghanistan are not at par with the medical facilities in
    this country but noted that that is not reason enough for the appellant
    to be granted humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom. The  Judge
    considered that notwithstanding the submission by  the  appellant  that
    there are only two psychiatrists in Afghanistan, the appellant in  this
    country  has  sought  the  assistance  from  a   variety   of   medical
    professionals including the GP who treats his condition at present.  He
    said that the appellant  will  be  able  to  seek  equivalent  care  in
    Afghanistan. He further said that the appellant is able to rely on  the
    techniques of coping mechanisms acquired in the United Kingdom to  deal
    with stressful situations. He accepted that the appellant will have  to
    pay for his medication but of the medication is available  nonetheless.
    The appellant is also seeking guidance from his  local  Imam  which  he
    will also be able to do  in  Afghanistan.  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant does not have an objective or subjective  foundation  to  his
    fear that his condition will deteriorate on his return to Afghanistan.

29. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge  did  not  make  a  material
    error of law in refusing the appellant's appeal was under Article 3 and
    Article 8. I find that a different Upper Tribunal Judge would not reach
    any other conclusion taking into account all the evidence and  the  law
    in this appeal.

    Decision

    Appeal Dismissed


Signed by   Date 17th day of December 2015
Mrs S Chana
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

