
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08566/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 July 2013                             |                           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                   MR A P
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr M Sowerby of
           counsel instructed by S Satha & Co solicitors
          For the Respondent: Ms M Tanner a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on  17  September
      1985. His appeal has been remitted to the Upper Tribunal by the  Court
      of Appeal for reconsideration.


   2. The  respondent's  original  decision,  to  give  directions  for  the
      appellant's removal from the UK following the refusal of  asylum,  was
      made on 19 July 2011 with a detailed explanation in  the  reasons  for
      refusal letter of 15 July 2011.


   3. The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-Tier Tribunal
      Judge Halliwell on 22 August 2011. He found the appellant  not  to  be
      credible and concluded that he would not be at risk on return  to  Sri
      Lanka. He dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection  and
      human rights grounds. The appellant then sought permission  to  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal which was granted.


   4. On 17 January 2012 Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Wood  TD  heard  the
      appeal, concluded that Judge Halliwell had not erred in law and upheld
      his determination.


   5. The  appellant  then  made  a  misconceived  application  for  further
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was rejected  on  the
      basis that the application should have been for permission  to  appeal
      to the Court of Appeal.


   6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal
      which was refused by an Upper Tribunal judge.  The  appellant  renewed
      his application to the Court of Appeal.  On  18  December  2012  Lloyd
      Jones LJ granted permission to appeal stating; "there was a great deal
      of evidence here supporting the view that AP would not be at  risk  on
      return to Sri Lanka.  However,  as  in  RS  (Sri  Lanka),  the  proper
      approach to the  medical  evidence  which  conflicts  with  the  other
      evidence justifies a second appeal."


   7. The respondent took the view that the appeal should  be  "remitted  to
      the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration" and a consent order  was  made
      by Davis LJ on 11 April 2013 the relevant portions of which state; "1.
      The decision of the Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
      promulgated on 17 June 2012 be quashed; 2. The appeal is remitted to a
      different immigration judge at the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
      Asylum Chamber) for reconsideration." There is an agreed Statement  of
      Reasons accompanying the order.


   8. The appeal came before me for mention on 5  June  2013.  Both  parties
      were represented. The question arose as to which decision  was  to  be
      quashed as there was no decision of either  the  First-Tier  or  Upper
      Tribunal promulgated on 17 June  2012.  The  decision  of  Judge  Wood
      followed a hearing on 17  January  2012  and  was  promulgated  on  13
      February 2012. However, as the decision of Judge Halliwell was in  the
      First-Tier Tribunal and the  decision  of  Judge  Wood  was  the  only
      substantive decision in the Upper Tribunal and the Order refers to  an
      Upper Tribunal decision it was agreed with  the  representatives  that
      there must have been a  typographical  error  and  that  the  decision
      quashed was that of Judge Wood. It was then common ground that my task
      was to decide whether there was an error of law  in  the  decision  of
      Judge Halliwell such that it should be set aside and if so  whether  I
      should remake the decision or decide how and when this should be done.


   9. On 30 December 2008 the  appellant  was  granted  a  student  visa  to
      undertake a PhD course in computing at a London College. He arrived in
      the UK on 19 January 2009 using his own passport. His period of  leave
      expired on 30 April 2011. He did not  study  at  the  college  he  had
      indicated but went to another where he did not complete  his  studies.
      He claimed asylum on 26 May 2011.


  10. The appellant claimed to have been a supporter and helper of the  LTTE
      but not a member. He had collected funds, arranged  accommodation  for
      members, collected and passed on information about military  movements
      and checkpoints. He was arrested by  the  police  in  August  2008  on
      suspicion of involvement with the LTTE. He was detained for two and  a
      half months, interrogated and tortured. He  was  beaten,  cut  with  a
      knife and burned with a hot metal rod. His uncle paid a bribe  and  he
      escaped, resulting in the issue of an arrest  warrant.  An  agent  was
      employed to made arrangements for him to  come  to  the  UK  where  he
      arrived in January 2009. He heard that in April 2011 the  police  went
      to his house with the arrest warrant looking for him.


  11. Both parties were represented at the hearing  before  Judge  Halliwell
      and the appellant gave evidence. The judge found that  he  was  not  a
      credible witness. He did not believe the appellant's account of events
      or that he would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka. He  dismissed  the
      appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.


  12. The grounds of appeal originally submitted in September 2011 have been
      refined and the appellant now relies on the submissions  contained  in
      Mr Sowerby's skeleton argument which is undated but submitted  on  the
      day of the  hearing  before  me.  Initially,  I  was  told  that  this
      superceded  the  original  grounds  of  appeal  but,   in   his   oral
      submissions, Mr Sowerby went back to and relied on paragraphs 5 and  6
      of the original grounds in which it was argued that the judge erred in
      law by failing to  consider  the  country  material  and  the  country
      guidance cases before him in the  context  of  whether  the  appellant
      would be at risk on return even in the light of  the  judge's  adverse
      credibility findings.


  13. Mr Sowerby relied on the authorities of  HE  (DRC  -  credibility  and
      psychiatric report) DRC [2004] UKAIT 00321 and  SA  (Somalia)  v  SSHD
      [2006] EWCA Civ 1302. I asked him whether  what  the  Judge  Halliwell
      said in paragraph 31 of the determination indicated that  he  accepted
      the medical evidence from Dr  Costa  that  the  appellant  scars  were
      caused by burns from hot metal. Mr Sowerby submitted that the  finding
      was ambiguous and  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  reaching  the
      conclusion that evidence should been provided as to the age of  scars.
      He accepted that the subsequent medical report which he said indicated
      that it was not possible to give the age of scars more than a year old
      was submitted later and was not before Judge Halliwell.


  14. I drew Mr Sowerby's attention to paragraph 15.7 of  the  determination
      recording the cross examination of the appellant which states;  "Asked
      why he went to Denmark in December 2010 - he said  it  was  to  see  a
      relative for one or two weeks. He had  not  arranged  for  someone  to
      cause the scars."


  15. Mr Sowerby submitted that nobody had suggested that  Dr  Costa  lacked
      the necessary qualifications. The judge had  failed  to  consider  the
      then current country guidance cases of TK  (Tamils,  LP  updated)  Sri
      Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049 and LP (LTTE area -  Tamils  -  Colombo  -
      risk?) Sri Lanka CG [2007] UKAIT  00076.  On  return  the  appellant's
      scarring would attract the adverse attention of the authorities.  Both
      representatives were aware of the very recent country guidance case of
      GJ and others (post-Civil War: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
      00319 (IAC). Mr Sowerby submitted that, even if the  current  guidance
      had changed, the judge's failure to address the then  current  country
      guidance amounted to a material error of law. It went to the  question
      of the appellant's credibility. I was asked to find that the judge had
      erred in law, to set aside his decision and to return  the  appeal  to
      the First-Tier Tribunal for a new decision to be made.


  16.  Ms  Tanner  submitted  that  Judge  Halliwell  reached  the   adverse
      credibility finding after considering all the evidence  including  the
      medical evidence. He had not put the cart before  the  horse.  It  was
      clear from the determination that he had accepted the medical evidence
      that the scars were caused by burns. There was  no  disagreement  with
      the evidence given by Dr Costa. The judge accepted Dr Costa's evidence
      that the injuries could not have been caused accidentally or have been
      self-inflicted. It was open to the judge to conclude  that  the  scars
      were not caused in the circumstances the appellant claimed. It was not
      for the judge to reach a conclusion as to an alternative  scenario  in
      circumstances  where  he  accepted   the   causation   but   not   the
      circumstances. There was no evidence before the judge as to whether it
      was medically possible to tell the age of scars.


  17. Ms Tanner submitted that paragraph 15.7 of the determination indicated
      that the appellant was  asked  in  cross-examination  whether  he  had
      arranged for injuries to be  inflicted  which  led  to  the  scarring.
      Whilst he denied this it raised the matter and would have alerted  the
      appellant's representatives. The appellant had no  family  history  of
      involvement with the LTTE  and  if  his  account  of  events  was  not
      accepted the country guidance in force at the time of the hearing  did
      not show that he had a profile which would put him at risk on  return.
      It had not been suggested that on the judge's findings he would now be
      at risk in line with GJ.


  18. In reply, Mr Sowerby clarified what the appellant  was  seeking  if  I
      found that the judge had erred in law and submitted that the judge had
      made no findings as to whether  the  appellant  had  arranged  to  the
      injuries to be inflicted. I reserved my determination.


  19. The main thrust of the appellant's case since the hearing before Judge
      Halliwell has been that he erred in law by failing to give  sufficient
      weight to the medical evidence  from  Dr  Costa,  disagreed  with  the
      doctor's conclusions without giving proper  reasons  and  reached  the
      conclusion that the  appellant  was  not  a  credible  witness  before
      considering the medical evidence.


  20. On a close examination of the medical evidence and the determination I
      find that Judge Halliwell did not disagree with Dr Costas conclusions,
      gave appropriate weight  to  his  opinions  and  reached  the  adverse
      credibility finding after considering all the evidence  in  the  round
      including the medical evidence.


  21. In his report dated 19  August  2011  Dr  Costa  said;  "After  having
      considered each scar individually, I have made  very  clear  that  the
      scars seen which Mr AP claims were caused by  his  having  been  burnt
      with a hot piece of metal are diagnostic  of  scars  which  have  been
      caused in this way. I  have  gone  as  far  as  quoting  the  Istanbul
      Protocol above as this would enable the reader to fully understand how
      I reached my conclusions. The scars seen which are the alleged  result
      of his having been cut with a knife were highly likely  to  have  been
      caused in the manner described but there are  other  possible  causes.
      Burns have a very characteristic shape and form and for that reason  I
      can corroborate all of his claims in relation to the scars seen  which
      he claims were caused by burns  with  hot  metal.  Furthermore,  given
      their size, position, form and characteristics the scars do not appear
      to have been caused by accident or indeed self-inflicted."


  22. I compare this with what Judge Halliwell said in  paragraph  31;  "The
      other significant issue is the extensive scarring on  the  appellant's
      back. Dr Costa is satisfied the scarring can only have been caused  by
      burns from hot metal - and is thus  consistent  with  the  appellant's
      account. I have not been so persuaded, even to the low level of  proof
      required. It is significant that the appellant made  no  reference  to
      burns in the interview. There is no analysis by Dr Costa of the age of
      the scarring. That in my view is a significant omission. The  scarring
      is extensive and without clear evidence it was caused within the  last
      three years, I can reach no conclusion as to its cause, save that  the
      weight of the medical evidence is that it was  caused  by  burns.  The
      burns may have been caused three years ago, much longer ago,  or  more
      recently, without any medical evidence on this point I  have  to  view
      the evidence in the round. I did  not  find  the  appellant  to  be  a
      truthful witness and I have not been persuaded, even to the low  level
      of proof required, that the scarring arose as the appellant  asserted.
      This matter could have been put to rest  by  the  appellant  obtaining
      evidence from Columbo of his asserted  medical  treatment  immediately
      after his alleged release, but no such material  was  before  me.  The
      matter could also have been evidenced by hearing  testimony  from  the
      appellant's brother - had the appellant  elected  to  call  him."  (My
      emphasis).


  23. I find that this paragraph and in particular the passage which I  have
      underlined there is  a  clear  finding  by  Judge  Halliwell  that  he
      accepted Dr Costa's opinion that the scars  on  the  appellant's  back
      were caused by burns and, in the context of what is  said  earlier  in
      the same paragraph, that they were caused by burns from hot  metal.  I
      reject Mr Sowerby submission that there is  any  ambiguity.  What  the
      judge was rejecting was not Dr Costa's medical opinion that the  scars
      were caused by burns from hot metal but his non-medical  opinion  that
      they were "consistent with the appellant's account".
  24. Looking  at  this  paragraph  in  the  round  with  the  rest  of  the
      determination I find that Judge Halliwell did not put the cart  before
      the  horse.  He  reached  the  adverse   credibility   finding   after
      considering all the evidence, including the medical evidence.


  25. It is accepted that the medical evidence before Judge  Halliwell  from
      Dr Costa said nothing about  the  age  of  the  appellant's  scars  or
      whether it was medically possible to estimate the age of scars.  There
      was no other medical evidence before him about this.  Dr  Costa  could
      have dealt with this but did not. In the circumstances I can  find  no
      error of law in the judge's reasoning as to the lack of evidence as to
      the age of the scars. Whilst it is not relevant  to  the  question  of
      whether Judge Halliwell erred in law on the evidence before him I note
      that the medical report from Professor Lingam dated  11  January  2012
      states on page 7; "The said incident was in August 2008 which is  more
      than three years ago. The scars are therefore now permanent  and  will
      not change. Scars become permanent by one year." I also note  that  on
      page 8 he  states;  "Secondly,  I  considered  if  these  were  caused
      deliberately  to  mislead.  I  have  ruled  that,  no  way   I   could
      scientifically differentiate between the wounds inflicted deliberately
      from the wounds inflicted from the said torture. They are not from any
      rituals." In paragraph  12  of  his  skeleton  Mr  Sowerby  refers  to
      Professor Lingam's opinion as to scars caused by "surgical procedure".
      Taken in context I take this to be a  reference  to  regular  surgical
      procedures for proper  medical  reasons  rather  than  what  Professor
      Lingam describes earlier as actions taken "deliberately to mislead".


  26. It was for the judge to reach conclusions in relation to the  evidence
      before him. He was under no duty to make findings as to other possible
      circumstances  in  which  the  injuries  might  have  been  inflicted.
      However, I note what  is  said  in  paragraph  15.7  that,  in  cross-
      examination, the appellant was asked, but denied, that he had arranged
      for someone to cause the scars. I also note that the point  is  likely
      to have been taken on board by those acting for the appellant  because
      Professor Lingam was asked to address this. In these circumstances  it
      could not have been argued that the only possible  conclusion  in  the
      light of the medical evidence was that the scars were not only  caused
      in the manner but in the circumstances the appellant claimed.


  27. The appellant's grounds of appeal submitted with the  application  for
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in August 2011  argue  that
      the judge erred in law in failing to consider the background  evidence
      and the country guidance cases of TK and LP. The  grounds  provide  no
      clear indication of how it is suggested that  the  appellant's  asylum
      claim might succeed if, as I now find, Judge Halliwell's wide  ranging
      adverse credibility finding is not flawed. Furthermore,  there  is  no
      reference to any particular background evidence. However, in the light
      of the  limited  evidence  which  was  accepted,  including  that  the
      appellant is a young Tamil from Sri Lanka who has scars  on  his  arms
      and back I find that he would not succeed on  an  application  of  the
      guidelines contained in these country guidance cases. He is  of  Tamil
      ethnicity, has scars on his back and arms,  would  be  returning  from
      London and has made an asylum claim abroad. On the judge's findings he
      does not have a previous record as a suspected or actual  LTTE  member
      or  supporter;  does  not  have  a  previous  criminal  record  and/or
      outstanding arrest warrant; is not a bail jumper and/or  escapee  from
      custody; has not signed a confession or similar document; has not been
      asked by the security forces to become an informer; did  not  departed
      illegally from Sri Lanka; and does not have relatives in the LTTE.  He
      should be able to show that he came to the UK with leave as a student.
      It is not clear whether he lacks an ID card or other documentation. LP
      was decided in August  2007  and  TK  in  December  2009.  Looking  at
      paragraph 144 of TK in conjunction with paragraph 217 of  LP  and  the
      authorities then specific focus of current interest in  tracking  down
      LTTE cadres, the appellant's lack of other significant  factors  means
      that he is not likely to come to  the  attention  of  the  authorities
      resulting in a body inspection and discovery of scarring resulting  in
      a  real  risk  of  arrest,  detention  and  subsequent  ill-treatment.
      Assessing the appellant's circumstances in the round in the  light  of
      LP as modified by TK I find that the appellant would not be at risk on
      return. Even if I had concluded otherwise and that the judge erred  in
      law I would have found that the error was not material or such that  I
      should set aside the decision because  the  appellant's  circumstances
      would now need to be assessed in the light of GJ. Mr Sowerby  has  not
      suggested that the appellant would be at risk in  the  light  of  that
      assessment of current conditions in Sri Lanka for  a  Tamil  returning
      from the UK. I find that he would not be at risk. I am  not  persuaded
      by Mr Sowerby's submission that Judge Halliwell erred in  law  by  not
      addressing the then current country guidance  or  that  this  had  any
      relevance to the question of the appellant's credibility.


  28. I conclude that the judge  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  his
      determination.


  29. Previously judges have made an anonymity orders in  relation  to  this
      appellant and this appeal. I consider that it is necessary to continue
      these.


      Direction regarding anonymity


      Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of their family. This  direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 10 July
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

