

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08441/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reason Promulgated    |
|On 4 April 2016                           |On 17 May 2016                   |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                             MR KAHIN ABDURAHMAN

                        (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Warren (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal  against  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M J H Wilson hereinafter "the
judge") promulgated on 5 November 2015, dismissing his appeal against  the
respondent's decision of 15 May 2015 to refuse to grant asylum or any other
form of international protection.  I have decided, for the reasons  set  out
below, to set aside the judge's  decision  (whilst  not  accepting  all  the
arguments advanced on behalf of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal) and to
remit so that matters can be considered afresh by  the  First-tier Tribunal
and so that the decision may be remade.

2.    The appellant is, it now seems, to be accepted a national  of  Somalia
who was born on 1 January 1982.  He entered the UK on 31 December 2005 at
Heathrow Airport in possession of a Djibouti passport which did not belong
to him.  He was detained upon arrival and it is recorded that his claim  for
asylum was made on 2 January 2006.  As to  the  matters  underpinning  his
asylum claim, he said that he is a member of a Somalian  minority  clan  the
Bandhabow and that he is from Mogadishu in Somalia.  He also  said  that  he
and his family had suffered ill-treatment at  the  hands  of  majority  clan
members, that a number of his family members had been  killed  and  that  he
had left the country in 2001, living illegally in other countries  including
Djibouti, prior to coming to the UK.

3.    The respondent did not, it is fair to say, deal with the asylum  claim
promptly.  There appears to have been some errors  in  the  decision making
process which it is not necessary for me to revisit  in  this  determination
but, eventually, the respondent made the  above  decision  which  forms  the
subject of this appeal.  In  so  doing,  the  respondent  rejected,  as  not
credible,  the  appellant's  claims  concerning  previous  ill-treatment  in
Somalia.  The respondent thought that, in any  event,  given  changes  which
had taken place in Somalia and, in particular in  Mogadishu,  the  appellant
would not now face any risk upon return.  It was  asserted  that  Al Shabab
had withdrawn from Mogadishu  and  it  was  suggested  that  general  living
conditions there had improved and that there  was  no  longer  a  difficulty
with clan based  persecution.   It  could  not  be  said,  with  respect  to
humanitarian protection, that the conditions set out  in  Article 15(c)  of
the Qualification Directive existed.  Nor was the appellant likely  to  face
conditions which would breach Article 3 of the European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR).  As to Article 8, the respondent thought that none  of  what
might be described as the Article 8 related Immigration Rules applied  and
that there were no exceptional circumstances which could justify a grant  of
leave to remain on Article 8 grounds outside the rules.

4.    The appellant's appeal was heard on 29 October 2015.   Both  parties
were represented.  He gave oral evidence as did two witnesses called on  his
behalf, the witness evidence relating only to the issue of clan  membership.
 It is possible that there was some misunderstanding  on  the  part  of  the
judge as to precisely what was being contended on behalf of  the  appellant.
Ms Warren, who did not represent the appellant before the  judge,  told  me
that it was not argued at all that the  appellant  was  entitled  to  asylum
although the judge appeared to think that it was.  That  may  have  been  in
consequence of the way in which matters were articulated to  him  but  I  do
not know.  In any event, there was advanced on behalf of  the  appellant  an
argument based upon what is said in the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in
Secretary of State for the Home Department v R(S) [2007] EWCA Civ 546 to
the effect that he should have been granted indefinite leave  to  remain  on
the basis of the delay in his asylum claim being  processed.   A  particular
point which was made in that context was that  had  the  asylum  claim  been
dealt with promptly then so long as it was accepted that the appellant is  a
member of a minority clan, (which the judge did appear to accept)  he  would
probably have been granted asylum  without  any  real  difficulty.   It  was
further contended that the appeal should succeed on humanitarian  protection
grounds and under Article 3 because of the general conditions he would face
upon return to Mogadishu and that since he would not (it was  asserted)   be
able to draw upon support from family and friends he would end up in an  IDP
camp.  The Article 8 arguments, in looking at a letter written by  Bradford
Law Centre on 12 October 2015 which the Centre had said should be  treated
as a skeleton argument, seems to have been  based  upon  the  difficulty  in
removing persons from the United Kingdom  to  Somalia  though,  of  course,
there were  also  considerations  regarding  private  life  based  upon  his
relatively long-term residence in the UK.  There was also a contention  that
the respondent ought to have considered granting leave under  the  terms  of
its policy as set out in Chapter 53 of  its  Enforcement  Instructions  and
Guidance.

5.    The judge, in  a  careful  determination,  distinguished  between  the
circumstances obtaining in this appeal and those  relating  to  one  of  the
parties in R(S).  In particular, he noted that in R(S) it had been  accepted
by the Court of Appeal that they were dealing with  not  simply  a  case  of
delay but of a deliberate and unlawful decision taken by the Home Office in
2001 to postpone the consideration of various  asylum  claims  in  order  to
enable them to  prioritise  other  asylum  claims  and  that  that,  in  the
circumstances, had amounted  to  conspicuous  unfairness  and  an  abuse  of
power.  As to risk on return, the judge (although it  seems  that  this  was
not argued before him in any event) found that there was  no  risk  stemming
from Al Shabab. Nor, in the context of humanitarian protection, was there a
risk based upon Article 15(c) bearing in mind what had  been  said  by  the
Upper Tribunal in MOJ and Others (return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG 2014
UKUT 00442 (IAC).  As to any risk of the appellant having to live in an IDP
camp upon return to Somalia in circumstances which would amount to a  breach
of Article 3, the judge concluded that the appellant  had  failed  to  show
that he would have a lack of support such that he would end  up  in  such  a
camp facing such conditions though he did not appear to  disagree  with  the
proposition that if he did find himself in an IDP  camp  the  conditions  he
would  face,  as  suggested  in  MOJ,  would  probably  breach  Article 3.
Concerning that matter he said this:

      "     20.  I find that the appellant failed to show  that  he  had  no
      family living in Somalia.  For example he  claimed  in  his  screening
      interview record in 2006 that both  his  parents  were  dead,  yet  he
      submitted no evidence of this even though he  stated  at  the  hearing
      that he was born and brought up in Mogadishu and even  though  he  has
      had almost 10 years in  which  to  produce  evidence  of  his  parents
      respective deaths.   I  find  that  he  failed  to  show  why  it  was
      impossible to obtain  such  evidence.   I  furthermore  note  that  he
      claimed that his brother's whereabouts, Jamal, was  unknown  but  then
      stated that he was not in Somalia, a claim that in the absence  of  an
      explanation I find somewhat contradictory.  Additionally I  note  from
      his screening interview that he  stated  he  had  siblings  living  in
      Saudi Arabia, including his sister, Sharifa,  with  whom  he  was  in
      contact and who had financially supported him.  However  I  note  from
      his most recent witness statement that he now claims  that  she  died.
      He failed to state when this  allegedly  occurred  and,  as  with  the
      alleged deaths of his parents, he submitted  no  evidence  in  support
      despite having been in contact with his brother-in-law, with  whom  he
      apparently is now no  longer  in  contact.   Now,  he  claims,  he  is
      'unaware' of any relatives living in Somalia and would therefore  have
      nowhere to go and no access to money."

6.    The judge then, without making it absolutely clear, seemed to  accept,
at least by implication, that the appellant is of  Bandhabow  ethnicity  but
thought that this would not give rise to any difficulties for him and, as  I
understand it, that it might even lead to his being able to  obtain  support
from his  other  clan  members  upon  return.   He  also  thought  that  the
appellant had failed to show he would be unable to obtain financial  support
from others who had assisted him in the past.  Finally, as to that, he  also
thought that, given that he had been able to  obtain  work  in  the  UK  and
elsewhere, the appellant would be able to earn  a  living  in  Mogadishu  or
somewhere else in Somalia.

7.    As to Article 8, the judge conducted an assessment outside the rules,
it seemingly not having been contended before him that there was any  viable
argument based on Article 8 within the rules, and he followed the five fold
test set out in Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department  2004
UKHL 27.  He noted that the appellant had been in the UK for in  excess  of
nine  years  but  said  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  he  has
established family life in the UK and that although he will enjoy a  private
life here there was no evidence before him "as to how or in what way  it  is
constituted".  He referred to section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002 which he observed obliged him to attach  little  weight
to private  life  established  when  a  claimant's  immigration  status  was
precarious and, in light of all of that, he concluded  that  Article 8  was
not, in fact, engaged at all so that the  arguments  failed  at  the  second
stage of the Razgar process. He added that, in any event,  even  if  he  was
wrong about that,  he  would  have  concluded  that  any  interference  with
Article 8 rights was proportionate.

8.    There  followed  an  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal.   Permission  was  granted  by  a  judge  of  the   First-
tier Tribunal despite his describing the  grounds  as  being  "over-wordy".
The salient part of the grant reads as follows:

      "In particular,  I  consider  it  arguable  that  in  considering  the
      appellant Article 8 case, the judge has not sufficiently factored  in
      the very long delay by the respondent in  making  a  decision  on  the
      appellant's claim for asylum and, as per paragraph 3 of the  grounds,
      given the circumstances that have prevailed  in  Somalia  over  recent
      years it may have been  unreasonable  for  the  judge  to  expect  the
      appellant to produce corroborating evidence in relation to the claimed
      deaths of his parents (see the judge's paragraph 20)."

9.    There was then a hearing before the  Upper Tribunal  (before  me)  so
that the question of whether the judge had erred in law  and,  if  so,  what
should flow from that could be considered.   Representation  was  as  stated
above and I heard oral submissions from each representative.  I  have  taken
all of what was said into account.

10.   As indicated above, I have decided to set the decision aside.   As  to
the consideration under Article 3, it does seem to  me,  as  noted  in  the
grant  of  permission,  that  the  judge  did  not  properly  consider   the
difficulties that there might well have been in obtaining any  corroborative
evidence of the claimed death of the appellant's parents.  As  I  understand
it, his account is that both must have died when he was very young.   It  is
well known that there has been a breakdown  of  law  and  order  in  Somalia
spanning a  number  of  years  which  might  have  meant  the  obtaining  of
corroborative documentary evidence would  simply  not  have  been  possible.
There might well have been difficulties in tracing any witnesses  who  might
be able to provide statements concerning the death of his parents.  It  does
seem to me that, notwithstanding the point the judge  makes  to  the  effect
that  the appellant has had many years to try to obtain some evidence  about
all of this, the judge's approach has not taken account of what  would  seem
to be obvious difficulties in seeking to  obtain  such  evidence.   Further,
although the judge detected inconsistency in the appellant having said  that
his brother's whereabouts were unknown but that he was not in Somalia, I  do
not  necessarily  detect  any  such  inconsistency  myself.   If  what   the
appellant was seeking to say was that he does not believe his brother is  in
Somalia but he does not actually know where, outside of Somalia he is,  then
that would not seem to me to be inconsistent or  contradictory.   The  judge
was not obliged to accept the appellant's assertions that he would  have  no
family or other support available to him upon return to Mogadishu  but  such
a conclusion had to be based upon a proper consideration  of  the  evidence.
I do conclude, therefore, that in this respect, and despite his  commendably
thorough approach, the judge  did  err  and  that  his  error  was  material
because had he decided the appellant would not have sufficient support  such
that he would end up in an IDP camp he  would  probably,  in  light  of  the
prevailing case law and in particular MOJ, have concluded  that  this  would
amount to a breach of Article 3.

11.   Turning to Article 8, the written grounds criticised  the  judge  for
failing to carry out "a proper balancing operation", and  sought  to  stress
the appellant's long period of residence in the UK and the fact that he  has
worked here.  It does seem to me, though, that little in the way of  written
or oral evidence was presented to the judge as to the  nature,  quality  and
substance of the  appellant's  private  life,  a  point  the  judge  himself
rightly made.  For example, there does not appear to be anything  about  any
strands or aspects of his private life, at least in  any  proper  detail  at
all,  in  the  appellant's  most   recent   witness   statement,   that   of
2 March 2015.  Nevertheless, as the judge who granted permission to appeal
noted, there had been a very long delay in the processing by the  respondent
of the appellant's  asylum  claim  and  such,  in  my  judgment,  had  clear
relevance, whilst not being  decisive  of  itself,  to  a  consideration  of
proportionality.  I  appreciate  that  the  judge  found  that  he  was  not
actually required to form a view as to proportionality (although he  did  go
on to do so) because Article 8 was not engaged but that seems to me to have
been a particularly bold conclusion  to  have  reached  bearing  in  mind  a
period of residence in the UK of such length.  Without more I  would  regard
that particular finding as being  unsustainable.   So,  the  delay  and  any
consequences that there were of it,  such  as  the  appellant  setting  down
roots in the UK as a result of it or the  implication  that  the  respondent
did not consider the interest of  immigration  control  to  be  particularly
compelling in this case, had to be properly considered and  addressed  in  a
proportionality balancing exercise.  That was not done here.  So, there  was
also legal error in the way the judge dealt with the Article 8 arguments.

12.   It will be noted I have not found what I consider to  be  identifiable
legal error with respect to the various other points which have  been  taken
on behalf of the appellant.  In particular, I do not consider  some  of  the
criticisms in the written grounds, and indeed the  way  some  of  them  were
expressed, to be entirely helpful.   Nevertheless,  since  I  have  accepted
there has been error with respect to  the  international  protection  aspect
and the Article 8 aspect I have decided to set aside the  decision  in  its
entirety.  I have decided to remit to the  First-tier Tribunal  bearing  in
mind that further fact-finding will be  necessary.  The  appellant  will  be
free, at the next hearing, to pursue whatever arguments he  wishes.  I  have
set out some directions which will hopefully assist the First-tier Tribunal
in its task. Given the current state of the documentation on  file  it  will
be seen I have directed the filing of a consolidated  bundle  which  I  feel
will be of assistance to all concerned.


Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

A.    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge M J H Wilson)  of
      5 November 2015 is set aside.  Nothing is preserved.  The appeal  is
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided by a judge of  that
      tribunal other than Judge M J H Wilson.

B.    The remitted appeal will be heard at the Bradford Hearing  Centre  and
      the time estimate shall be three hours.  A Somali speaking interpreter
      will be required.

C.    The appellant's representatives shall send to the First-tier Tribunal
      (and send a copy to the  respondent)  a  consolidated  bundle  of  all
      documents which are to be relied upon at the forthcoming hearing  even
      if such documentation has been previously sent to  either  the  First-
      tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.  That bundle should include any
      additional documents not previously filed but which are to  be  relied
      upon at the next hearing such as any  further  witness  statements  or
      further background country material.  The bundle shall be indexed  and
      paginated and shall, if appropriate, contain a schedule  of  essential
      reading.  That bundle should reach the  First-tier Tribunal  and  the
      respondent at least 10 working days prior to the date which  will  be
      fixed for the hearing.



D.    Should the respondent wish to file any additional  documents  she  too
      must observe the requirements regarding  service,  timing  and  format
      which have been set out in direction C above.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  That decision is, in consequence, set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

