
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA081612015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 June 2017                        |On 22 June 2017                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  respondent
herein is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall  directly
or indirectly identify him or any member of their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Maqsood, instructed by Maxim Law



                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     (Delivered Orally on 20 June 2017)


 1. This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("SSHD") against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Samimi promulgated (unfortunately) as long ago as 8 January 2016.   The
    appeal was allowed on both Refugee Convention and human rights grounds,
    ostensibly on the basis that the Claimant, as a gay man,  would  be  at
    risk upon return to Pakistan of suffering persecutory treatment  and/or
    treatment in breach of Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

 2. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal, with the permission  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kelly, on the basis that the  FtT's  decision  does
    not disclose  a lawful adequacy of reasons for its conclusion that  the
    claimant would be at risk in Pakistan. No challenge is brought  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that the  claimant  is  a  witness  of
    truth.

 3. On an initial reading of the First-tier Tribunal's decision I had  some
    sympathy for the submissions made by  the  SSHD  in  her  grounds,  and
    broadly concurred with the terms of  the  grant  of  permission.   This
    sympathy and concurrence swiftly  disappears,  however,  on  a  further
    investigation within the  file.  Such  investigation  turned  up  Judge
    Samimi's the Record of Proceedings which, unlike many,  are  typed  and
    (at least in appearance) are a verbatim record of  the  hearing  before
    her.

 4. When one turns to the penultimate page of the judge's typed  Record  of
    Proceedings the first relevant feature  of  note  is  that  the  SSHD's
    closing submissions target in their entirety  the  credibility  of  the
    claimant - no submissions being made on the  discrete  issue  of  risk.
    The claimant's submissions also focus on  matters  of  credibility  and
    then turn, very briefly, to internal relocation - there being reference
    to passages within the background documentation  said  to  support  the
    contention that there was no possibility of such relocation.

 5. Of utmost importance, however, is what follows:

     "PO: If the A is found credible - he is at risk of harm on return"

 6. That concession, albeit not reflected in the FtT's decision, leads to a
    clear understanding as to why the FtT's decision lacks reasoning on the
    issue of risk.  At the hearing I read out the  relevant  parts  of  the
    record of proceedings to the parties. Ms Holmes indicated she  did  not
    seek to challenge the accuracy of the record, or my understanding of it
    and that she had nothing else to add.

 7. It seems to me read that  in  light  of  the  concession  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal (which is clear  from
    the face of the Record of Proceedings) the reasoning  set  out  in  the
    FtT's decision is lawfully adequate.  The FtT did not need to  go  into
    detail as the reasons the claimant would be at risk in  Pakistan,  once
    she had found him to be credible, because this was - by the end of  the
    hearing - not a matter in dispute between the parties.

 8. It would have been helpful had the FtT identified the concession on the
    face of its decision. This would have saved much public expense and the
    claimant would have been granted the status he is clearly entitled  to,
    well over a year ago.   The fact that the concession is not recorded in
    the decision is not, however, an error capable of affecting the outcome
    of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

For  these  reasons  the  SSHD's  appeal  is  dismissed.    The   First-tier
Tribunal's decision stands.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

