

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: AA/08129/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     WA
                       (Anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                   SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                               Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: no appearance
For the Respondent: Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a national of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against  a  decision  made  by  the  respondent  to  refuse  his
   application for asylum and to remove him from the UK. Judge of the First-
   tier Tribunal Baldwin dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals
   with leave to this Tribunal.

2.    At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal there was no appearance by or  on
   behalf of  the  appellant.  The  solicitors  previously  acting  for  the
   appellant wrote to the Tribunal on 14 May 2014  to  inform  the  Tribunal
   that they were without instructions from the appellant and advising  that
   they were withdrawing their representation.  I  was  satisfied  that  the
   notice of hearing had been sent to the appellant at the address given  on
   the notice of appeal. As I was satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  been
   notified of the hearing and that  no  reasons  had  been  given  fro  his
   absence I decided that it was in the interests of justice to proceed with
   the hearing in the absence of the appellant in accordance with Rule 38 of
   the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Immigration Rules 2008.  I  heard
   submissions from Mr Nath who contended that there was no error of law  in
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

3.    The background is that the respondent accepted the  appellant's  claim
   that he is of the Ahmadi  faith.  However  the  respondent  rejected  the
   appellant's claim that he  encountered  difficulties  in  Pakistan  as  a
   result of his faith and that he would  be  at  risk  from  the  Pakistani
   authorities upon his return. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted  that
   the appellant is a Pakistani Ahmadi but found that the appellant does not
   openly preach or proselytise and does not want to do so and dismissed the
   appeal.

4.    There are three grounds identified  in  the  renewed  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The  first  ground  contends
   that the Judge made inadequate findings in relation  to  the  appellant's
   credibility and made errors of fact in his assessment of the  appellant's
   credibility in relation to his activities  in  the  UK.  It  is  secondly
   contended that the Judge failed to apply the country guidance set out  in
   the case of MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk)  Pakistan
   CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC) and that he failed to apply the  decisions  of
   the  Supreme  Court  in   the  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  in HJ
   (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 and RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38. It is contended
   that the Judge  focussed  on  proselytising  rather  than  analysing  the
   remaining aspects of the appellant's faith based activities as set out in
   MN. The third ground contends that the Judge applied the  wrong  standard
   of proof.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane  on
   the basis that it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not
   make findings as to  whether  the  appellant  would  wish  to  engage  in
   paragraph 2 (i) behaviour, within the meaning of  MN,  falling  short  of
   proselytising.

Error of law

6.   The country guidance set out in MN is summarised in the  head  note  as
   follows;

      "...
      2. (i) The background to the risk faced by Ahmadis is legislation that
      restricts the way in which they are  able  openly  to  practise  their
      faith. The legislation not only prohibits preaching and other forms of
      proselytising  but  also  in  practice  restricts  other  elements  of
      manifesting one's religious beliefs, such as  holding  open  discourse
      about  religion  with   non-Ahmadis,   although   not   amounting   to
      proselytising. The prohibitions  include  openly  referring  to  one's
      place of worship as a mosque and to one's religious leader as an Imam.
      In addition, Ahmadis are not permitted to refer to the call to  prayer
      as azan nor to call themselves Muslims or  refer  to  their  faith  as
      Islam. Sanctions include a fine and imprisonment and if  blasphemy  is
      found, there is a risk of the death penalty which to date has not been
      carried out although there is a risk of lengthy incarceration  if  the
      penalty is imposed. There is clear evidence that this  legislation  is
      used by non-state actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis. This includes
      the filing of First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first step in  any
      criminal  proceedings)  which  can   result   in   detentions   whilst
      prosecutions are being pursued. Ahmadis are also subject to attacks by
      non-state actors from sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population.
      (ii) It is, and has long been, possible  in  general  for  Ahmadis  to
      practise their faith on a restricted basis either  in  private  or  in
      community with other Ahmadis,  without  infringing  domestic  Pakistan
      law.
      3. (i) If an Ahmadi is able to demonstrate that it  is  of  particular
      importance to his religious identity  to  practise  and  manifest  his
      faith openly in Pakistan  in  defiance  of  the  restrictions  in  the
      Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) under sections 298B and 298C, by engaging in
      behaviour described in paragraph 2(i) above, he or she is likely to be
      in need of protection, in the light  of  the  serious  nature  of  the
      sanctions that potentially apply as well as the  risk  of  prosecution
      under section 295C for blasphemy.
      (ii) It is no answer to expect an Ahmadi who fits the description just
      given to avoid engaging in behaviour described in paragraph 2(i) above
      ("paragraph 2(i) behaviour") to avoid a risk of prosecution.
      4. The need for protection applies equally to men and women. There  is
      no basis for considering that  Ahmadi  women  as  a  whole  are  at  a
      particular or additional risk;  the  decision  that  they  should  not
      attend mosques in Pakistan was made by the Ahmadi Community  following
      attacks on the mosques in Lahore in 2010. There is  no  evidence  that
      women in particular were the target of those attacks.
      5. In light of the above, the first question the  decision-maker  must
      ask is (1) whether the claimant genuinely is an Ahmadi.  As  with  all
      judicial fact-finding the judge will need to reach conclusions on  all
      the evidence as a whole giving such weight to aspects of that evidence
      as appropriate in accordance  with  Article  4  of  the  Qualification
      Directive. This is likely to include an enquiry whether  the  claimant
      was registered with an Ahmadi community in Pakistan and worshipped and
      engaged there on a regular basis. Post-arrival activity will  also  be
      relevant. Evidence likely to be relevant  includes  confirmation  from
      the UK Ahmadi headquarters  regarding  the  activities  relied  on  in
      Pakistan and confirmation from the local community in the UK where the
      claimant is worshipping.
      6.  The  next  step  (2)  involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
      intentions or wishes as to his or her faith, if returned to  Pakistan.
      This is relevant because of the need to establish  whether  it  is  of
      particular  importance  to  the  religious  identity  of  the   Ahmadi
      concerned to engage in paragraph 2(i) behaviour. The burden is on  the
      claimant to demonstrate that any intention or  wish  to  practise  and
      manifest aspects of the faith openly that are  not  permitted  by  the
      Pakistan  Penal  Code  (PPC)  is  genuinely  held  and  of  particular
      importance to the claimant to preserve his or her religious  identity.
      The decision maker needs to evaluate all the evidence. Behaviour since
      arrival in the UK may also be relevant.  If  the  claimant  discharges
      this burden he is likely to be in need of protection.
      7. The option of internal  relocation,  previously  considered  to  be
      available in Rabwah, is not in general reasonably open to  a  claimant
      who genuinely wishes to engage n  paragraph  2(i)  behaviour,  in  the
      light  of  the  nationwide  effect  in  Pakistan  of  the  anti-Ahmadi
      legislation.
      8. Ahmadis who are not able to show that they practised their faith at
      all in Pakistan or that  they  did  so  on  anything  other  than  the
      restricted basis described in paragraph 2(ii)  above  are  in  general
      unlikely to be able to show that their genuine  intentions  or  wishes
      are to  practise  and  manifest  their  faith  openly  on  return,  as
      described in paragraph 2(i) above.
      9. A sur place claim by an Ahmadi based on post-arrival conversion  or
      revival  in  belief  and  practice  will  require  careful  evidential
      analysis. This will probably include consideration of evidence of  the
      head of the claimant's local United Kingdom Ahmadi Community and  from
      the UK headquarters, the latter particularly in cases where there  has
      been a conversion. Any adverse findings in the claimant's account as a
      whole may be relevant to the assessment of likely behaviour on return.
      10. Whilst an Ahmadi who has been found to be not reasonably likely to
      engage or wish to engage in paragraph 2(i) behaviour is,  in  general,
      not at real risk on return to Pakistan, judicial fact-finders  may  in
      certain cases need to consider whether that person would  nevertheless
      be reasonably likely to be targeted by non-state actors on return  for
      religious persecution by reason of  his/her  prominent  social  and/or
      business profile."

7.    In light of the  fact  that  the  respondent  had  accepted  that  the
   appellant is a Pakistani Ahmadi, in accordance with the country guidance,
   the issue to be determined by the Judge in  this  case  was  whether  the
   appellant demonstrated  that,  upon  return  to  Pakistan,  he  genuinely
   intends or wishes to practise and manifest aspects of  his  faith  openly
   that are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code  (PPC)  and  that  such
   practice of his faith is of particular importance to him to preserve  his
   religious identity (paragraph 6 above).

8.    The Judge set out his findings at paragraphs 20-22. He made  a  number
   of adverse credibility findings in relation to the  appellant's  account.
   The Judge considered that there was a conflict  between  the  appellant's
   evidence and the information contained in one of  the  letters  from  the
   Ahmadiya Muslim Association (AMA) UK as to the age group of  people  with
   whom the appellant was said to be serving as an assistant. The  appellant
   said that his involvement was with  those  under  16  whilst  the  letter
   stated that it was those under 18. The conflict in the evidence was  such
   that the Judge was not satisfied that the appellant  performed  any  role
   with any age group.

9.   The Judge also found that the fact that none of the 3 letters from  the
   AMA mention the appellant's claim that he was subjected to  incidents  of
   violence and claimed seizure of his shop in Pakistan. He noted  that  the
   letters did not mention any open preaching or  proselytising.  The  Judge
   considers that this damages the appellant's credibility. The Judge  notes
   that the appellant failed to produce any evidence  about  the  school  he
   claimed to have attended, he failed to produce any medical evidence as to
   his claimed injuries sustained, or articles about the seizure of his shop
   which he said was publicised or any articles about the other incidents he
   recounted.  The Judge further found that the appellant has  not  preached
   in Pakistan or in the UK and noted that no one had given evidence  as  to
   his claimed activities in the UK. The  Judge  noted  that  the  appellant
   could not say where in London the mosque is situated even though  he  had
   been living in the same area of London.

10. Considering all of the evidence the Judge  found  that  the  appellant's
   activities in  the  UK  'have  not  extended  beyond  child  minding  and
   security'. Given the inconsistencies in his evidence in relation  to  his
   activities in the UK the Judge found that 'it would  seem  unlikely  that
   anyone would encourage or want him to start preaching  or  proselytising'
   in Pakistan.

11. The Judge said  that  the  conflict  as  to  the  age  group  which  the
   appellant claimed to work 'leaves a doubt as to whether he performed  any
   such role for any age  group'.  I  accept  that  this  may  indicate  the
   application of too high a burden of proof. However I read this finding in
   the context of all of the other findings and the decision as a  whole.  I
   am satisfied that the Judge did apply the correct standard of proof.

12. The Judge did not set out his findings in the manner  suggested  by  MN.
   However I am satisfied that when the decision is  read  as  a  whole  and
   given the adverse credibility findings it is clear that the Judge did not
   accept that the appellant practised his faith  in  Pakistan  on  anything
   other than the restricted basis described in paragraph 2(ii) of  MN.  The
   Judge did not accept the appellant's account of his activities in the  UK
   and made clear findings on that matter. I do not accept  that  the  Judge
   made any factual errors in relation  to  the  letters  from  the  AMA  in
   reaching that conclusion. I consider that it is therefore clear that  the
   Judge was not satisfied that the appellant had  shown  that  his  genuine
   intentions or wishes are to practise and manifest  his  faith  openly  on
   return, as described in paragraph 2(i) of MN.

13. I am satisfied that the Judge  did  not  err  in  his  approach  to  the
   evidence or the application of the country guidance in  MN  and  that  he
   made a decision which was open to him on all of the evidence before him.

Conclusion:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

Signed
                                   Date:  28 June 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).

Signed
                                   Date:  28 June 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






