
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08228/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July and 3 September 2015       |On 17 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              A M (afghanistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola (01.07.15) and Mr P. Duffy (03.09.15),
                             Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr Iain Palmer, Counsel instructed by
                             Barnes Harrild & Dyer Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the
    decision to remove him as an illegal entrant, on the ground that he has
    a well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  in  Kabul,  or  he  cannot
    reasonably be expected to  relocate  to  Kabul  having  regard  to  the
    general  circumstances   prevailing   in   Kabul   and   his   personal
    circumstances. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction, and
    I consider that it is appropriate that the claimant should continue  to
    be accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge P J G White granted the  Secretary  of  State
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         1.   The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against  a  decision
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones who, in a  Decision
             and Reasons  promulgated  on  19  February  2015  allowed  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse
             to grant asylum.

         2.   If necessary, I extend time for permission to appeal as  I  am
             satisfied that it is in the interests of justice to do so.

         3.   Having had regard to the grounds for permission to appeal  and
             the Decision and Reasons, I am satisfied that in reaching  his
             decision the judge arguably made  an  error  of  law  for  the
             following reasons:-

             a.   It is  arguable  that  the  judge  has  given  inadequate
                  reasons for apparently departing from AK  (Article  15(c))
                  Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163  (IAC)  in  regard  to
                  sufficiency of protection in Kabul.

             b.   It is  arguable  that  the  judge  has  given  inadequate
                  reasons for applying case law referable to children,  when
                  the Appellant was born on 14 February 1996  (paras  12-13,
                  and 20).

             c.   It is arguable that in regard to the  Appellant's  health
                  issues the judge has had inadequate regard to the cases of
                  N and GS.

The Background

 3. The claimant's material history was accepted by the judge, and there is
    no challenge by the Secretary of State to this aspect  of  the  judge's
    decision.  The claimant was born on 14 February 1996  in  Ghazni  City.
    During the war between the Taliban and the Americans, the  family  home
    was bombed, killing his parents, his older brother,  his  older  sister
    and his grandparents.  He survived because he was in a different  room,
    but he sustained injuries for which he was treated in hospital.   After
    coming out of hospital, he was taken in by another older sister  called
    S who lived with her husband and three children in  the  same  area  of
    Ghazni City[ - ].

 4. His family all belonged to the Qazelbash ethnic group, which  was  part
    of the Muslim Shia sect.  In [ - ], Shia Muslims were  in  a  minority,
    and Sunni Muslims were part of the majority.   As  a  young  child,  he
    faced  discrimination  because  he  was  part  of  the  Shia  minority.
    Approximately a year  and  a  half  before  he  left  Afghanistan,  his
    father's paternal uncle was decapitated.  His brother went to look  for
    him and found his body.  He saw that people were  regularly  questioned
    and stopped by the Taliban on the route that he was using, so  he  must
    have been targeted by the Taliban because he was Shia.

 5. As a result  of  killings  by  the  Taliban,  a  group  called  Engener
    Lutfallah was set up.  This group started forcibly recruiting  boys  to
    fight the Taliban.  The claimant was approached by some of his  friends
    who were supporters of the group, and asked to join them.  He told them
    that he did not want to join them.  Around eight  months  after  N  was
    killed, he travelled to a district called Qarabag, and on the way  back
    he was stopped by the Taliban.  They spoke to him in Pashtu, and he was
    unable to respond to them clearly as his first language was Dari.  They
    asked him whether he worked for the authorities, the police,  the  army
    or the Americans.  The claimant lied, and said that he was part of  the
    Sunni sect.  He told his sister what had happened, and she thought that
    he would be targeted by the Taliban in the future, so it would be  best
    for him to leave the country.  She and her husband were also  concerned
    that if he remained in the village, he would  be  targeted  by  Engener
    Lutfallah to fight against the Taliban.

 6. He had flown from Afghanistan to Turkey,  and  he  had  then  travelled
    through various countries and  remained  in  Germany  for  some  eleven
    months.  He was fingerprinted in Germany and transferred to a camp.  He
    was sent a letter to appear for an interview in Germany, but he did not
    attend because he wanted to go to the UK, as  he  had  family  residing
    there.  He is recorded as having claimed asylum in the UK  on  12  July
    2013.

 7. On 26 September  2014  the  SSHD  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  to
    recognise  the  claimant  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise  requiring
    international human rights protection.  The  Secretary  of  State  took
    into account an interim psychological and development report  from  the
    Baobab Centre dated 11 March 2014.  This report had  been  compiled  by
    Kevin Perkins, a specialist  in  adult  integrated,  psychotherapy  and
    child and adolescent integrative psychotherapy.

 8.  The  claimant  had  provided  an  internally  and  consistent  account
    regarding the rocket attack which hit his house when he  was  a  child.
    It was accepted his house was  destroyed  and  his  family  was  killed
    during an air strike, and it was accepted that  he  had  suffered  some
    mental health problems as a result.  It was  accepted  that  he  was  a
    Shia, however it was not accepted he would actively practice his  faith
    on a regular basis.  It was also not accepted that he  was  continually
    targeted by the young boys in his village due to his religion.  It  was
    accepted that the bus back from Qarabagh had been stopped  and  he  and
    other fellow passengers were questioned by the  Taliban.   It  was  not
    accepted he had any problems with Engener Lutfallah or that his friends
    had tried to get him to join them.

 9. With regard to his claimed risk on return  from  the  Taliban,  it  was
    considered that sufficiency of  protection  was  available  to  him  in
    Afghanistan and that internal  relocation  was  a  viable  option.   At
    paragraph  [58],  the  respondent  cited  various  passages   from   AK
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC):

         "Whilst when assessing a claim ... in which the respondent  asserts
         that Kabul City would be a viable internal relocation  alternative,
         it is necessary to take into account (both in assessing safety  and
         reasonableness) not only the level of violence  in  that  city  but
         also the difficulties experienced by that city's poor and also  the
         many  IDPs  [internally  displaced  persons]  living  there,  these
         considerations will not in general make return to Kabul  unsafe  or
         unreasonable, although it would always be necessary to  examine  an
         applicant's individual circumstances."  (Paragraph 243)

         "We do not think the situation  of  UK  returnees  to  Kabul  (even
         limiting this category to persons whose home area is not Kabul) and
         IDPs in Kabul are wholly the same.  As noted earlier ... there  are
         return and reintegration packages available.  It would be unwise to
         exaggerate the  importance  of  such  packages:  they  are  chiefly
         designed to cushion against immediate  travails  on  return.   That
         said,  by  assisting  the  skills  training  enquiries  related  to
         employment opportunities, they clearly do help  position  returnees
         advantageously as compared to IDPs marooned in squatter settlements
         in outlying areas."  (Paragraph 244)

10. The Secretary of State returned to the topic of an internal  relocation
    at paragraph [79] onwards.  At paragraph [80], she said:

         "The legal principle of internal relocation,  whether  the  Refugee
         Convention is considered to be engaged or not, was first considered
         in the case of Robinson  where  it  was  considered  that  internal
         relocation within any country can only be disregarded if it were to
         be unduly harsh."

    This view was further strengthened in Januzi [2006] UKHL  5,  where  it
    was again established "For internal relocation to be regarded as unduly
    harsh any breach of  fundamental  rights  must  be  established  to  be
    serious".  In AH [2007] UKHL 49 at paragraph 42 it stated that:

         "Only proof that their  lives  on  return  would  be  quite  simply
         intolerable compared even to the problems and  deprivations  of  so
         many of their fellow  countrymen  would  entitle  them  to  refugee
         status.  Compassion alone cannot justify the grant of asylum."

11. At paragraphs [115] following,  the  Secretary  of  State  addressed  a
    potential medical claim under either Articles 3 or 8 ECHR.  He  claimed
    to have ongoing psychological problems  and  that  he  had  been  under
    treatment.  He claimed he was currently taking mirtazapine and  lyricho
    tablets,  which  had  been  prescribed  by  his   GP   based   on   his
    psychologist's instructions.  He had been receiving this treatment  for
    six to seven  months.   He  said  he  was  also  suffering  from  these
    psychological problems in Afghanistan, because they started during  his
    childhood.  His evidence was underpinned by documents from various  NHS
    departments, and it  was  therefore  accepted  that  he  suffered  from
    various mental health issues.

12. The Secretary of State went on to refer to the case law  of  N  v  SSHD
    [2005] UKHL 31 and to GS and EO (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012]
    UKUT 00397 (IAC) where the headnote states:

         "(i) The fact that life expectancy  is  dramatically  shortened  by
             withdrawal of medical treatment in the host state is in itself
             incapable of amounting  to  a  highly  exceptional  case  that
             engages the Article 3 duty.

         (ii) There  are  recognised  departures  from  the  high  threshold
             approach in cases concerning children,  discriminatory  denial
             of treatment,  absence  of  resources  through  civil  war  or
             similar human agency.

         (iii)    Article 8 cases may also require a different approach  and
             will do so where health questions  arise  in  the  context  of
             obstacles of relocation.

         (iv) Any extension of principles set out in N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31
             and N v United Kingdom [2008] 47  EHRR  39  will  be  for  the
             higher courts."

13. The Secretary of State cited information from the WHO  updated  in  May
    2011 to the effect that services and  facilities  had  improved  during
    recent years.  She quoted the response from MedCOI dated 3 August  2012
    on the topic of the availability of treatment for PTSD.  The  following
    were available:

       . in and out patient treatment by a psychiatrist;

       . in and out treatment by a psychologist or psychotherapist;

       . individual and group psychotherapy, self help group therapy, family
         therapy, psychosocial counselling, narrative exposure  therapy  and
         cognitive behavioural therapy;

       . these treatments were available  at  the  following  organisations:
         Mental Health  Hospital  at  Serahi  Allaudin,  Kabul  and  Aliabad
         Hospital at Karte-Sachi, Kabul.

14. There was also an Afghanistane-Nawin psychosocial organisation in  most
    districts  of   Kabul   and   an   IPSO   (International   Psychosocial
    Organisation) near to Mili Buss Street, at Silo Road, Kabul.

15. At paragraph [120], the Secretary of State  said  that  the  background
    evidence above showed that medical treatment, including  treatment  for
    mental health issues was available in Afghanistan, and it was  open  to
    him to approach the relevant medical  authorities  there  to  seek  any
    necessary treatment he might require either immediately on  his  return
    or at any time in the future.  It was not accepted  that  he  qualified
    for discretionary leave to remain on the basis of his medical problems.

16. On the topic of assisted voluntary return,  reintegration  support  was
    available and this might be  used  for  excess  baggage,  training  and
    education, help in setting up a business, travel  to  find  employment,
    housing, childcare, medical needs and mentoring opportunities.  The aim
    of  this  assistance  was  to  contribute  to  an  improved  and   more
    sustainable return.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

17. The judge addressed the question of internal  relocation  at  paragraph
    9(10)  onwards.   She  began  by  setting  out  the  UNHCR  eligibility
    guidelines.  She acknowledged that the claimant was  now  18  years  of
    age, but reminded herself that, following KA (Afghanistan) [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1014, persecution was not respectful of birthdays, and apparent  or
    assumed age was  more  important  than  chronological  age.   She  also
    referred  to  JS  (former  unaccompanied  child  -  durable   solution)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00568 (IAC), where the Upper Tribunal  affirmed
    the principle that there is no bright line across which the risk to and
    the needs of a child suddenly disappear.

18. At paragraph 9(14), she cited the conclusions  of  Mr  Perkins  in  his
    report at section E of the respondent's bundle.  The report is undated,
    but it is apparent that the report was generated in the summer of 2014.
     The date of the  referral  to  him  was  11  March  2014,  and  twelve
    psychotherapy sessions had been attended by the claimant following this
    referral.  The same report was referred to in the refusal  decision  of
    September 2014.

19. Mr Perkins' conclusions were that Mr M was a vulnerable young man.  His
    experiences in Afghanistan had directly  contributed  to  his  unstable
    mental state.  He continued to be in great  need  of  psychotherapeutic
    social and educational support.  Without these being in place, he would
    have great concerns about his mental state,  in  particular  the  risks
    posed  by  ongoing  suicidal   ideation.    He   had   been   receiving
    psychotherapy since 22 April 2014 on a weekly  basis  and,  "this  will
    continue on an open ended basis for the foreseeable  future."   He  was
    taking  mirtazapine  at  night,  and  preqabline  daily.    The   judge
    continued:

         "16. The Appellant has no extended family who can provide him  with
             support in Kabul and there is no evidence that members of  his
             ethnic group will be  willing  and  able  to  provide  genuine
             support.  As indicated by UNHCR in the Eligibility  Guidelines
             referred to above "... the presence of  members  of  the  same
             ethnic background as the applicant in the proposed area cannot
             itself be taken as evidence that  the  Appellant  ill  benefit
             from meaningful support from such communities in  the  absence
             of specific pre-existing social relationships".

         17.   The  Appellant  will  have  no   access   to   pre-identified
             accommodation,  sanitation  or  education  and  it  would   be
             difficult for him to secure  work.   Regarding  healthcare  as
             stated by Ms Majidi "in a 2013 survey, it  was  reported  that
             more than  half  of  surveyed  youth  reported  the  need  for
             psychological counselling or help: 75% in  Kabul  wanted  such
             counselling against 12% who had received any.  In 2006,  there
             were 50 trained Psychiatrists in Afghanistan and  only  1%  of
             doctors training involved mental health.  The health sector is
             still poorly equipped to deal with mental health".

         18.  The UNHCR Guidelines state that where  the  proposed  area  of
             relocation is an urban area where the Appellant has no  access
             to pre-identified accommodation  and  livelihood  options  and
             where he cannot be expected to fall back on meaningful support
             networks,  the  Appellant  would  likely  find  himself  in  a
             situation comparable to other urban IDPs. IDPS are  considered
             to be amongst the most vulnerable group in  Afghanistan,  many
             of whom are beyond the reach of humanitarian organisations; as
             well as available information to the effect  that  urban  IDPs
             are more vulnerable than the non-displaced urban poor, as they
             are particularly affected by unemployment, limited  access  to
             adequate housing, limited access to water and  sanitation  and
             food insecurity.

         19.   Having  regard  to  all  the  above  and   particularly   the
             Appellant's mental health problems and lack of family  support
             in Kabul I  find  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             Appellant to relocate  to  Kabul.   He  would  also  face  the
             "stigma of contamination"  and  would  find  it  difficult  to
             access protection (see paragraphs 9(8) and 9(9)  above).   The
             Appellant therefore faces a real risk of persecution by reason
             of  his  religion  /  imputed  religion  /  imputed  political
             opinion.

         20.  In the absence of contact with his family the Appellant is  an
             unaccompanied returnee and in the circumstances if returned to
             Afghanistan he would risk persecution as  a  result  of  being
             exploited and ill-treated LQ (age: immutable  characteristics)
             Afghanistan (2008) UKIAT 005, DS (Afghanistan) -v- SSHD (2011)
             EWCA Civ 305."

20. The judge went on to address an alternative claim under Article 3 ECHR.
     She said that for the reasons given in finding that he  qualified  for
    refugee status,  she  also  found  there  would  be  a  breach  of  the
    claimant's Article 3 rights if he  was  returned  to  Afghanistan.   In
    addition, he would be at risk of recruitment by  Engener  Lutfallah  in
    his home area.

The Error of Law Hearing

21. At the hearing to decide whether an error  of  law  was  made  out,  Mr
    Palmer, who appeared for the claimant below, relied  on  the  extensive
    Rule 24 response opposing the  appeal.   There  was  no  merit  in  the
    submission that the judge failed to clearly explain the significance of
    the case law which she had  cited,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    clearly wrong to say that the  case  law  was  irrelevant  because  the
    claimant was an adult as opposed to being a minor.  With regard to  the
    application of AK, the Secretary of State's grounds amounted to no more
    than seeking to persuade the Tribunal that AK  was  authority  for  the
    general proposition that Kabul was  neither  unsafe,  unreasonable  and
    unduly harsh for any applicant,  whatever  their  circumstances.   With
    regard to the claimant's mental health,  the  evidence  of  his  mental
    frailty was that one of the  material  issues  before  the  judge  when
    determining whether it would  be  safe  and/or  unduly  harsh  for  the
    claimant to relocate to Kabul.  The evidence relied upon in the refusal
    letter only went to show the existence of mental  healthcare,  not  its
    adequacy.  The country expert had addressed adequacy  and  availability
    of healthcare in her report, and the judge  had  referred  to  this  at
    paragraph 9(17).

Reasons for finding an Error of Law

22. The judge gave adequate reasons for finding that the claimant's account
    of his past experiences in Afghanistan was true, and for  finding  that
    he would be at risk on return  to  his  home  area.   But  the  judge's
    finding on the viability of the  internal  relocation  alternative  was
    flawed, through a  combination  of  (a)  failing  to  engage  with  the
    relevant background evidence and country  guidance  relied  on  by  the
    Secretary of State in the refusal letter and (b) inadequate reasoning.

23. Dealing first with the issue of safety in Kabul, the judge was right to
    have in mind the principle that there is no bright  line  across  which
    the risk to and the needs of a child suddenly disappear.   But  at  the
    time of the hearing before her, which was on 9th January 2015, some six
    months had elapsed since Mr Perkins had produced  his  interim  report.
    The claimant's date of birth was not a crude estimate,  but  a  precise
    date of birth which the claimant had given, and which had been accepted
    by the Secretary of State.  So at the date of the hearing the  claimant
    was very close to his 19th birthday.  Of greater significance,  in  the
    context of his mental health condition, was that since the date of  the
    interim report he had had a further six months' therapeutic  treatment.



24. As a minor, he had displayed independence, resourcefulness and survival
    skills in refusing to be coerced by his peer group  into  fighting  the
    Taliban, and in lying to the Taliban about his religious affiliation in
    order to protect himself  from  being  identified  by  the  Taliban  as
    someone of adverse interest.

25. While Mr Perkins opined in his report that his symptom cluster severely
    impacted upon many areas of the claimant's day-to-day life,  making  it
    hard for  him  to  engage  socially,  Mr  Perkins  explained  that  his
    difficulties were compounded by his poor English and inability both  to
    comprehend the complexity of what was said to him and respond  in  ways
    which conveyed an understanding of what had been said and intention  to
    respond satisfactorily.  In  Kabul,  the  claimant  would  be  able  to
    communicate in his first language, which is Dari.  So the  difficulties
    consequential upon his poor ability in English would not arise.

26. Given (a) the claimant's age at the date of the hearing, (b)  the  fact
    that his mental health difficulties were exacerbated by  his  inability
    to speak English, and (c) the fact that the claimant was likely  to  be
    considerably further down the road of recovery compared to where he was
    in the summer of 2014, the judge did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the Appellant had a well-founded fear  of  persecution  in
    Kabul on LQ grounds and/or on the  basis  that  he  was  vulnerable  to
    sexual exploitation  or  other  ill-treatment  consequential  upon  him
    appearing to be under the age of 18.

27. The lack of adequate reasoning on the claimant's safety in  Kabul  also
    undermines the judge's parallel finding that it would  be  unreasonable
    to expect him to relocate to Kabul, having regard  inter  alia  to  his
    youthful vulnerability.

28. There are two other errors.  The first is a failure to engage with  the
    background evidence  relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  the
    availability of treatment for PTSD in Kabul.  If what  the  expert  had
    said on this topic was broadly consistent with the background  evidence
    cited by the Secretary of State, it would have been legitimate for  the
    judge only to cite the evidence  of  the  expert  as  underpinning  the
    finding that the claimant would  be  unlikely  to  be  able  to  access
    adequate treatment for PTSD in Kabul.  But as interpreted by the judge,
    there was a clear conflict between the thrust of the  evidence  of  the
    expert and the thrust of the evidence relied on  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, and this was a conflict which the judge needed to resolve, or to
    give reasons as to why the evidence of the general survey quoted by the
    expert prevailed over the very specific evidence cited in  the  refusal
    decision as  to  where  the  claimant  could  go  in  Kabul  to  access
    psychiatric treatment or counselling for PTSD.

29. The survey did not purport to establish that half of surveyed youth  in
    Kabul actually needed psychological counselling, still less  that  more
    than half actually suffered from PTSD.  In short,  it  did  not  follow
    from the survey  that  someone  such  as  the  claimant  who  had  been
    diagnosed by healthcare professionals as suffering from  PTSD,  and  as
    requiring  psychological  counselling  in  consequence,  would  not  be
    amongst the relatively small number of young adults who would  be  able
    to access adequate treatment in Kabul for PTSD.

30. Alternatively, if and insofar as it can be inferred that a  substantial
    number of youthful IDPs in Kabul are suffering  from  PTSD,  the  judge
    does not explain why the claimant's  life  on  return  would  be  quite
    simply intolerable compared even to the problems and deprivations of so
    many of his fellow returnees/IDPs in Kabul.

31. In her report, the expert went on to say as follows at paragraph 17:

         "Young people in Afghanistan suffer from  PTSD  and  little  social
         support.  M has the chance to get clinical support in the  UK  that
         he will never be able to access in Afghanistan.  He started on such
         a programme and disrupting it, and returning  him  to  Afghanistan,
         could increase his mental vulnerabilities."

32. While this evidence might assist a claim under Article 8  ECHR,  it  is
    antithetical to the principle enunciated in AH (Sudan).

33. Accordingly, for the reasons given above, the decision of the judge  on
    internal relocation was vitiated by a material error of law, such  that
    the decision should be set aside and remade.

Future Disposal

34. Mr Kandola submitted that the decision should be remade on the evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  But Mr Palmer invited  me  to  adjourn
    the remaking of the  decision  to  a  resumed  hearing,  at  which  the
    claimant could deploy up-to-date medical evidence and  also  up-to-date
    country of origin information which was not available at  the  time  of
    the hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.  That  information  included  a
    warning posted on the internet on 28th February 2015  from  the  Afghan
    Minister for Refugees and  Repatriation.   He  advised  against  forced
    returns of male returnees who originated from dangerous provinces.  The
    claimant fell into this category. The announcement was included in  the
    Rule 15(2A) bundle which the claimant's  solicitors  prepared  for  the
    error of law hearing.

35. In further discussion, Mr Kandola agreed that a resumed  hearing  would
    be appropriate.  It was also agreed that the hearing would  proceed  by
    way of submissions only, on the evidence that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal and by reference to such additional  documentary  evidence  as
    was filed by the claimant's solicitors in accordance with my directions
    (see below).

Directions for Remaking

36. The judge's finding at paragraph 9(9) that the  claimant  would  be  at
    risk on return to his home would be preserved.

37. The issue to be addressed at the resumed hearing was the  viability  of
    the internal relocation alternative.  The hearing would be  submissions
    only, and evidence would be confined to the evidence  that  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and the following additional evidence, provided
    that it was served on the Tribunal and the Specialist Appeals Team in a
    paginated and indexed bundle,  no  less  than  seven  days  before  the
    resumed hearing.

38. The claimant's solicitors were permitted to adduce:

      a) the evidence served for the error of law hearing  pursuant  to  the
         Rule 15(2A) notice, which was contained in a supplementary bundle;

      b) up-to-date medical evidence relating to the claimant;

      c) up-to-date background evidence or country guidance appertaining  to
         the viability of the claimant's relocation to Kabul.

The Resumed Hearing

39. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Palmer renewed an application  for  an
    adjournment which had previously been  refused  by  an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge.  Mr Palmer's principal reason for seeking an adjournment was  to
    obtain a report from an expert on the  current  viability  of  internal
    relocation  to  Kabul.   The  subsidiary  reason   was   that   in   HN
    (Afghanistan) and Others, case  reference  JR2772/2015,  the  Court  of
    Appeal on 21 August 2015 had granted  interim  relief  to  a  group  of
    Afghan nationals whom the Secretary of  State  had  been  proposing  to
    remove to Kabul on 26 August 2015.  The order which  was  drawn  to  my
    attention provided inter alia as follows:

         "2.  The appellants' application  for  further  interim  relief  is
             granted in the form of a stay on the removal from the UK until
             further order of the Court of Appeal for all other persons who
             are facing forced removal from the UK on  the  charter  flight
             PVT081 to Kabul at 00:30 hours on Wednesday 26 August 2015 who
             were not habitually  resident  in  the  provinces  of  Banyan,
             Panjshir and Kabul."

40. Mr Tufan opposed  the  adjournment  request,  and  after  some  further
    discussion I ruled in favour of the Secretary of State.  There had been
    sufficient time since the promulgation of my error of  law  ruling  for
    the  claimant's  representatives  to  obtain  and   adduce   up-to-date
    background evidence or country guidance appertaining to  the  viability
    of the claimant's relocation to Kabul  (including,  if  pertinent,  the
    evidence relied on in recent judicial review claims - see  below),  but
    nothing had been produced.  So there was no reason to suppose  that  an
    expert could add anything to what had been said in  the  expert  report
    relied on before the First-tier Tribunal.

41. As to the relief granted to the appellants in HN and Others, I did  not
    consider that this impinged on the questions which I had to decide when
    remaking the decision under appeal.  The  background  to  the  judicial
    review claim made by the appellants in HN  and  Others  (and  by  other
    groups of failed asylum seekers whom the Secretary of State had  sought
    to remove to Kabul on earlier flights) was the warning referred  to  in
    paragraph 34 above and the public  announcement  at  the  beginning  of
    March 2015 as to the current stance of the Afghan Ministry of Migration
    and Repatriation Affairs.  The Ministry announced that it  had  decided
    to reconsider the terms of the existing  memorandums  of  understanding
    through diplomatic  channels;  and  had  requested  partner  countries,
    including the UK, to suspend the deportation of Afghan  migrants  until
    decided otherwise, where  the  Ministry  could  provide  the  necessary
    services to returning Afghans.  Until that time, the Ministry could not
    accept responsibility regarding any Afghan deportee.

42. As elaborated in discussions around this time, which are in the  public
    domain (see inter alia paragraph 34 above),  the  Minister's  view  was
    that only those who could be safely  returned  to  their  provinces  of
    origin should be removed to Kabul.  In his view, it was not  reasonable
    to expect Kabul to be able to  receive  all  those  who  were  forcibly
    returned especially when they were from other provinces in  Afghanistan
    which were not regarded as safe.

43. If this stance is still being maintained by the Afghan  government,  it
    calls  into  question  the  current  practicality  of  removing  Afghan
    nationals, such as AM, who do not originate from a "safe" province such
    as Kabul.  But the decision in this appeal requires to be remade on the
    hypothesis  that  AM's  removal  is  imminent  and  that   the   Afghan
    authorities would allow him to disembark.

44. I invited Mr Palmer to open his case.  He referred me to  his  skeleton
    argument and to Mr Perkins' report dated  31  August  2015.   While  Mr
    Perkins fairly described an improving situation in  the  treatment  for
    mental health conditions in Kabul  at  paragraphs  98  to  106  of  his
    report, he opined that the claimant  would  be  unlikely  to  have  the
    capability of accessing care and that his return  would  precipitate  a
    collapse in his mental health.  He also opined that there  was  a  real
    risk of suicide in the claimant should he  be  removed  to  Kabul.   He
    continued  to  suffer  from  complex  PTSD  and  he  attended   regular
    psychotherapy sessions at the Baobab Centre, and he continued  to  take
    prescribed medication.  The claimant was  clearly  a  vulnerable  young
    person, and in his opinion he would be at risk of inhuman and degrading
    treatment if returned to Kabul, and relocation there would therefore be
    unduly harsh.

45.  In  his  oral  submissions,  Mr  Palmer  said  that   the   claimant's
    vulnerability as a mentally ill person rather than his age was the  key
    consideration.  Mr Perkins, who was present in court, answered a  query
    I raised about the claimant's current medication.  He said that he  was
    taking an antidepressant, and a drug to control  the  severe  headaches
    which he suffered from as a result of his PTSD.

46. Mr Palmer acknowledged that at paragraph [224] of AK, the Tribunal  had
    found that the situation of UK returnees to Kabul (even  limiting  this
    category to persons whose home area is not Kabul) and IDPs in Kabul was
    not wholly the same:

         "As  noted  earlier  (leaving  to  one   side   irregular   migrant
         returnees), there are return and reintegration packages available."

47. On behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Tufan  referred  me  to  KH
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 1354.  In that case, the  appellant  relied  on  a  medical  report
    prepared by Dr Bruce Owen, a consultant psychiatrist in whose  care  he
    had been.  This report diagnosed him  as  suffering  from  a  recurrent
    depressive disorder.  The prognoses found in the report noted that  the
    appellant had responded  only  minimally  to  medication.   He  was  on
    medication at the time of fluoxetine and  olanzapine.   The  medication
    had been adjusted since 2006.  The lack of response said Dr Owen was in
    part  the  result  of  the  resistant  nature  of  his   illness   with
    additionally the result of ongoing stresses which he  was  under  which
    were inhibiting any  recovery.   The  stresses  which  he  went  on  to
    identify centred  upon  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  appellant's
    future and threat of removal, given that his  appeal  had  failed.   Dr
    Owen was concerned that relapses might occur in  the  event  of  future
    stress.  He  indicated  the  effect  of  stopping  treatment  would  be
    adverse.  He considered  the  impact  of  removal  to  Afghanistan  and
    concluded that such removal would be a highly stressful experience.  He
    anticipated that the high level of stress combined  with  the  loss  of
    support and treatment would lead to a high risk of relapses, depression
    and symptoms of PTSD.  Should his depression deteriorate,  clearly  the
    risk of self-harm and indeed suicide would escalate, with the appellant
    being at particular risk of suicide in view of his previous  self-harm.
    The appellant's current situation was that he was  well-established  in
    Newcastle with a good deal of medical and social service support  which
    enabled him to live what appeared to be a relatively normal life.

48. The issue before the Court of Appeal was whether the Secretary of State
    was wrong to conclude  that  an  Immigration  Judge  would  necessarily
    dismiss an appeal advanced under Articles 3 and 8  of  the  ECHR.   The
    judge at first instance found that the Secretary of State was  entitled
    to conclude that any appeal on these grounds would be hopeless,  having
    regard to the particularly high threshold in medical cases  imposed  by
    Razgar [2004] 2AC 368 and N [2005] 2AC 296. Giving the leading judgment
    of the court, Longmore LJ cited with approval the following passage  in
    paragraph 42 of N v the United Kingdom [2008] 47 EHRR 885:

         "The decision to remove an alien who is suffering  from  a  serious
         mental or physical illness to a country where  the  facilities  for
         the treatment of that illness are inferior to  those  available  in
         the contracting state may raise an issue under Article 3, but  only
         in a very exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds  against
         the removal are compelling."

49. At paragraph [33] Longmore LJ said:

         "The truth is that the presence  of  mental  illness  among  failed
         asylum seekers cannot really be  regarded  as  exceptional.   Sadly
         even asylum seekers with mental illness who have  no  families  can
         hardly be regarded as very exceptional.  If  this  case  is  to  be
         regarded as a very exceptional one, there will inevitably be  cases
         which will be distinguishable.  A person with no family would  have
         to be equated with a person who has a family but whose members  are
         unwilling or unable to look after him or her.  I cannot think  that
         Baroness Hale had such a wide category in mind.   In  order  for  a
         case to be very exceptional it would have to be exceptional  inside
         the class of person with mental  illness  without  family  support.
         Perhaps a very old or very young person would qualify but hardly an
         ordinary adult."

50. Delivering a concurring judgment, Sedley LJ agreed that  the  Court  of
    Appeal was compelled by authority to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal.
    If the bare prospect of inhuman treatment were  enough  to  secure  the
    protection of Article 3, this appeal and many like it would succeed.

51. Mr Tufan submitted that AM's case was not very exceptional, and it  did
    not meet the threshold for relief on medical grounds under Article 3 or
    Article 8 ECHR.  While  it  was  not  necessary  for  the  claimant  to
    establish a real risk of a breach of Article 3 in  order  to  establish
    that his internal relocation to Kabul was  unreasonable,  the  test  of
    reasonableness was nonetheless a stringent  one.   He  referred  me  to
    paragraph [212] of AK,  where  the  Tribunal  held  there  was  a  very
    significant level of support  provided  to  the  Afghan  population  by
    myriad aid and humanitarian agencies, domestic and  international.   By
    dint of high levels of international support in money and in kind,  the
    economy was improving and the country's GDP had nearly trebled  in  the
    past nine years.  There was also no evidence of significant  levels  of
    destitution.

52. In reply, Mr Palmer distinguished AK and KH on the facts.  In  AK,  the
    appellant was not vulnerable on account of his mental ill  health.   In
    KH, the appellant had not been found credible in his  account  of  past
    persecution or future risk, and so the question  of  the  viability  of
    internal relocation to Kabul did not arise.

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

53. In his interim report, which was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Mr
    Perkins concluded that the claimant continued to be in  great  need  of
    psychotherapeutic, social and educational support.  Without these being
    in place, he would have great  concerns  about  his  mental  state,  in
    particular the risk posed by ongoing suicidal ideation.

54. Nonetheless, it does not appear to have been contended before the First-
    tier Tribunal that there was a real risk  of  the  claimant  committing
    suicide if he was removed to Kabul, and in any event  this  was  not  a
    finding made by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   It  was  also  not  a
    finding which Mr Palmer invites me to make in his written  submissions,
    despite Mr Perkins' continuing concerns about the appellant's  suicidal
    ideation.  I do  not  in  any  event  consider  that  the  evidence  is
    sufficiently cogent to establish such a real risk, even  to  the  lower
    standard of proof.  The claimant does not have a history  of  self-harm
    or  actual  suicide  attempts,  despite  his  removal  being   imminent
    following the decision in September 2014 by the Secretary of  State  to
    refuse to grant him asylum.

55. Mr Perkins says that the recently instituted requirement to  report  to
    the Home Office resulted in his suicidal thinking increasing to a level
    where he contemplated killing himself -  only  to  be  stopped  by  the
    thought that it was an act which if carried out would  in  faith  terms
    mean he would be damned and sent to hell.  Since the claimant  reported
    suicidal ideation when he was first formally assessed by Mr Perkins  in
    the spring of 2014, when no decision had yet been taken on  his  asylum
    claim, the  claimant's  reported  response  to  the  institution  of  a
    reporting requirement does not evince a  deterioration  in  his  mental
    state.

56. Mr Perkins concludes his latest report by underlining that the claimant
    survives in the UK, and sustains college attendance, only with the high
    level support provided  by  the  Baobab  Centre,  including  individual
    psychotherapy, a great deal of therapeutic support, regular home visits
    and extra casework.  Nonetheless, Mr Perkins' account of the claimant's
    current social circumstances in the UK at the beginning of  his  report
    shows that AM is capable of living independently.  He shares a house in
    West Croydon with two other young people who are  seeking  asylum.   He
    attends John Ruskin College following a change  from  Croydon  College.
    This has proved to be a positive change  and  has  had  the  effect  of
    making  him  feel  more  contained.   He  has  developed  good  working
    relationships with his tutors and has made some academic progress.   He
    has taken some steps to join a  local  refugee  support  group  and  to
    develop a small network of friends.

57. While the treatment available to the claimant in Kabul would not be  as
    good or as comprehensive as that which he is  able  to  access  in  the
    United Kingdom from the Baobab Centre, no new evidence has been brought
    forward  which  contradicts  or  casts  doubt  on  the  information  on
    available treatment which is given in the refusal letter.  As submitted
    by Mr Tufan, there is no reason to suppose that the claimant would  not
    be able to access the medicines he requires to  combat  depression  and
    suicidal thoughts. Indeed it is Mr Perkins' understanding  that  mental
    health services in Afghanistan are predominantly medicalised, with what
    he describes as an overreliance  on  psychotropic  medication  such  as
    antidepressants and  benzodiazepines.   Mr  Perkins'  concern  is  that
    psychosocial treatments and  interventions  have  a  lower  profile  in
    Afghanistan compared to the UK, which I accept is  probably  the  case.
    But there are not substantial grounds for believing that  the  claimant
    will be unable to access therapy or psychosocial support  in  Kabul  as
    asserted by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter, and there are
    also not substantial grounds for believing that the  claimant's  mental
    health condition will inhibit him from seeking out such treatment.  The
    claimant engages fully with the treatment offered to him by the  Baobab
    Centre, never missing his weekly therapy sessions  -  with  the  result
    that he has now attended 53 such sessions in the space of just  over  a
    year.

58. In conclusion, I find the claimant has not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that he faces a real risk of persecution or Article 3 harm as a
    result of his removal  to  Kabul,  or  that  he  cannot  reasonably  be
    expected  to  relocate  to  Kabul  having   regard   to   the   general
    circumstances prevailing in Kabul and his personal circumstances.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted:

The claimant's appeal against the decision  to  remove  him  as  an  illegal
entrant is dismissed on all grounds raised.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the SSHD.  Failure to comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson



TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

