
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08725/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons                |
|On 4 May 2016                             |On 29 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                mr omar rafas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Omar Rafas in person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer
Interpreter present is:    Ms Salwa Ashi
Language:     Arabic - Moroccan dialect


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant seeks an adjournment of the hearing today  on  the  issue
    of whether an error of  law  was  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Telford in the judge's decision  dated  17  December  2015  whereby  he
    dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's decision.

2.   An appeal was made against that decision,  settled  by  Counsel  on  23
    December 2015, and permission to appeal was given by Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on 15 January 2016 in which he decided  that
    the only ground that demonstrated any potential error of law  was  that
    "it is arguable that the Appellant's Counsel was  inadvertently  misled
    into making no submissions on Article  8  ECHR"  and  "this  ground  is
    arguably consistent with the judge's notes".

3.   A further application of 30 January 2016 was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant seeking to  renew  the  grounds  associated  with  ground  1,
    essentially founded upon a Refugee Convention claim which the judge had
    rejected.

4.    By  letter  of  1  February  2016  the  position  remained  that   the
    Respondent's representatives were Coram Children's Legal Centre.

5.   Notice of hearing was  given  but  Coram  Children's  Legal  Centre  by
    letter dated 17 March 2016 informed the Upper Tribunal that  they  were
    no longer acting for the Appellant.

6.   They confirmed the Appellant's address at [Harrow].  They wrote to  the
    Home Office Presenting Officers' Unit and it  is  reasonable  to  infer
    that they also notified the Appellant that they were no longer acting.

7.   At a hearing said to be on 21 March 2016 Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Saini adjourned the hearing because of the late notice, as it was  put,
    of Coram Children's Legal Centre withdrawing but also that it  was  not
    clear if the Appellant had received the new notice of hearing,  bearing
    in mind he did not attend but  also  his  given  address  was  not  the
    address to which such notice of the hearing on the 21st March had  been
    sent.

8.   For some reason which is not relevant the file shows that Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Saini was led to believe that the  Appellant  was  at  a
    completely different address in Harrow in Middlesex and that  may  have
    played a part in his thinking as to why the Appellant did  not  appear.
    Irrespective of that, the fact was that the grounds of appeal gave  the
    [Harrow] address which was the address to which notice of a hearing had
    been sent for 26 February 2016.

9.   The Appellant must have received notice for today's hearing because  he
    wrote seeking an adjournment.

10.  Coram Children's Legal  Centre  wrote  again  to  the  Tribunal  on  27
    February 2016 in which  they  confirmed  to  a  Mr  David  Robinson,  a
    caseworker with the London Borough of Harrow, that they  would  not  be
    attending and the reason they gave was:

         "... just to confirm (I have checked with Omar that it is ok to let
         you know) that I stopped acting for him because I couldn't get hold
         of him and without his instructions and being able to re-assess him
         for legal aid I couldn't continue to represent him.  I do not  have
         the capacity to take on Omar's case just now.   I  have  also  told
         Omar that he can make a request to the Tribunal to adjourn his case
         whilst he looks for representations"


    This was signed by a Miss Freeman of Coram Children's Legal Centre.


11.  Thus, when she writes in effect that she had  stopped  acting  for  the
    Appellant that can only relate back to the  events  of  the  middle  of
    February 2016.  In the circumstances  therefore  I  take  into  account
    particularly that since before or on 17 March 2016 the  Appellant,  who
    is being in broad terms cared for by the London Borough of Harrow,  has
    been in the position to seek other legal representation.  As  of  today
    none has been identified save that the  firm  of  solicitors,  Lawrence
    Lupin & Co, have indicated in general terms that they would look at the
    Appellant's file and consider whether they would act.

12.  The overriding objective of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 is to secure proceedings can be dealt with fairly,  avoiding
    delay,  enabling  persons,  where  practicable,   to   take   part   in
    proceedings, and dealing with the  issue  of  adjournment  so  that  no
    injustice arises in the circumstances of the case nor was it  otherwise
    unfair.  Having considered this matter it seemed to me that the grounds
    of appeal do not need presentation by a legal representative.   In  the
    circumstances I decided that the fair, just and timely consideration of
    these grounds meant that they should now  be  dealt  with.  Whilst  the
    Appellant was not in a position to make arguments on the legal  issues,
    I was satisfied that the right course for the timely and fair  disposal
    of this challenge lay in dealing with the matter today.

13.  Accordingly, the application for adjournment is refused because of  the
    brief and uncomplicated dispute involved.

14.  Ground 1 essentially engages with errors of law arguments based  around
    the adequacy of the assessment of the case.  I  find  the  grounds  are
    essentially a disagreement with the findings of fact  which  the  judge
    was entitled to make.

15.  As to the Article 8 ECHR claim, quite simply  the  case  file  contains
    nothing from the Appellant's former representatives to support a  claim
    of 'exceptional circumstances' which justified looking  at  the  matter
    outside of the Rules.  For it was clear that the  Appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.   There  was  nothing
    before me to show that before the judge there was evidence to justify a
    consideration of Article 8 outside of the Rules.

16.  Accordingly, having looked at the potential  merits  it  seemed  to  me
    that there is nothing  in  the  nature  of  challenge  to  the  judge's
    decision that  disclose any error of law.

17.  I find the Original Tribunal made no error of law.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 27 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



