
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08580/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |   Decision & Reasons          |
|                                              |Promulgated                    |
|On 4 November 2015                            |   On 20 January 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SFZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts, Counsel, instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Page dated 23 October 2013 which allowed the appeal of SFZ on Article 8
    grounds.

 3. For the purposes of this determination we refer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department as the  respondent  and  to  SFZ  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.


 4. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born in 1994. The background
    to this matter is that he came to the UK in 2009 aged  14  and  claimed
    asylum. His claim was refused on 6 October  2009  but  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave on the basis of his age until 1 February  2012.  On
    31 January 2011 he made an application for further leave to  remain  on
    asylum and human rights grounds. The respondent's decision of 23 August
    2013 refusing further leave gave rise to these proceedings.


 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Page did not find that the appellant had made
    out his protection claim, finding at paragraph 22 that  there  was  "no
    serious possibility that the appellant's asylum story, as  told,  could
    be the truth given the lack of any significant  detail."  There  is  no
    challenge to that part of the decision from the appellant.


 6. Judge Page went on to consider the Article 8 claim.  He found that  the
    appellant had a strong family life with his foster carers and  that  he
    had established a private life of some substance in the four years that
    he had been present in the UK. There is no challenge to those  findings
    before us.


 7. Mr Mills conceded that the grounds insofar as they challenged  adequacy
    of reasons were not sustainable as the reasoning and examination of the
    evidence by the First-tier Tribunal Judge was admirably  thorough.  The
    respondent maintained that two errors arose in the second stage Article
    8 assessment, however.


 8. Firstly, it is now well understood that the Immigration Rules represent
    a legitimate view of when an Article 8 claim should be allowed. It  was
    common ground that the appellant here did not meet the requirements  of
    the Rules relating to family and private life. Where that was  so,  the
    judge had not followed the correct approach which required the  failure
    to  meet  the  Rules  to  be  the  starting  point  in  the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment and taken as a  strong  factor  weighing  in
    favour of the public interest and against the appellant. The judge here
    failed to take that approach.


 9. Secondly, where the Rules were not met, the Tribunal  was  required  to
    find there to be compelling or exceptional circumstances in  order  for
    the public interest to be outweighed. The First-tier Tribunal  had  not
    identified compelling or exceptional capable of outweighing the  public
    interest. Certainly, where the appellant could only  be  said  to  have
    been in the UK when his immigration status was precarious, the  private
    life he established, attracted little weight on the correct application
    of section 117B (5) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.


10. It was not  our  view  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  took  an
    incorrect approach to the failure to meet the Immigration Rules in  the
    second stage Article 8 assessment.  Firstly, Judge Page refers  himself
    in paragraph 24 to the two stage approach set out  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD. That approach was upheld more recently by the Court of Appeal  in
    SS (Congo) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387. There is a finding at  paragraph
    24 that the Immigration Rules were not met and that it  was  this  that
    led to the need to proceed to a second stage assessment. It  cannot  be
    said that the judge did not have the failure to  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules in mind as he commenced the second stage assessment. It  was  not
    the respondent's case before us that there was  no  requirement  for  a
    second stage assessment here. That must be right where the  applicant's
    relationship with  his  foster  family  is  not  provided  for  by  the
    Immigration Rules, for example.


11. Having directed himself to the correct approach to the failure to  meet
    the Immigration Rules, we were not taken to  anything  in  the  ensuing
    consideration that suggested that the First-tier Tribunal departed from
    that correct approach.  The judge said this at [38]:


         "This  has  been  a  finely  balanced  exercise,  weighted  in  the
         appellant's favour by one additional factor.  The appellant is half
         way through his training as a motor mechanic at Gloucester College.
          There is no pressing need to remove the appellant to  Afghanistan.
         The respondent said as much in  granting  the  appellant  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom until 1 February 2012 after he arrived
         on 11 February 2009 - and then not making a decision to remove  the
         appellant from the  United  Kingdom  until  23  August  2013,  some
         eighteen months after the appellant's leave to remain had  expired.
         I take this delay  into  account  in  forming  the  view  that  the
         appellant should at least be allowed to complete his training as  a
         motor mechanic before any consideration is given  to  removing  the
         appellant from the United Kingdom to Afghanistan.   He  has  worked
         very hard in the United  Kingdom,  taking  full  advantage  of  all
         educational  opportunities  and  training  opportunities  and   his
         immigration history does not dictate that this should be  truncated
         by his forcible removal to Afghanistan.   On  balance  and  at  the
         present - I emphasise  at  the  present  time  -  the  respondent's
         decision  to   remove   the   appellant   to   Afghanistan   is   a
         disproportionate response to  the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
         control.  This is because of the interference with the  appellant's
         private and family life in circumstances where the appellant is  at
         a crucial stage in his training which Mr and Mrs A are  sponsoring.
         I therefore allow the appeal under Article 8 in anticipation  that,
         at the very least, the appellant will be granted a  further  period
         of leave to remain sufficient for him to complete his training as a
         motor mechanic and continue living with his  foster  parents  until
         then (our emphasis)."


12. The first line of this paragraph  refers  to  the  assessment  being  a
    balancing exercise. Everything in this paragraph and the  remainder  of
    the decision indicates that the judge understood that on  one  side  of
    this balance was the public interest legitimately  represented  by  the
    failure to meet the Immigration  Rules.  There  is  the  correct  self-
    direction, as above.  In  addition,  there  is  an  explicit  reference
    towards the end of paragraph 38 to "the legitimate aim  of  immigration
    control" being outweighed here.


13. We did not  find  that  the  determination  here  showed  an  incorrect
    understanding or application of the importance of the failure  to  meet
    the Immigration Rules in the second stage Article 8 assessment.


14. The respondent's second challenge before us was that the judge  reached
    a conclusion that was not reasonably open to a rational  decision-maker
    on the evidence provided.  We did not find that  argument  to  be  made
    out.  As above, the  finding  of  a  strong  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his foster family and of a substantive  private  life  is
    not challenged.  It is not just the conclusions at paragraph [38]  that
    led to the finding of a disproportionate interference with  family  and
    private life but the thorough assessment at paragraphs [32] to [37]  of
    all of the particular factors in  play  here.   Although  there  is  no
    specific reference to "compelling" or "exceptional" circumstances, read
    fairly the decision shows that the judge found  the  substance  of  the
    appellant's  history,  family  and  private  life  and  the  particular
    "additional factor" here of the progress made and stage reached in  his
    education  sufficiently  exceptional  so  as  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest for a limited period. On the evidence before him, that  was  a
    conclusion legitimately open to the First-tier Tribunal judge.


15. For those reasons we did not find the grounds had merit.


Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.



Signed   [pic]                               Date 9 November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

