
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08771/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent:        |
|On 15th May 2014                                |                           |
|Extempore judgement delivered                   |                           |
|On 15th May 2014                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     ps
                           (anonymity order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah of Counsel instructed by Greater
London Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals a decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated
    on 17th October 2013, the date of which it was heard,  in  which  Judge
    Taylor dismissed his appeal against  a  refusal  of  asylum  dated  2nd
    September 2013.  The Appellant applied for permission  to  appeal  that
    decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  on  refusal  renewed  the
    application in the Upper Tier.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted permission on 10th  January  2014
    in the following terms:

         "Taking into account the various positive findings of the Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal together with the grant of permission given
         by the Court of Appeal in MP and NT (Sri Lanka)  in  appeal  number
         AA/02916/2009 I consider that the grounds of appeal are arguable."

 3. Before me Ms Jegarajah relied on the grounds  of  the  application  for
    permission as they were drawn before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  as
    renewed in the Upper Tier.  Ground 1 of those applications asserts that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law because the  appeal  on  the
    basis of the facts found ought to have been allowed.   I  am  satisfied
    that there is merit in the grounds to the point that this appeal should
    have been allowed in the context of the guidance set out in the case of
    GJ & Others (post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.
     The judge has set out the Appellant's account at paragraphs 9  and  10
    of his determination and also reminded himself of  the  detail  of  the
    reasons  for  refusal  at  paragraph  7  of  the  determination.    The
    Respondent, the judge  noted,  had  rejected  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account and the judge identified as  the  main  reason  for
    that rejection an issue about the Appellant's passport used  to  travel
    to the United Kingdom.  After  detailed  consideration  the  judge  has
    accepted the Appellant's account in respect of that issue.

 4.  The  other  significant  adverse  factor  the  judge  found  was   the
    Appellant's immigration history which has been set out at  paragraph  1
    of the decision and which the judge visits in some detail at  paragraph
    20 of the  determination  in  the  context  of  Section  8  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  The  judge  finds
    that when weighed against the positive evidence in the Appellant's case
    that  despite  the  adverse  immigration  history  the   Appellant   is
    nonetheless credible and he accepts the Appellant's account.   That  it
    is clear from the reasons is the account that the  judge  has  set  out
    previously in the determination.

 5. Mr Walker has accepted  before  me  that  the  Appellant  has  provided
    evidence to the judge about his claim that the authorities in Sri Lanka
    have exhibited an  ongoing  interest  in  him  post  his  release  from
    detention and post his arrival in the United  Kingdom.   That  evidence
    was not subjected to any cross-examination  before  the  judge  and  in
    light of the credibility findings it is evidence  that  the  judge  has
    accepted as being part of the Appellant's  account.   The  evidence  is
    that the authorities remained interested in the Appellant prior to  his
    coming  to  the  United  Kingdom,  post-flight  in   April   2011   and
    subsequently in 2013, and that this took the form  of  the  authorities
    making enquiries of the Appellant's mother about  his  whereabouts  and
    expressing an interest in wanting to locate him and speak to  him.   In
    that context I find that that is evidence that the  authorities  remain
    interested in this Appellant.

 6. It follows that  although  on  the  findings  or  the  account  of  the
    Appellant's  own  activities  in  Sri  Lanka  it  is  not   immediately
    discernible as to why the authorities should  have  such  an  interest.
    The evidence establishes that they do and of course their perception of
    what he may know or what his affiliations now might be are not  matters
    which are able to be determined.

 7. Having accepted the Appellant's account the judge then  considered  the
    categories at risk as set out in the country guidance case in GJ and it
    is apparent that in doing so he has failed to  take  into  account  the
    evidence of the authorities' ongoing interest in the Appellant and  for
    that reason I am satisfied that his assessment of  risk  is  materially
    flawed.  The evidence is that absent any reason  other  than  pro-Tamil
    separatism for the authorities' interest in the Appellant the  evidence
    shows that this Appellant comes within the risk category set out at GJ,
    in particular at 356(7(a)).  The standard is of course the low standard
    of real risk and to that end the evidence  of  continuing  interest  is
    deficient to meet it.  In those circumstances I find  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision is vitiated by error so that  I  set  it
    aside and re-make the  decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  asylum  and
    Article 3 grounds.

 8. There is no challenge to the issues of the dismissal of the  appeal  in
    respect of Article 8 and that decision remains.





Signed   E Davidge                           Date 23 May 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

