
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08673/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 November 2016                   |On 9 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GARNHAM
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr FGH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Government Legal
                    Department
For the Respondent:    Mr P Haywood, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 14 July 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker allowed the appeal  of
    Mr FGH on asylum grounds, finding that the appellant did not  meet  the
    criteria for exclusion from the protection of  the  Refugee  Convention
    provided by  Article  1F(b).  The  Secretary  of  State  now  mounts  a
    statutory appeal against that decision.

 2. In considering this appeal we have carefully reviewed the  decision  of
    Judge  Parker  together  with  the  written  grounds  prepared  on  the
    Secretary of State's behalf by Mr Zane Malik of Counsel and the grounds
    prepared on behalf of  Mr  FGH  by  Mr  Phil  Haywood.   We  have  also
    considered the documentary evidence provided by both  parties  and  had
    the benefit of oral argument from both Counsel.

 3. The factual background to this case  may  be  stated  shortly.   It  is
    described in rather  greater  length  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    respondent, Mr FGH, was born in Libya.  In 1989 he  met  Saif  Gaddafi,
    son of Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, at university and the  two  men  became
    close friends.  In 1994 Saif Gaddafi set up a  private  company  called
    the National Service and Supply Company or "NESSCO".  The appellant was
    appointed a director in that  company  and  placed  in  charge  of  the
    company's finances.   He  earned  the  trust  of  Mr  Saif  Gaddafi  on
    financial matters.

 4. Saif Gaddafi had a 50% shareholding in NESSCO but was anxious to  avoid
    being officially connected with the company.  Accordingly,  he  divided
    his ownership between the appellant and other shareholders.  A separate
    bank account was set up into which his share of the  company's  profits
    was deposited.  There were concerns about rivalry between  elements  of
    the Gaddafi  family  and  it  was  thought  unwise  to  publicise  Saif
    Gaddafi's connection with the company.  Accordingly,  the  company  did
    not use his name when seeking  to  win  contracts  in  their  field  of
    endeavour, namely construction.

 5. The appellant and his family left Libya in August  2011  and  moved  to
    Tunisia.  In May 2012 the appellant's  name  was  included  on  a  list
    issued by the Libyan National Congress of those whose assets  ought  to
    be frozen.  INTERPOL issued a red notice in January 2013 alleging  that
    the appellant was wanted for embezzlement  of  public  funds.   It  was
    subsequently submitted that that was a politically motivated  move  and
    INTERPOL issued caveats against the red notice.   The  red  notice  was
    subsequently blocked or withdrawn entirely.

 6. On 6 October 2014 the Secretary of State issued her decision  on  FGH's
    application for asylum.  She  accepted  that  there  was  a  Convention
    reason  for  the  appellant's  fear  of  persecution,  namely   imputed
    political opinion, but decided that he  should  be  excluded  from  the
    protection of  the  Refugee  Convention  on  the  ground  that  he  had
    committed a serious non-political crime outside the country  of  refuge
    prior to his admission to that country of refuge.

 7. The substantive hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took place on 10
    May this year.  The judge heard Mr FGH give evidence and Mr FGH adopted
    his two witness statements dated 15 July 2013 and 22 February 2016.  He
    gave oral evidence  and  was  cross-examined.   The  judge  then  heard
    submissions from Mr Malik and Mr Haywood.

 8. The judge's decision runs to some 93 paragraphs and  covers  30  pages.
    It accurately summarises the Secretary  of  State's  case  against  the
    appellant.  It accurately sets out the provisions of Article 1F(b)  and
    it addresses each of the grounds advanced by the Secretary of State for
    his conclusion that Mr FGH is  excluded  from  the  protection  of  the
    Convention.

 9. Before us the Secretary of State advances five grounds of appeal.   The
    first ground is that the  FTT  Judge  misconstrued  Article  1F(b)  and
    misdirected herself in law in assuming that the Convention required the
    Secretary of State to prove, by producing  cogent  evidence,  that  the
    person concerned has in fact committed a serious non-political crime.

10. Mr Malik points to particular expressions used by the judge, notably in
    paragraphs 61, 65, 77, 78, 83 and 93, which he says  demonstrates  that
    the judge was applying the wrong test.  Mr Malik says  it  is  apparent
    from the determination when read as a whole that the judge  was  asking
    herself whether the Secretary of State had been able to show  that  the
    appellant had  "actually  committed  a  serious  non-political  crime";
    what Article 1F requires instead  is  simply  that  there  are  serious
    reasons for considering that he has committed such a crime.

11. We reject that ground.  In our judgment it is clear from a fair reading
    of the judge's determination that the judge  has  applied  the  correct
    test.  The judge set out in paragraph 46 of her determination the legal
    framework which she had to apply to the question before her.  That  was
    at the very beginning of her analysis  of  the  evidence.   She  quotes
    Article 1F correctly.  She then refers to the leading authority on  the
    proper interpretation of that provision, namely Al-Sirri v SSHD  [2012]
    UKSC 54.

12. The Judge then quotes from Mr Malik's skeleton the relevant definitions
    taken from that Supreme Court decision.   At  paragraph  57  the  judge
    indicates that her analysis "will begin  by  considering  the  evidence
    relied upon by the respondent in respect of the appellant's involvement
    with NESSCO".  She then reviews the respondent's evidence  relating  to
    Saif Gaddafi's secret involvement  in  NESSCO,  his  shareholding,  his
    alleged illegal accumulation of wealth and the INTERPOL  notices.   All
    but one of the paragraphs criticised by Mr Malik are found in this part
    of the decision.

13. In our judgment it is perfectly clear that what the judge was doing  in
    this part of her  determination  was  analysing  the  strength  of  the
    evidence on which the respondent relied.  She was not disregarding  the
    legal test that she had to apply, which she had set out so  clearly  in
    the preceding paragraphs.  So, for example, at the end of paragraph  61
    she indicates that  she  is  not  satisfied  that  the  respondent  had
    established "even to the lower standard" that there was a  criminal  or
    even morally negative motivation  for  keeping  secret  Saif  Gaddafi's
    involvement in NESSCO.  The reference to the lower standard is  plainly
    a reference to the provisions of Article 1F.

14. In paragraph 65 the judge said that she was  "not  satisfied  there  is
    evidence of a serious non-political crime  in  keeping  Saif  Gaddafi's
    involvement in the company secret".  If there is no  evidence  to  that
    effect there is no serious reason for considering  it.   Similarly,  in
    paragraph 83 the judge reminds herself that in order to establish  that
    the appellant should be excluded  from  protection  of  the  Convention
    there needs to be  evidence  of  individual  responsibility.   She  was
    satisfied there was no such evidence.  In applying that  criterion  she
    was in our judgment doing no more than applying  the  guidance  of  the
    Supreme Court in Al-Sirri.

15. The judge  then  summarises  her  conclusions  in  paragraph  93.   She
    explains that having considered all the evidence she found  "even  when
    considered cumulatively, it  is  insufficient  to  establish  that  the
    appellant warrants exclusion from the Refugee Convention".  Given  that
    she had set out precisely what it was necessary to establish  in  order
    to bring an individual within Article 1F(b) at  the  beginning  of  her
    analysis we can see no arguable error of any sort in  that  conclusion.
    That is enough to dispose of the first ground.

16. The second ground is that the judge erred in law in  failing  to  carry
    out a structured and reasoned analysis of the  evidence.   By  that  Mr
    Malik means that the judge did not adopt his  suggested  structure  for
    the decision.  That structure  is  set  out  at  paragraph  18  of  the
    Secretary of State's application for permission.  In our  judgment  the
    judge was not obliged precisely to  follow  Mr  Malik's  structure  and
    contrary to Mr Malik's case the Judge's  analysis  was  perfectly  well
    reasoned and well explained using the judge's own structure.

17. We also note in passing that at the end of the decision the  judge  did
    in fact return to the four questions posed by Mr Malik and  dealt  with
    them.  There is nothing whatever in this ground of appeal.

18. The third ground of appeal alleges that the  judge's  approach  to  the
    issue of financial corruption and its seriousness  in  the  context  of
    Article 1F(b) is inconsistent with authority.  Reference is made to  AH
    (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ
    1003.

19. In his written response Mr Haywood argues that "whether  serious  crime
    includes financial  corruption  requires  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    demonstrate what it was that FGH was alleged to have done".   Here,  as
    he points out, the judge did not find that the Secretary of  State  had
    established a factual case that FGH was in fact  corrupt.   That  being
    so, in our judgment it is impossible to argue that the judge  erred  in
    her  approach  to  the  question  whether  financial  corruption  might
    constitute serious crime.  If it is not  established  that  there  were
    serious grounds for considering the appellant had acted  corruptly  the
    issue of whether such corruption constitutes  a  serious  crime  within
    Article 1F simply does not arise.

20. The Secretary of State's fourth ground of appeal is  that  the  judge's
    "implied refusal to accept that the Libyan  state  apparatus  and  Saif
    Gaddafi were corrupt  is  not  justified  on  the  available  objective
    evidence".  It is  said  that  the  relevant  evidence  was  completely
    ignored by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

21. That ground too is simply not borne out on the facts.  It  is  apparent
    from the determination  read  as  a  whole,  and  in  particular  those
    sections dealing with each part of the Secretary of  State's  case  and
    from the conclusions at  paragraphs  90  to  92,  that  the  judge  did
    consider the evidence and submissions relating to corruption  in  Libya
    generally and corruption by Saif Gaddafi in particular.   But,  as  the
    judge correctly observed, this was not Saif Gaddafi's  appeal  and  the
    issue was  not  whether  Saif  Gaddafi  should  be  excluded  from  the
    protection  of  the  Convention.   The  judge  correctly  focused   her
    attention on the case  against  FGH  and  she  made  entirely  adequate
    findings about the extent of FGH's involvement with Saif  Gaddafi.   As
    Mr Haywood rightly pointed out in writing,  Mr  FGH  was  not  a  state
    official and in order to make good her  case  the  Secretary  of  State
    needed to show serious grounds for considering  that  FGH  rather  than
    others in the Libyan establishment were corrupt.

22. We would add  in  that  context  that  the  judge  placed  considerable
    reliance in analysing the respondent's case on expert evidence  from  a
    Ms Melinda Taylor and Professor Joffe.  It is of some note that, as the
    judge observed at paragraph 64, the credentials of  these  experts  was
    not challenged. It still has not been. In those circumstances the judge
    was  entitled  to  rely  on  that  expert  evidence  and  it   provided
    considerable support for her in the conclusions she reached.

23. Finally, the Secretary of State argues that  the  judge's  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's activities in Libya are "inconsistent  with
    the appellant's own evidence and furthermore its findings  in  relation
    to this are not justified on the available evidence".  We  reject  that
    argument too.  In substance that is nothing more than an expression  of
    disagreement with the judge's analysis and conclusion.  It points to no
    error of law or error of approach.  The judge had set out in detail the
    nature of the evidence; she had identified and considered the nature of
    FGH's role in Libya; and she had drawn conclusions that  were  properly
    open to her.

24. In our  view,  the  evidence  relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    undoubtedly justified  suspicion  of  corruption  but  that  is  wholly
    insufficient to meet the test set out in Article 1F as  considered  and
    analysed by the Supreme Court in Al-Sirri.  What was required  was  not
    suspicion but clear and credible, or strong, evidence.  In our view the
    judge was entitled to come to the conclusion that  that  had  not  been
    demonstrated.

25. For those reasons this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Mr Justice Garnham

