

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08375/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reason Promulgated|
|On 15 July 2016                               |On 01 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     GI

                         (Anonymity DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford     (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal  against  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew hereinafter "the Judge")
to dismiss his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  of  13 May 2015
refusing to  grant  him  asylum.   The Judge's  written  determination  was
promulgated on 5 October 2015.

2.    By way of background, it is not  disputed  that  the  appellant  is  a
national of Afghanistan and a minor.  Indeed, the  respondent  accepted  the
appellant's contention that he had been born on 15 March 2000, there having
been an assessment conducted by  the  Solihull  Social  Services  Department
which was supportive of that proposition.  The appellant claims to  be  from
a village known as Dabrai Khwaja which is located in  the  Logar Province.
He has said that, having left Afghanistan, he journeyed through a number  of
countries during a six month journey to the United Kingdom  which  he  says
had been arranged by his mother and a person from his village.   During  the
course of that journey he was finger-printed in Greece on 15 July 2014.  He
entered the UK on 1 October 2014 and it is recorded that he claimed asylum
on 20 November 2014.

3.    The account offered by the appellant as to why he was claiming  asylum
is as follows.  He says that his father was an  influential  member  of  the
Taliban at a local level and that, as a result, he (that is the father)  was
taken by the Afghani forces and foreign forces in a raid on the family home
when the appellant was  aged  approximately  11 years.   His  brother  then
joined the Taliban and, as he grew older, became an  active  member.   There
were further raids on the family home which were made  with  the  intention,
on the part of the Afghani and foreign  forces,  of  locating  his  brother.
Those raids were  unsuccessful  and  the  brother  had,  in  fact,  been  in
Pakistan undergoing some training provided by the  Taliban.   However,  says
the appellant, his brother returned home, having  changed  his  views  about
the Taliban, and, as a consequence, the Taliban murdered him.   After  this,
Taliban members told his mother that they wished to recruit  him  and  would
harm him if he did not join them.  That is  why,  says  the  appellant,  his
mother arranged for him to be  taken  out  of  Afghanistan  to  a  place  of
safety.  The appellant  gave  his  account,  prior  to  the  hearing  before
the Judge, in witness statements of 21 May 2015 and 23 September 2015 and
at a substantive asylum interview of 22 April 2015.

4.    The appellant's account did  not  find  favour  with  the  respondent,
other than his claim to be from Afghanistan and to  be  a  minor,  the  view
being taken that he had not, otherwise, given a truthful account of  events.
 Accordingly, the respondent  refused  to  grant  him  asylum  but  did,  in
accordance with policy, grant him limited leave to remain until he  attained
the age of 17 years and 6 months.  The appellant, dissatisfied  with  that
partially successful outcome, launched his  appeal  which  led  to  an  oral
hearing before the Judge with took place on 30 September 2015 and at which
both parties were represented.  The appellant, presumably  in  view  of  his
young age, did not give oral evidence.

5.    The Judge, unlike the respondent, found the appellant to be  credible
and truthful.  Notwithstanding that, though, she dismissed his  appeal.   In
explaining her view as to credibility and her decision  and  reasoning,  she
said this:

      "     14.  I have taken into  account  that  the  Appellant  was  just
      15 when his asylum interview was conducted.  He  was  asked  a  large
      number of questions about his  experiences  in  Afghanistan.   He  had
      previously filed a statement that had been prepared  for  him  by  his
      representative.  This is written in the  English  language  and  I  am
      satisfied will have been translated back to  the  Appellant.   Indeed,
      there is an endorsement to that effect on the back of the statement.

            15.  Most of the concerns of the Respondent appear  to  be  that
      his statement and the responses the Appellant gave in interview differ
      in parts.  However, I accept  that  the  Appellant  has  been  broadly
      consistent in his claims.  He has answered many of the concerns of the
      respondent in his further witness statement.

            16.  Accordingly I am satisfied that the Appellant  is  a  young
      teenager from Afghanistan whose father was with the Taliban.   Whether
      he was an influential member of  the  Taliban  I  cannot  say  as  the
      Appellant himself does not know.  However, I accept that at some point
      he was taken away.  However, the Appellant was very  young  when  this
      happened:  he has no recollection of this event and  is  dependent  on
      what he was  told  by  his  mother.   Whether  he  was  taken  by  the
      authorities I cannot say.  However, I am satisfied that the  appellant
      has not seen his father for a very long time.  I cannot  say,  on  the
      evidence before me, whether or not the  Appellant's  father  is  dead.
      The only evidence the Appellant has been able to give in  this  regard
      is second-hand.

            17.  I am further satisfied that the Appellant's brother  joined
      the Taliban.  I also accept that the authorities came to look for  him
      in the Appellant's home although  I  believe  that  it  is  reasonably
      likely that this was part of a general round-up of Taliban  supporters
      in the area, the appellant indicating that other houses in the village
      had members  of  the  Taliban  in  them.   There  is  nothing  in  the
      Appellant's claims to indicate that his  brother  was  anything  other
      than a rank and file member of the Taliban and thus I find it  is  not
      reasonably likely there would be any specific interest in him from the
      authorities.

            18.  I am further satisfied that  the  Appellant's  brother  was
      killed by the Taliban because he  had  become  disaffected  with  that
      organisation.  Although there is some  confusion  in  the  Appellant's
      evidence he is clear  that  his  brother  had  been  shot,  and  I  am
      satisfied that it is reasonably likely that this was by the Taliban as
      he had become disaffected with that organisation  and  would  thus  be
      considered disloyal to it.

             19.   What  I  cannot  be  satisfied  about,  however,  is  the
      Appellant's claims that the Taliban wanted to  forcibly  recruit  him.
      In this regard I have noted the country information which is contained
      in the Respondent's Bundle at E1.  I have also noted what is  said  in
      the Appellant's Bundle at page 89.  Whilst I accept that this  refers
      to the recruitment of under-aged children and that there  are  reports
      of abductions of children what it does  not  do  is  refer  to  forced
      recruitment of children by the Taliban.

            20.  I have also noted the references in the Skeleton Argument.
       However, I have no evidence before  me  to  show  that  the  forcible
      recruitment of the Appellant by the Taliban is a real risk.

            21.  I then turn to whether or not the  Appellant  would  be  at
      real risk from the Afghani authorities because he is  from  a  Taliban
      family.  I have no objective evidence before me to show  that  Taliban
      families, as such, are targeted by the authorities in Afghanistan.   I
      can accept that this might be the case  if  the  authorities  believed
      that  the  Appellant  was  involved  in  Taliban  activities  but  the
      Appellant has given the authorities no reason to believe that this may
      be the case.  I do not find the Appellant's fears in this regard  made
      out.

            22.  For these reasons I do not find the Appellant would  be  at
      real risk if he were to be returned to Afghanistan.

            23.  Further I  do  not  find  that  there  is  any  warrant  in
      departing from the country guidance case in AK  (Afghanistan) v SSHD
      [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC)  in  view  of  the  guidance  in  R (on  the
      application of Naziri and Others) v SSHD IJR [2015] UKUT 00437 (IAC)."

6.    The Judge went on  to  confirm  that  she  was  concluding  that  the
appellant was not a refugee because he had not  established  a  well-founded
fear of persecution.  As to humanitarian protection she said:

      "     27.  ... having found he is not a refugee  because  he  has  not
      established a well founded fear of persecution, by analogy I find  the
      appellant does not qualify for humanitarian protection."

7.    The dismissal of the appeal was not the end of the matter because  the
appellant, through his representatives, applied for and obtained  permission
to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Although permission was initially refused
by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal it was granted  by  a  judge  of  the
Upper Tribunal in these terms:

      "     1.   The grounds of appeal assert that the judge of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal erred in  her  consideration  of  whether  or  not  the
      appellant would be forcibly recruited by the Taliban.  They  refer  to
      the country guidance case of HK and  Others  (Afghanistan)  CG [2010]
      UKUT 378 (IAC) and to background evidence from  UNHCR.   It  is  also
      claimed that the Judge had erred in  not  considering  the  issue  of
      subsidiary protection.

            2.    Particularly  with  regard  to  the  issue  of  subsidiary
      protection where the Judge states that because she has found that the
      appellant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution  she  finds
      that the appellant does not  qualify  for  subsidiary  protection  'by
      analogy' I consider that the grounds of appeal are arguable."

8.    Permission having  been  granted,  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me).  The hearing was to enable the  Upper Tribunal
to consider whether the Judge had erred in  law  but  directions  indicated
that the Upper Tribunal might go on  to  remake  the  decision  if  it  was
thought  that  that  could  be   done   without   further   oral   evidence.
Representation at that hearing was as stated above  and  I  am  grateful  to
each representative for their considerable assistance.

9.    Mr Bedford relied upon  all  the  grounds  of  appeal,  not  limiting
himself to the point concerning subsidiary protection.  He was  entitled  to
do that because the grant was not expressed to be limited.  He  argued  that
the Judge had not properly considered the risk of forcible  recruitment  at
the hands of the Taliban in light of what had been said  in  HK  and  Others
(Minors - Indiscriminate Violence - False Recruitment by Taliban - Contact
with Family Members) Afghanistan CG(2010) UKUT 378 (IAC).  He asserted that
if she had, bearing in mind the seeming acceptance that  he  is  from  Logar
province, she would have had  to  conclude  that  there  was  such  a  risk.
Further, return would, initially, be to Kabul and there was no  analysis  as
to the safety or otherwise of returning an  unaccompanied  minor  to  Kabul.
The document the Judge had mentioned at paragraph 19 of her  determination
and which appears at page E1 of the respondent's bundle was only  one  page
from a much larger document  and  did  not,  in  any  event,  rule  out  the
possibility of forced recruitment.  Further, and still looking at  the  same
paragraph  of  the  determination,  it   appeared   that   the Judge   had
misunderstood what was said at page 89 of the appellant's bundle because it
was indicated, therein,  (and  that  page  is  from  the  UNHCR  eligibility
guidelines of August 2013) that AGE's did abduct children for  recruitment.
Mr Mills accepted that a Skeleton Argument which had been before the Judge
did refer to the decision in HK and did refer to  the  appellant  as  having
been from Logar province.   He  accepted  that  the  question  of  forcible
recruitment had to be considered on a case by  case  basis  whilst  pointing
out that if there was risk in the home area  then  the  availability  of  an
internal flight alternative would have to be considered.  He  indicated,  in
the circumstances and in light of the points made by  Mr Bedford,  that  he
could not "defend" the Judge's determination.

10.   In light of Mr Mills frank and open response to the  points  made  by
Mr Bedford, I do not need to say very much about why  it  is  that  I  have
decided to set the decision aside.  I do accept, though, that the Judge did
not adequately consider the question of the risk of forcible recruitment  in
light of HK, in light of her acceptance of the appellant  as  a  largely  if
not wholly credible witness, in light of the consequent acceptance that  his
father had been taken away and that his brother had  been  murdered  by  the
Taliban and in light of what does appear to have been a misunderstanding  as
to what was said in the document at  page 89  of  the  appellant's  bundle.
Thus, she did err in law.  Accordingly, the Judge's decision is  set  aside.


11.   Mr Bedford urged me to go on to remake the decision on the  basis  of
further oral submissions.  After some discussion I decided to do so. I  also
agreed that, for the  purposes  of  that  exercise,  I  would  preserve  the
favourable  credibility  findings  and  conclusions  which  the Judge  had
reached.  There had been no subsequent challenge to those findings.

12.   Mr Mills submitted that the appellant had failed to demonstrate,  and
of course the burden does lie upon him, that he would not have  any  broader
family support other than that of his mother if he were to  be  returned  to
Afghanistan.  It seemed he has an older brother  who  is  also  in  the  UK.
There may be other relevant family members still  in  Afghanistan.   His  UK
based brother might be able to contact other family members  in  Afghanistan
who might, in turn, be able to arrange to provide support for the  appellant
in relocating to Kabul.  Mr Mills, though, said he  would  accept  that  if
there was risk to the appellant in his home area it could not be  said  that
his mother, as a widow, would be able to  afford  him  adequate  support  or
protection as a single mother in Kabul if she were to move there  with  him.
The point was, though, that  if  there  was  risk  in  the  home  area  (and
Mr Mills did not submit, in terms, that there was not)  there  would  be  a
possible internal flight alternative relying  upon  broader  family  members
and the appellant had done nothing to show that such broader family  support
was not available.

13.   Mr Bedford submitted that  what  evidence  there  was  on  the  point
appeared to suggest that the appellant's  brother  had  been  given  refugee
status in the UK and, in those circumstances, he could not  be  expected  to
return to support the appellant in Afghanistan.  There was  nothing  in  all
of the material before me  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  could  receive
support from anyone other than his mother who would  not,  as  a  widow,  be
able to protect him or assist him with internal flight.  It  appeared,  from
the evidence, that she was the only family member in Afghanistan  which  the
appellant now has.  I was, therefore, invited to allow  the  appeal  on  the
basis that the appellant would be at risk of  forcible  recruitment  in  the
home  area  and  would  not  have  available  to  him  an  internal   flight
alternative.

14.   By way of reminder, the Judge had accepted, in terms, in  findings  I
have preserved, that the appellant's father had  been  taken  away  and  his
brother had been murdered by the  Taliban  having  become  disaffected  with
that group.  Those are matters which  certainly  weigh  in  the  appellant's
favour with respect to my remaking of the decision.  However, the Judge did
not accept that the Taliban "wanted to forcibly recruit  him".   I  did  not
understand Mr Mills to be asserting that the appellant was not at  risk  in
his home area though he did not  make  an  outright  concession  as  to  the
matter.  I have, therefore, found it necessary to consider  the  matter  and
make some additional findings.  In this context, the  appellant  did  appear
to suggest that the Taliban had sought him  out  for  forcible  recruitment.
That is how I interpret the opening words of paragraph 20 of the  statement
of 21 May 2015 which are as follows:

      "     20.  After killing my brother the Taliban came  looking  for  me
      at our home but I was very lucky because I was not there.   They  told
      my mother that they wished to take me now."

15.   In answering questions from question 155-162 of the asylum  interview
the appellant also indicated that the Taliban had come to his  family  home,
when he was not there, seeking to recruit him and that they had said to  his
mother that if he did not join them he would  be  killed.   That,  if  true,
would certainly amount to attempted forcible recruitment.  It seems  to  me,
therefore, that the appellant has been consistent about this matter.

16.   Turning then to background material,  I  do  have,  in  front  of  me,
page E1 of the respondent's bundle which had been prepared for the  hearing
before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is a single  page  from  a  Country  of
Origin  Information  Report  for  Afghanistan.   No  additional  pages  have
subsequently been provided.  It is not possible to precisely date it  though
there  is  a  footnote  referring  to  a  report  which  was   produced   on
2 February 2012 so this report must have been produced at some point after
that date.  The page ends mid-sentence so it does appear that  the  complete
section of the report under the heading "Recruitment  by  the  Taliban"  has
not been provided.  It would, I think, have been more helpful if, at  least,
the full section regarding recruitment had been put before the Judge  and  I
do not have, from the respondent, anything  more  than  she  had.   What  is
before me from this report suggests, in summary, that the  Taliban  are,  in
general terms, able to find willing volunteers to join them so that they  do
not need to indulge in  forced  recruitment.   That  said,  I  would  accept
Mr Bedford's submission that the content of page E1, even incomplete as it
is, does not exclude the possibility of forced  recruitment  at  least  from
time to time.  The document though,  in  general  terms,  is  weak  evidence
because, as I say, it is incomplete and it is not possible to properly  date
it.  Turning now to material contained in the bundle which  had  been  filed
on behalf of the appellant for  the  purposes  of  the  First-tier Tribunal
hearing, the UNHCR eligibility guidelines released in August 2013  indicate
that "AGE's reportedly abducted children for recruitment".  Earlier  in  the
same eligibility guidelines it is said that where AGE's  exercise  effective
control it has been reported that  they  use  a  variety  of  mechanisms  to
recruit fighters including "coercive  strategies".   As  to  pertinent  case
law, it was indicated in HK that forcible recruitment by the  Taliban  could
not be discounted as a risk particularly in areas of high militant  activity
or militant control though it was also said that evidence  was  required  to
show that there was a real risk for the particular person concerned and  not
only a mere possibility.  I accept, though, that the appellant was,  through
his mother,  threatened  with  forcible  recruitment  because  he  has  been
consistent about that as well as other matters and there is some  background
country material  in  the  form  of  the  UNHCR  eligibility  guidelines  to
demonstrate that  such  does  take  place  at  least  in  certain  areas  in
Afghanistan.  Linked to that is the point that the appellant,  it  does  not
appear to have been seriously disputed, is from  the  Logar province  where
there is known to be Taliban activity.   In  this  context  the  same  UNHCR
eligibility guidelines refer to Logar as being an area which, in  2012,  had
seen an increase  in  what  were  described  as  "higher  security  incident
levels" in the context of AGE activity.

17.   I conclude, then, applying what is often  referred  to  as  the  "real
risk test" that the appellant has demonstrated that  he  would  be  at  real
risk of persecution  if  he  were  to  be  returned  to  his  home  area  in
Afghanistan.  That is because  the  risk  of  forcible  recruitment  by  the
Taliban is a risk which, on the evidence, is  more  than  fanciful  and  is,
indeed,  substantial  given  the  approach  made  to  his  mother  and   the
indication that if he did not  join  them  he  would  be  killed.   I  would
conclude that, on the facts of this case,  the  applicable  1951 Convention
reason is that of  imputed  political  opinion  because  the  Taliban  would
regard him as being opposed to them, as ultimately his brother  was,  if  he
did not join them.

18.   There remains, though, the question  of  whether  the  appellant  will
have, available to him, an internal flight alternative.  Mr Mills  did  not
seek to suggest that internal flight would be available anywhere other  than
Kabul.  It is that, then, which I  focus  upon.   The  appellant  remains  a
minor.  He is currently aged 16 years.  There is nothing  in  the  material
before me to suggest that he has ever  been  to  Kabul  other  than  briefly
during the course of his journey  outside  of  Afghanistan.   What  is  said
about that at paragraph 21 of the statement of 21 May 2015  is  that  his
mother took him to Kabul and handed him over to an  agent  who  simply  took
him elsewhere.  I would conclude, and Mr Mills in fact accepts  this,  that
it would be unduly harsh to expect him, at his young  age,  to  relocate  to
Kabul by himself.  There is then the question  of  what  family  support  he
might have.  There is, it is accepted, his mother.  She  does  not  live  in
Kabul but it might be thought, from one perspective that she would  be  able
to move from Logar province to Kabul and set up  home  with  the  appellant
such that he would, at least,  be  in  the  company  of  a  familiar  adult.
However, Mr Mills accepts that a female in Afghanistan would not be able to
set up home without an adult male relative and provide support for a  minor.
 So, that does not represent an available option. Mr Mills argues,  though,
that there might be  other  male  relatives  in  Afghanistan  who  might  be
prepared to relocate to Kabul with the appellant or who,  I  suppose,  might
already be in Kabul, and that with that sort of support an  internal  flight
alternative would not be unduly harsh.  He stresses that the appellant  has,
as he puts it, done nothing to  disprove  the  availability  of  other  such
adult male relatives.

19.   The appellant was asked about at least certain of his relatives  in  a
screening interview.  He mentioned his father and  his  elder  brother.   Of
course, in preserved findings it has  been  accepted  that  his  father  was
taken away and has disappeared and that his elder brother has been  murdered
by the Taliban.  He mentioned his mother and he  also  mentioned  a  younger
brother who, of course, himself remains  a  minor.   Finally,  he  mentioned
another brother, an adult, who he says is in the UK.  There was  no  mention
of any other family members in  Afghanistan  although,  in  looking  at  the
screening interview, it may have been the case that he was not asked  if  he
had any other such relatives.  Turning to the substantive asylum  interview,
he mentioned his parents and his brothers (those persons referred to  above)
and was then asked at question 24 whether he had family in other  areas  of
Afghanistan.  He replied "no". I see no reason  to  disbelieve  his  answer.
This material, though,  is  not  conclusive  as  to  whether  he  had  other
relatives in his home village.  The implication from what  he  says  appears
to be that there were no such other relatives but  the  possibility  is  not
actually precluded.  However, what is being suggested, in effect, on  behalf
of the respondent, is that any such relative living in the appellant's  home
area might be prepared to give up his home (and  it  would  have  to  be  an
adult male relative) to go to live in Kabul with the appellant.   One  might
ask what motivation anyone who does not live  in  Kabul  would  have  to  do
that.  Applying the real risk test I find that there are no  such  relatives
but that, in the alternative, even if there  are,  there  is  no  reason  to
think that they would "up sticks" and go to live in Kabul simply to  afford
support for the appellant.  As to the appellant's UK based brother  it  does
not seem to have ever been in dispute that the  two  are  not  currently  in
touch with each other.   It  would  be  something  of  a  stretch,  in  such
circumstances, to think that that brother might be prepared to leave the  UK
to go live in Kabul with the appellant.  It may be,  as  Mr Bedford  points
out, that the brother has been granted refugee status but there  is  nothing
in the material before me to properly or persuasively indicate that he  has.
 Even so, I do not think it at all likely that if he has  chosen  to  travel
to the UK and remain here for the moment that he would  be  prepared  to  go
back to protect a brother he is not even in touch with.  Nor  is  there  any
basis to think he would have  enough  power  or  influence  over  any  wider
family members that there might be such as to persuade them to  relocate  to
Kabul simply to help the appellant. I find, therefore, that there  would  be
nobody to accompany the appellant and afford him any support if he  were  to
relocate to Kabul.  On that basis I would conclude that requiring him to  do
so would be unduly harsh.

20.   In light of the above, therefore, in remaking the  decision,  I  allow
the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  That means it  is  not  necessary
or appropriate  for  me  to  consider  humanitarian  protection.   I  would,
however,  for  completeness,  say  that  the  appeal  also  succeeds   under
Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)  for  the  same
reasons and on the same basis as the appellant has been able  to  show  that
he is a refugee.

21.   Finally, it will be noted that I have  made  an  anonymity  direction.
Such a direction was made by the  First-tier Tribunal,  presumably  on  the
basis of the appellant's young age, and nothing has been said before  me  to
indicate that the status quo should not be maintained.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  That decision is set aside.

In remaking the decision I allow the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human
rights grounds (Article 3 only).

Anonymity

I grant the  appellant  anonymity  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  No  report  of  this  case  shall
identify him or any member of his family. Any breach may result in  contempt
of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date:

M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is payable I can make no fee award.



Signed:                                 Date:

M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



