
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08411/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 January 2014                            |On 31 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     M A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1 January 1985.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 February 2011 and on 30  March  2011
    made a claim for asylum.  On 20 August 2013,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant's claim for asylum and  humanitarian  protection.
    On that date, the Secretary of State also made a decision to remove the
    appellant to Iraq as an illegal entrant  by  way  of  directions  under
    paras 8 to 10A of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 6 October 2013,  Judge  A  Cresswell  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  The judge rejected the appellant's  claim  that
    he would be targeted on return to Iraq because  his  father  had  acted
    against the Kurds on behalf of the  Ba'ath  Party.   In  addition,  the
    appellant relied on the fact that he had previously come to the UK  and
    claimed asylum and in September 2010, following the  dismissal  of  his
    appeal on 11 October 2005, he had been returned to Baghdad where he had
    been arrested at the airport and had been detained in a prison where he
    had been beaten and kicked by police who had shown him a picture of his
    father and questioned him  about  his  father's  whereabouts.   He  had
    subsequently escaped and had returned  to  the  UK  and  again  claimed
    asylum.  Judge Cresswell did not accept the appellant's account  which,
    the appellant claimed, was  supported  by  a  witness  (called  at  the
    hearing) who had also been returned to  Baghdad.   Consequently,  Judge
    Cresswell found that the appellant would not be at risk on return.

 4. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  on  a  number  of  grounds
    including that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's
    application to adjourn the hearing as he was unrepresented;  the  judge
    had failed properly to record  the  evidence;  the  judge  had  wrongly
    rejected the evidence of the appellant's witness on the basis  that  he
    had not submitted a witness statement and the respondent had not had an
    opportunity to make checks upon him; the Judge  had  wrongly  conducted
    post-hearing research on the witness and concluded that  there  was  no
    evidence about him being  returned  to  Baghdad;  that  the  judge  had
    unfairly   considered   evidence   submitted   by   the    respondent's
    representative but which had not  been  translated  and  shown  to  the
    appellant in order to give him an opportunity to respond;  finally  the
    judge had applied an inappropriate standard of proof in  assessing  the
    appellant's credibility by asking whether certain events were  "likely"
    or "unlikely".

 5. On 29 October 2013, the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Warren  L  Grant)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    following ground:

         "3.  It is of concern that the First-tier Judge carried out his own
             research on the internet after the hearing and then failed  to
             give the  parties  the  chance  to  make  submissions  on  his
             findings.  There is accordingly an arguable error of law.  The
             First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  also  erred  in  law  in  the
             assessment of the evidence of [the witness] and the fact  that
             a sentence ends in mid-air (para 19) makes  it  impossible  to
             know the extent to which the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
             assessed  the  evidence  supplied  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant."

 6. Thus, the appeal came before me.

 7. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Hodgetts who represented the appellant
    indicated that the interpreter present at  the  hearing  was  the  same
    interpreter who had been present at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    and, as there were factual matters concerning  that  hearing  including
    potentially what had been interpreted, it was not appropriate  for  the
    same interpreter to act in this appeal.  The factual matters are  dealt
    with in the appellant's witness statement attached to  the  application
    for permission including his claim to have asked for an adjournment  to
    obtain legal representation  and  that  documents  were  given  by  the
    respondent's representative to the Judge but not to the appellant.

 8. Following a discussion with the  representatives,  I  granted  a  short
    adjournment so that the  representatives  could  identify  whether  any
    factual issues arose in the light of the appellant's witness  statement
    dealing with the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

 9. Following the adjournment, Mr Richards  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    accepted that an  accumulation  of  the  points  made  in  the  grounds
    demonstrated a perception of unfairness to the appellant at the hearing
    at which he was unrepresented.  Mr Richards indicated that he  did  not
    seek to resist the appeal being allowed and remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal in order that the decision could be remade de novo.

Decision

10. Although I would not accept all of the grounds  are  made  out,  having
    carefully considered those grounds, and the grant of permission,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand.

11. The First-tier Tribunal's findings are set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (to be heard by a judge other  than
    Judge A Cresswell) in order to remake the decision de novo.






                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

