
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08728/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th February 2018                         |On 19th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     KJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Robertson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Paul dismissing his appeal on the basis of his application  for  asylum
    and humanitarian protection or protection of his human rights.

 2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Chalkley.  The  grounds  upon  which  permission  was  granted  may  be
    summarised as follows:

         "I believe that the challenges set  out  at  paragraphs  2.2.i  and
         2.2.ii of the renewed application are properly arguable, but  I  do
         not seek to limit the challenges.  All issues may be argued."

 3. I was not provided with a Rule 24 reply from the Respondent before  the
    hearing, however the Appellant's representative had provided a skeleton
    argument for the purpose of today's  hearing,  which  parties  had  the
    chance to read before the hearing commenced.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of the hearing I indicated that I did find that there  was
    a material error of law in the decision such  that  it  should  be  set
    aside, but that my reasons would follow.  My  reasons  for  so  are  as
    follows.

 5. Although the parties were agreed there was an error, I  was  explicitly
    asked to set out the issues and the concessions made for the benefit of
    the First-tier Tribunal upon remittal  and  rehearing  of  this  matter
    which I shall now do.

 6. In relation to the challenges set out within  the  grounds  upon  which
    Judge Chalkley gave permission, and in relation to the  other  grounds,
    those may be summarised as follows.  Firstly, the initial ground  is  a
    challenge to the adverse credibility findings  and  their  rationality.
    The second ground relates to the First-tier  Tribunal's  assessment  of
    Article 15(c) to the extent that the assessment appears  in  the  final
    paragraph of the decision under challenge.

 7. Miss Roberston made the following submissions in relation  to  each  of
    those matters.

 8. Firstly, in terms of  Ground  1  and  the  challenges  to  the  adverse
    credibility findings, Miss Robertson's submissions related primarily to
    the judge's conclusion upon the Appellant's credibility  at  paragraphs
    52 onwards which were premised largely upon his previous assessment  of
    the Appellant's contact with his family in Pakistan/Afghanistan  (their
    precise whereabouts being unknown) and the assessment  of  whether  the
    Appellant was in touch with his brother in  Italy  and  the  manner  in
    which they were able to maintain contact.  At paragraph  46  the  judge
    found against the Appellant in relation  to  his  telephone's  contents
    (his telephone being produced for examination by the Tribunal) and  the
    judge stated that the fact that it  contained  a  number  of  telephone
    numbers in Afghanistan and Pakistan, and the Appellant's statement that
    those people with Pakistani telephone numbers 'all lived in Punjab' was
    unconvincing. This was not least because "Of course, most of the people
    from Afghanistan who would have gone to Pakistan would have been in the
    Peshawar District". In  relation  to  those  findings,  Miss  Robertson
    submitted that they  lacked  any  rational  basis.   In  short  it  was
    submitted that the  finding  was  not  based  upon  any  background  or
    objective evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  it  must  have
    emanated from the Tribunal Judge's own view  which  was  not  canvassed
    with the Appellant and the basis  of  this  view  was  unknown  to  the
    parties to this appeal (although it was speculated that it could  be  a
    finding that  arose  based  purely  upon  the  geographic  location  of
    Peshawar in relation to the Afghan/Pakistan  border).   However,  there
    was no way of knowing why the judge made that finding  which  played  a
    key part in his assessment of the Appellant's claim.

 9. Secondly, in relation to the whereabouts of the Appellant's family  and
    the damage to his credibility from the fact that he was not in  contact
    with them, the submission made by Miss Robertson again, in  short,  was
    that owing to the mass deportation of Afghan  refugees  to  Afghanistan
    from Pakistan, this fact and the failure to factor it into the  judge's
    assessment renders the assessment an incomplete one as this  background
    fact could have affected the assessment of whether the Appellant  would
    have lost contact with his family and the credibility of that  account.



10. In relation to the sim cards and the phones of the Appellant's  family,
    I was told that the Appellant's wife and  father-in-law  are  Pakistani
    and they may have Pakistani  sim  cards,  however  the  point  was  not
    explored further given that it may become relevant in a further hearing
    and it was not an issue before me.

11. Finally, in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  brother  and  the  adverse
    credibility finding that  arose  from  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant's brother's phone details should have appeared on his  phone,
    Miss Robertson submitted that the Appellant's brother had  given  clear
    evidence at paragraph 4 of his witness statement that he does not  have
    a normal phone and that he used a Facebook Messenger App to communicate
    with his brother's solicitors in the United Kingdom.  That being so, it
    was not apparent that the Appellant's brother should have had a  mobile
    phone number and also that that mobile phone number would have appeared
    in the Appellant's phone necessarily.  I observe that it may be that if
    the  Appellant's  brother  in  Italy  is  allegedly  using  a  Facebook
    Messenger App, such an application could be  used  in  a  mobile  phone
    without the benefit of a sim card as that mobile phone and the Facebook
    Messenger App could hypothetically function  using  Wi-Fi  without  the
    need for a sim card and a network connection.

12. In reply to those submissions, Mr Walker accepted that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had indeed made assumptions in reaching  its  conclusions,  an
    example of which appeared at paragraph 56 of  the  decision,  regarding
    the migration of persons from Afghanistan to  Peshawar  as  opposed  to
    Punjab, and he accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had given its  own
    view likely based on its  personal  knowledge  perhaps,  but  that  the
    source of the information and finding was unclear and did  not  emanate
    from either part in any event and was  therefore  unsafe  overall.   Mr
    Walker further submitted that the discussion of the  telephone  numbers
    at paragraphs 46 to 47 showed that the judge had erroneously looked  at
    the evidence with a  reverse  logic  and  the  points  raised  by  Miss
    Robertson did reveal major credibility challenges against the Appellant
    which would have affected the final credibility finding against him.

13. In the light of both parties'  submissions,  I  accept  that  there  is
    perversity in the credibility challenges made in the issues  identified
    by Miss Robertson and accepted by Mr Walker as erroneous on  behalf  of
    the Respondent.  Thus, the protection claim  assessment  is  materially
    flawed and should be set aside.

14. Turning to the issue arising from Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive and the assessment to the  extent  that  it  does  appear  in
    paragraph 56 of the judgment, whilst Miss Robertson accepted  that  the
    judge had mentioned a sliding scale  factor  in  his  assessment  which
    would relate to the Elgafaji "sliding scale" approach, approved by  the
    Upper Tribunal, the First-tier Tribunal had however gone  on  to  state
    further in the same paragraph that the Appellant could "only succeed on
    the basis that he is able to show, following the principles set out  in
    the case of N, that return to Afghanistan would breach  his  Article  3
    rights".   Miss  Robertson  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  never
    advanced an Article 3 medical claim and that the same was not reflected
    at paragraph 12 of her skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal
    which  discussed  Article  15(c),  which  was  an  autonomous  concept,
    separate and distinct from Article 3.  Miss Robertson further submitted
    that despite the mention of the sliding scale there was  no  ostensible
    attempt  to  apply  the  principle,  and  that  principle  required  an
    assessment of all the personal circumstances of  the  Appellant  before
    considering whether there was any risk of harm compared to an  ordinary
    civilian.  Thus the examination  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  the
    medical evidence in isolation, and without consideration of the list of
    factors mentioned in the skeleton argument at paragraph 26  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, meant that the assessment was incomplete.

15. In reply to this Mr Walker accepted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    indeed used the wrong test at paragraph 56 and he accepted  the  errors
    as identified by Miss Robertson.

16. I agree with the submissions of Miss Robertson  and  Mr  Walker  and  I
    agree it is right to concede this point as the assessment at  paragraph
    56 does not mention the Article 15(c)  claim  at  all,  and  given  its
    omission on the face of the decision in  its  entirety,  that  omission
    would unquestionably be a fatal one to the lawfulness of  the  decision
    on that same topic.

17. Finally, in terms  of  Ground  3  Miss  Robertson  in  turn  rightfully
    conceded that the Paposhvili ground was no longer being pursued and  so
    I do not go on to consider that.

18. Thus, taking all of these matters as a whole, in my view the first  and
    second grounds do reveal sufficient flaws such that a material error of
    law is identifiable in the decision with the result that it  should  be
    set aside.

Notice of Decision

19. The appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The  making  of  the
    previous decision involved a material error of law and is set aside  in
    its entirety.



Directions

20. The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by
    a differently constituted bench.

21. This appeal is to be directed for the attention of the  Resident  Judge
    at IAC Taylor House for any further case management.  In  that  regard,
    given that this appeal is of several years vintage  and  has  proceeded
    and several hearings have taken place before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    without any final outcome to the appeal, it is my suggestion that  this
    appeal be listed before either the Resident Judge at IAC  Taylor  House
    or another judge chosen by him of sufficient seniority.

Anonymity

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

22. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
    direction applies  both  to  the  Appellants  and  to  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 18 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
