
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08319/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th October 2018                 |On 18th December 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                 THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     FF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwyncz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Pickering, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal by way of a  remittal  made
    by an Order of the Court of Appeal made with the consent of the parties
    on the 23rd April 2018 and in accordance with the statement of  reasons
    attached to the consent order. I will set out a summary of the  history
    and background to the litigation as it is of relevance  to  the  issues
    that the Upper Tribunal is now to determine.

 2. The issue that I am required to determine is an appeal brought  by  the
    Secretary of State, with permission, against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Gribble) promulgated on the 9th November  2015  in
    which the Tribunal allowed the appeal of FF against the decision of the
    Secretary of  State  to  refuse  his  claim  for  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and/or on human rights grounds.

 3. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or indirectly refer to him or  members
    of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and to the
    Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 4. Although the Secretary  of  State  is  now  the  Appellant  before  the
    Tribunal, I will for ease of reference refer to him as  the  Respondent
    as he was the Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I  will
    refer to FF as the Appellant as he was the Appellant before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Background

 5. There is a long litigation history and background to the  appeal  which
    is set out in the papers before the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The Appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity.  He  entered
    the United Kingdom on the 7th December 2014 and made a claim for asylum
    the next day. The basis of his claim to asylum was  that  in  or  about
    June/August 2014 his town in Diyala was  attacked  by  ISIS  and  as  a
    result of that attack, parts of the town were taken over by  them.  Two
    ISIS members approached  the  Appellant  on  occasions.  He  was  first
    approached in mid-October 2014 and was asked to cooperate and help ISIS
    in their fight and the second time he was approached was on 14 November
    2014. On this occasion he was told that if he could not fight for ISIS,
    he would have to spy for them. The Appellant stated that he was  scared
    of refusing as he feared that he would  be  severely  ill  treated  for
    disagreeing with their demands and therefore told the two men  that  he
    would think about it. As a result of the threat of having to join  ISIS
    at the end of November 2014 he left Iraq through the help of  an  agent
    that had been arranged by his maternal uncle. He crossed the border  by
    foot into Iran and subsequently travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  by
    Karin Laurie. He arrived on 7 December 2014 and claimed asylum  on  the
    following day.

 7. In his claim it was asserted that he could not return to his home  area
    for fear of reprisal from ISIS  and  that  he  could  not  relocate  to
    another area in Iraq, such as  the  IKR,  as  his  father  was  heavily
    involved in the Baath party and  that  there  were  people  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity who would seek revenge against him.  It  was  further  stated
    that he could not return to Baghdad  as  a  result  of  the  civil  war
    between the Shia and the Sunni and also as  a  result  of  his  Kurdish
    ethnicity.

 8. His claim for asylum was refused in a decision letter dated 27th  April
    2015. The Secretary of State accepted that the factual  claim  made  by
    the Appellant which related to the attacks undertaken by  ISIS  in  his
    home area which was consistent with the country information on Iraq. It
    was also recorded that since arriving in the UK, the  country  evidence
    demonstrated that his hometown was  back  in  control  of  the  Kurdish
    forces. Nonetheless, it was accepted that the Appellant's home town  in
    the area of Diyala was classified as a "contested area" and thus was an
    unsafe area which would be unreasonable for him to return back to.  The
    Secretary of State considered that he had provided both  an  internally
    consistent and  plausible  account  which  was  supported  by  external
    country information.

 9. As to the claim made that he would be at risk in the IKR as a result of
    his father's involvement in the Baath party, the Respondent  considered
    that in the light of the country information  which  demonstrated  that
    being targeted solely because of a former Baath party  Association  was
    no longer likely given that everyone employed by  the  previous  regime
    had to be a member of the Baath party. Furthermore, it  was  considered
    that he had  not  provided  a  consistent  account  as  to  why  he  in
    particular would face any problems in this respect.  Thus  it  was  not
    accepted that he would have or would experience any problems in Iraq as
    a result of his father's alleged  previous  involvement  in  the  Baath
    party.

10. In respect  of  internal  relocation,  the  Respondent  considered  the
    Appellant's responses in his asylum interview  that  he  could  not  be
    expected to live in  the  IKR  as  those  who  in  the  past  had  been
    persecuted by his father and the past  government  would  seek  revenge
    against him. In addition, he stated that he could not  be  expected  to
    live in Baghdad as there was a Shia/Sunni civil war going on,  both  of
    whom threatened reprisals against those of Kurdish  ethnicity.  However
    the Secretary of State upon  consideration  of  the  country  materials
    considered that it was reasonable to expect him to relocate  to  either
    Baghdad or the IKR.

11. In summary, the Respondent considered the decision  of  HM  and  others
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 which did not establish  that
    there was a real risk of serious harm to civilians  who  are  Sunni  or
    Shia or Kurds or those who have former Baath party connections  as  the
    characteristics did not themselves amount to "enhanced risk categories"
    under Article 15(c) "sliding scale".

12.  The Appellant submitted an appeal against the  decision  and  it  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  9th  November  2015.   It  was
    therefore asserted that it was reasonable him to return to an  area  of
    Baghdad where there is a sizeable Arab Sunni population.

13.  As to relocation to the IKR, it  was  not  accepted  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles preventing him from returning to the area.  It
    had not been accepted that his father's past involvement with the Baath
    party was sufficient to put him at risk either from the authorities  or
    the Kurdish people. When questioned, he was unable to identify  who  in
    particular he feared and stated that he had never actually been to  the
    IKR for a long period of time and had not mentioned any problems  there
    during his short visit (see AIR question 91).

14. The Respondent made reference to the country information as follows:

         "In the IKR the civilian population  is  predominantly  of  Kurdish
         (Sunni) ethnic origin, whilst persons  displaced  to  the  IKR  are
         likely to have either immediate or extended  families  residing  in
         IKR."

         "Travel from Baghdad to IKR by road is not considered  either  safe
         or reasonable due to the current security situation."

15. Reference was also made to the case law MK  (document/relocation)  Iraq
    CG [2012] UK UT126 that a lack of documentation was not  ordinarily  an
    insuperable problem and would not be a factor likely to make return  to
    any part of Iraq unsafe. The Respondent  took  into  account  that  the
    Appellant spoke Kurdish, his language was the official language used in
    Iraq, he had been received a basic  education  and  had  previous  work
    experience as a farmer and labourer. It was  also  considered  that  he
    demonstrated personal fortitude in relocating to a country they had  no
    ties or spoke the language and attempted to establish  a  life  in  the
    United Kingdom. It was therefore concluded  that  he  had  skills  that
    could utilise upon his return to Iraq, including  an  ability  to  gain
    lawful employment. In summary was not considered to be unreasonable  or
    unduly harsh to expect him to return to the I KR or Baghdad.

16. Consideration was also given to Articles 2, 3 and Article 8 but it  was
    concluded that he did not qualify for asylum or humanitarian protection
    or discretionary leave.

17. The Appellant appealed that decision and the  appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Gribble) on 22 October 2015. The judge heard
    the evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  considered  country  information
    provided by each of the parties and referred to at paragraph 3  of  his
    decision. He also had an expert report from Dr Fatah  dated  1  October
    2015 and had the advantage of the most recent country guidance case  of
    AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UK UT00544 which  had  been  recently
    promulgated on 30 September 2015 and had not been before the SSHD  when
    reaching a decision on the Appellant's case. Attached to that  was  the
    Home Office guidance on  Iraq  dated  April  2015,  UNHCR  report  from
    October 2014, an Amnesty International report from  February  2015,  an
    IOM report of September 2015 and other reports which the judge read and
    took into account (see paragraph 5 of the decision).

18. The judge noted at paragraph 16 that the expert report  from  Dr  Fatah
    had not been challenged by the Secretary of State. The  judge  observed
    that the expert had commented on the issue of whether and  if  so  how,
    the Appellant could obtain travel documents to return to Iraq or the  I
    KR, he commented on security situation in Iraq and that his "status  as
    an expert is not in doubt and he provided evidence in the case  of  AA,
    which was found to carry great weight paragraph 90 of that  case".  The
    judge found that he "summarises the issues very well at paragraph 33 of
    his report and deals with the documentation required to enter Iraq  for
    the I KR at paragraph 91 - a hundred. He concludes at paragraph  119  -
    120 that without access to documents from xxx the Appellant may not  be
    able to return back to Iraq."

19. The judge set out his findings of fact at paragraphs  23  -  38.  Those
    findings of fact can be summarised as follows:-

          1) The Appellant originated from xx in Diyala in Iraq and not the
             IKR. It was accepted that the town of xxx was in a  "contested
             area" and he could not be returned there. The evidence  of  Dr
             Fatah was accepted that his home town at the present time  was
             a "ghost town".

          2) As to his claim that his father was a Baath party intelligence
             member, the judge gave reasons at paragraphs 26 - 29 that  the
             account lacked credibility and that the  Appellant  could  not
             discharge the burden to show that he  faced  a  real  risk  of
             persecution for imputed political opinion on return to Iraq.

          3) The Appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity.

          4) It was accepted by the Respondent that  the  Appellant  speaks
             only a very little Arabic, his language is Kurdish Sorani.

          5) The Appellant has been issued  with  a  CS  ID  by  the  Iraqi
             authorities, but he left that document in Iraq when he fled.

          6) The Appellant does not have an INC or a birth  certificate  in
             his possession.

          7) The Appellant has never been issued with  a  passport  by  the
             Iraqi authorities.

          8) The Appellant left his mother and sister behind in the  family
             home when he fled Iraq, but he does not know where they are.

          9)  The Appellant's elder brother lives in the  UK,  having  left
             Iraq in 2002.

         10) The Appellant would as a  result  face  a  return  to  Baghdad
             airport, rather than any attempted return to  the  I  KR.  The
             Appellant could not travel from Baghdad airport  to  his  home
             town in safety.

         11) The Appellant does not have a family member  or  a  proxy  who
             could go to xxx his home town and obtain the issue of it CS ID
             from the authorities in that town.

         12) The Appellant will not be returned to Iraq without  possession
             of a current, or an expired passport - which he does not  have
             and has never had.

         13) The judge accepted the expert evidence that  without  a  birth
             certificate,  a  CS  ID  or  an  INC  to  prove  his  identity
             nationality, and without the support of family members in Iraq
             able to  access  such  documentation  from  within  Iraq,  the
             Appellant would not  be  obtain  either  travel  documents  or
             identification documents from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK.

20. The judge considered the issue of whether or not he could  qualify  for
    humanitarian protection under Article 15 (c). When considering  whether
    the Appellant could relocate Baghdad or the I KR without an Article  15
    risk of serious harm, the judge found that he was from Iraq and not the
    I KR and thus he would only be returned to the I  KR  if  he  was  from
    there and his identity had been pre-cleared with the I KR  authorities.
    The judge at [31] therefore considered the place  of  return  would  be
    Baghdad (whether or not the Appellant could travel  onwards  to  the  I
    KR).

21. The judge then considered  the  report  of  Dr  Fatah,  which  was  not
    challenged by the Respondent, and having considered the issue of a CSID
    the judge found that the Appellant had  no  ID  document,  passport  or
    CSID. The latter document  being  a  "vital  document"  to  allow  Iraq
    citizens to access  services  such  as  education,  housing,  financial
    assistance and employment. The judge found that individuals who did not
    have a CSID were required to go personally to their place of origin  to
    obtain one or in the alternative, a family member or proxy could go  on
    their behalf. The judge found that it could not be  done  centrally  in
    Baghdad the documents are stored in each town  and  in  this  case  the
    Appellant's home city xxx had been destroyed and is a "ghost town". The
    judge accepted that the Appellant did not know  where  his  mother  and
    sister were and placed weight on the comments of Dr Fatah at  paragraph
    112 that he would be surprised if the family  remained  in  their  home
    town given the current situation.

22. The judge therefore concluded that he could not  obtain  the  documents
    necessary and if in Baghdad, he could  not  travel  to  his  home  town
    without an Article 15 risk. The judge also concluded that  if  returned
    to Baghdad he would not be able to obtain a  CS  ID  as  he  could  not
    travel to his hometown to obtain one, even if there one  available.  He
    cannot speak Arabic, he has no family links or family  to  Baghdad  and
    would be  unlikely  to  find  a  sponsor  to  access  hotel  or  rented
    accommodation. She  therefore  found  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  and
    unreasonable for him to relocate Baghdad.

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

23. The Secretary of State sought to appeal that  decision  and  permission
    was granted by FtT Judge Adio on the 25th November 2015.

24. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal (Deputy UT Judge  Holmes)  on
    the 15th March 2016. It was argued on behalf  of  the  Respondent  that
    having found that return was not feasible, the judge should have simply
    dismissed the appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds  because  the
    judge could only go on to consider the ground if return  was  feasible.
    In the alternative, if the judge was considering the  position  on  the
    assumption that the Appellant's return  was  feasible,  the  judge  was
    obliged to consider the ability of the Appellant to relocate in  safety
    to the IKR by way of flight from Baghdad airport,  which  she  had  not
    done. It is plain from paragraph 11 that the Appellant's representative
    sought to argue that even if a  laissez-  passer  were  issued  to  the
    Appellant (which would not happen on the  judge's  findings),  then  he
    could not use it to travel internally within Iraq; such document  would
    not allow individual to board a flight  to  the  I  KR,  even  if  they
    managed to retain that document in their possession upon arrival.  Thus
    the judge would have found that he could not travel from Baghdad to the
    I KR.

25. The conclusion reached by Judge Holmes was that a finding  that  return
    to Iraq was not feasible meant that the Appellant could not succeed  in
    his humanitarian protection claim which was based upon a risk  of  harm
    arising from an absence of identity documents.  The  judge  found  that
    that was the basis upon which the  humanitarian  protection  claim  was
    advanced, it being argued that the Appellant could not get to his  home
    area in safety, or live there, because of the  indiscriminate  violence
    prevalent in that  area,  and  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to
    relocate either to Baghdad  or  elsewhere  without  a  CSID  or  family
    support, because he would be unable to find food or shelter was to look
    for employment support himself, which he would  not  in  any  event  be
    likely to find (see paragraph 14). The judge therefore set  aside  both
    the decision  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  and  made  the
    decisions dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

26. Permission was sought to appeal the decision of the Deputy Judge  which
    was refused on the papers by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on the 12th July
    2016.

27. It is plain from the grounds of appeal that the first  ground  advanced
    was that the judge had gone beyond the grounds of  appeal  advanced  by
    the Respondent and the grant of permission- the sole ground  raised  by
    the Respondent was internal relocation to the I KR. Thus it was  argued
    that the first argument had not been included in  the  application  for
    permission and that the  Respondent  having  made  no  application  for
    permission to amend the grounds was not lawfully entitled  to  consider
    such an argument.

28. The application for permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  was
    renewed and was again refused on the papers by Sir  Stephen  Silber  on
    the 12th October 2017. However on  oral  renewal  before  Lord  Justice
    Flaux, the application for permission to appeal was granted on the 12th
    February 2018.

29. Following this an order was made by consent that the Appellant's appeal
    should be allowed and that the appeal should be remitted to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for reconsideration in accordance with the attached  statement
    of reasons.

30. The statement of reasons set out the history that I  have  referred  to
    above. At paragraph 12, it sets out that the  parties  agree  that  the
    Appellant's argument  that  the  Tribunal  misinterpreted  the  country
    guidance case of AA (Iraq) [2015] as set out  at  paragraph  9  of  his
    determination, was answered by the Court of Appeal's  judgement  in  AA
    (Iraq) [2017) EWCA Civ 944 and the annex to that decision on which  the
    country guidance had been amended.

31. It was therefore agreed that it was appropriate for the  matter  to  be
    remitted to the Upper Tribunal to consider whether the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of a material error of law.

32. Paragraph 15 sets out as follows:

         "the  parties  accordingly  agree  that  in  the   light   of   the
         determination of the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq), the decision  of
         the Upper Tribunal dated 24th of March 2016 should be set aside  in
         this matter and  should  be  remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
         consider the issue  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
         material error of law and  in  particular  whether  the  First-tier
         Tribunal failed to make a finding in respect of the ability of  the
         Appellant to safely relocate to the I KR."



The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

33. At the hearing before the Tribunal,  neither  party  had  provided  any
    skeleton arguments setting out their respective positions. Furthermore,
    Mr Diwncyz did not have any of the documentation which  post-dated  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal, which included the  proceedings  before
    the Court of Appeal and  the  pivotal  document  of  the  statement  of
    reasons. Those documents were therefore provided  to  him  and  he  was
    given time to consider those documents in order  to  provide  his  oral
    submissions.

34. It was unclear from the statement of reasons as to what the  ambit  was
    of the hearing and in particular whether it was  anticipated  that  the
    Upper Tribunal would consider any further CG decision  given  that  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  UKUT  00212  had  been
    promulgated a considerable time after the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

35. I heard submissions from each of the advocates, Mr Diwncyz on behalf of
    the Respondent and Miss Pickering on behalf of the Appellant. It is not
    necessary to set out the submissions of each of the parties as they are
    set out in the record of proceedings and I will set  out  the  relevant
    aspects of those submissions when dealing with the grounds advanced  on
    behalf of the parties and my consideration of those issues.

36. The grounds advanced on behalf of the Secretary of  State  submit  that
    the FTTJ failed to take into account the guidance given in AA (Iraq)  v
    SSHD [2015] UKUT 00544 and that  in  particular  the  judge  materially
    erred in law by failing to conduct an assessment to  establish  whether
    internal relocation to the IKR was viable. It was  submitted  that  the
    Appellant was an Iraqi Kurd who had a CSID identity card which was left
    with his mother in Iraq. It was further asserted that  he  had  visited
    the I KR in his childhood, spoke Kurdish fluently and had contact  with
    relatives in Iraq including his sister.

37. It was therefore submitted on behalf of  the  on  those  facts  it  was
    incumbent on the judge to conduct  an  analysis  of  the  viability  of
    internal relocation to the I KR in accordance with the guidance  of  AA
    at paragraph 20 - (a)-(c).

38. Mr Diwncyz submitted that this was the sole ground of challenge to  the
    FTTJ's determination. He submitted that the judge had made no  findings
    as to where his family were and whether he would be able  to  access  a
    CSID.

39. In the alternative he made reference to the more recent decision of AAH
    noting that all enforced returns are to  Baghdad.  As  to  whether  the
    error of law was material, he submitted that the question  was  whether
    or not the Appellant could obtain a CSID or the means to obtain one  in
    a timely fashion and if he could  it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  to
    relocate to the IKR.

40. Miss Pickering on behalf of the Appellant agreed that the  sole  ground
    advanced by the  Respondent  in  the  grounds  was  whether  the  judge
    materially erred in law by failing to consider internal  relocation  to
    the I KR.

41. She accepted that the judge had not expressly considered return to  the
    I KR but that on the findings of fact that were  made  in  relation  to
    this particular Appellant that this was not a  material  error  because
    even if the judge had gone on to consider this, on the findings of fact
    made it would have had no difference to the outcome.

42. She submitted that  at  paragraph  25  of  AA  (Iraq),  Dr  Fatah  made
    reference to the documentation necessary and that he did  not  consider
    that a laissez-passer used by a person to return from the UK to Baghdad
    could be used for an onward trip to the IKR. Such a document  would  be
    valid for one trip and would be likely to be taken by  the  authorities
    on arrival in Baghdad. She submitted that against that  background  the
    judge found that the Appellant did not have a CSID and on the basis  of
    AA (Iraq) [2015] was not in the possession of a laissez-passer once  he
    had arrived in Baghdad. Therefore applying the guidance set out  in  AA
    (Iraq) on the findings made by the judge, the Appellant could not  have
    travelled from Baghdad to the IKR in safety.

43. Even applying the more recent country guidance in AAH which was not  in
    existence at  the  time  of  the  hearing,  the  Appellant  would  have
    succeeded as return  to  the  IKR  would  still  be  via  Baghdad.  The
    Appellant had no valid CSID nor passport  which  would  therefore  make
    internal relocation not possible. Without a CSID or a valid passport he
    would not be able to board any domestic flights from Baghdad to  the  I
    KR. She submitted that this was relevant to the issue of materiality of
    any error because the Appellant would be in a position where  he  could
    not board such a  flight,  therefore  could  not  travel  to  the  IKR.
    Furthermore, he could not make that  journey  by  land  once  that  was
    viewed through the lens of the Appellant not being in the possession of
    a CSID. He would not be able to pass the checkpoint and therefore would
    be a route at real risk of detention. Similarly, he  had  no  relatives
    that could verify his identity as  set  out  at  paragraph  33  of  the
    decision of the FTTJ. The judge had  found  that  no  one  could  bring
    documentation to verify his identity because the  only  family  members
    were his mother and sister and their whereabouts were unknown.

44. Thus she submitted on the factual findings made it would  be  difficult
    to see how the Appellant would be able to leave Baghdad airport without
    the CS ID and travel to the I KR. She therefore invited me to find that
    there was no material error of law in the decision of the FTTJ.

Discussion:

45. I have carefully considered the submissions made by the parties in  the
    light of the decision of the FTTJ and in the light of the statement  of
    reasons.

46. I therefore turn to the original grounds which were submitted on behalf
    of the Secretary of State. The Respondent's  grounds  accept  that  the
    FTTJ had applied the country guidance in existence  at  that  time,  AA
    (Iraq) [2015] in relation to internal relocation to  Baghdad.  Such  is
    plain from the written grounds at paragraph 2  where  it  was  accepted
    that the judge had applied the guidance and given weight to the  expert
    report and was entitled to conclude on the findings  of  fact  that  it
    would be unreasonable and unduly harsh to relocate to Baghdad.

47. It is also plain from the original grounds of  appeal  that  the  other
    factual  findings  made  by  the  judge  in  relation  to   access   to
    documentation was also not challenged in the grounds.

48. It is common ground between the parties at the sole ground relied  upon
    by the Respondent in the written grounds and before the Tribunal relate
    to whether the judge materially edge in law by failing  to  conduct  an
    assessment to establish whether internal  relocation  to  the  IKR  was
    viable in this Appellant's case. This is also set out in the  statement
    of reasons.

49. AA (Iraq) CG was amended by the Court of Appeal in  AA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944. However it reaffirmed the guidance provided by the
    Upper Tribunal at paragraph 18 of the annex stating:

         "The Iraqi Kurdish Region; In AA (unchanged by the Court of Appeal)
         it was held that (i) the Respondent will only return an Iraqi
         national (P) to the IKR if P originates from the IKR and P's
         identity has been "pre-cleared" with the IKR authorities. The
         authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an expired or
         current passport, or laissez passer; (ii) the IKR is virtually
         violence free. There is no Article 15(c) risk to an ordinary
         civilian in the IKR; (iii) A Kurd (K) who does not originate from
         the IKR can obtain entry for 10 days as a visitor and then renew
         this entry permission for a further 10 days. If K finds employment,
         K can remain for longer, although K will need to register with the
         authorities and provide details of the employer. There is no
         evidence that the IKR authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from
         the IKR whose permits have come to an end; (iv) whether K, if
         returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be expected to avoid any
         potential undue harshness in that city by travelling to the IKR,
         will be fact sensitive; and is likely to involve an assessment of
         (a)the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to
         Irbil by air - there is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian
         travelling from Baghdad airport to the southern governorates,
         suffering serious harm en route to such governorates so as engage
         Article 15(c).); (b)the likelihood of K's securing employment in
         the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance from family and
         friends in the IKR; (v) As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at
         real risk in a home area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate
         to the IKR."


50. The Tribunal found that a Kurd who does not originate from the IKR and
    is facing a real risk of harm elsewhere in the country could enter the
    area and upon finding employment would be lawfully permitted to remain
    there. Against that background, the judge was required to conduct a
    fact sensitive assessment of whether internal relocation to the I KR
    would be reasonable or not unduly harsh.

51. I have therefore considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    judge. In the findings of fact made by the judge, she considered the
    alternative area of relocation, namely the IKR (see paragraph 30). She
    found that the Appellant was from Iraq and not from the IKR which was
    important because, as a judge observed, AA (Iraq) section B paragraph 5
    applied, that return of former residents from the I KR will be to the I
    KR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad. The judge went on to state,
    "it is clear from section D paragraph 17 that the Appellant can only be
    returned to the I KR if he is from there and his identity has been pre-
    cleared with the I KR authorities."

52. The judge went on to state at [31]:

         "As therefore the place of return is Baghdad (whether  or  not  the
         Appellant could travel onwards to the I KR) I turn to the report of
         Dr Fatah and the facts I have found about the Appellant's  lack  of
         ID document, passport or CSID. Dr Fatah's uncontested view, and one
         accepted by the court in AA, is at the CSID is a vital document  to
         allow Iraqi's  to  access  services  such  as  education,  housing,
         financial assistance and employment (paragraph 86 of his report)."


53. There has been no challenge to the report of Dr Fatah,  either  at  the
    hearing before the FTT or before this Tribunal.

54. The findings of fact made in relation to the documents were relevant to
    the issue of relocation to the I KR. Whilst the judge  did  not  go  on
    further to consider relocation to the I KR, I have  considered  whether
    the findings of fact made in essence provide  the  answer  to  such  an
    assessment and includes whether the Appellant, if returned  to  Baghdad
    can travel to the I KR and the matters set out at paragraph 20 (a)-(c).

55. In this  context  I  observe  that  the  findings  of  fact  which  the
    Respondent refers to being as "uncontested"  relate  to  the  Appellant
    being an Iraqi Kurd who has a CSID identity card which  was  left  with
    his mother in Iraq and that he had visited the I KR in  his  childhood,
    spoke Kurdish  fluently  and  it  had  recent  contact  with  relatives
    including his sister (see original grounds of the Secretary of  State).
    However those matters have not been accurately stated in  the  grounds.
    It is plain from reading the determination that whilst it was  accepted
    by the judge that he was an Iraqi Kurd he did  not  have  access  to  a
    CSID. The judge found at [33] that he could not go  personally  to  his
    place of origin to obtain one as his home city had been  destroyed  and
    was a "ghost town". Furthermore the judge found that no  family  member
    or proxy could go on his behalf to obtain documentation  as  the  judge
    found "I have no reason to doubt the Appellant says he  does  not  know
    whether his mother and sister are". The judge noted  and  accepted  the
    comments of Dr Fatah paragraph 112 where he said he would be  surprised
    if the family remained in their home town given the  current  situation
    that. The judge returned to this at [36] and [37]  and  found  that  he
    would not be able to obtain a CS ID as he could not travel to his  home
    city to get one even if there was an office that was open.  Whilst  the
    Appellant had travelled to the I KR as a child, that by itself does not
    provide any assistance in establishing relocation for an adult  in  the
    circumstances of this Appellant. The judge found the fact that  he  had
    no contact with his mother and sister and did not know where they were.
    It is against that background and those  findings  of  fact  which  the
    issue of relocation to the I KR should be considered.

56. Therefore the judge found on the evidence that he could not obtain CSID
    by travelling to his home area as it  had  been  destroyed  and  was  a
    "ghost town". The alternative would be that a family  member  or  proxy
    could go on his behalf but the judge accepted  that  he  did  not  know
    where his mother and sister were  the  judge  accepted  the  report  at
    paragraph 112 as it was likely the family members were no longer in the
    area. It is therefore open to the judge to conclude at [34] that if  in
    Baghdad he could not travel to his home area without facing an  Article
    15 (c) risk.

57. As he would not be able to obtain a CS ID when  in  Baghdad  the  judge
    found on the fact that he would be at a real  risk  of  destitution  in
    Baghdad as without a CSID he would be  unable  to  obtain  anywhere  to
    live, access to employment and all the vital  services  that  he  would
    require.

58. Against that background I accept the submission made by Miss  Pickering
    that it is difficult to see how it could be  said  that  the  Appellant
    would be able to leave Baghdad  and  travel  to  the  I  KR.  This  was
    supported by paragraph 25 of AA (Iraq) and the report of Dr Fatah  that
    even with a laissez-passer that would be  taken  from  him  at  Baghdad
    airport. Therefore in the light of the judge's findings, I am satisfied
    that there is no material error in not considering return to the  I  KR
    any further on the facts found; he was an Iraqi Kurdish  male,  and  if
    returned to Baghdad, would be without documentation and  would  not  be
    able to  obtain  the  CSID,  the  vital  document  required.  He  would
    therefore be in Baghdad as a member of a  minority  community  with  no
    family members to accommodate him in Baghdad or provide any network  of
    support. He has not resided in the Kurdish area namely IKR nor does  he
    come from the I KR.

59. I consider that I am supported in this view even if I were to  consider
    the more recent country guidance decision (although this  decision  was
    not in existence at the time of the FTTJ's decision in November 2015).

60. In AAH, section E is replaced with more current guidance. However it is
    still the position that all returns from United Kingdom are to Baghdad.
    It records that for an Iraqi national returnee of Kurdish origin, which
    is therefore this Appellant, in possession of a  valid  CSID  or  Iraqi
    passport, the journey from Baghdad to the I KR whether by land  or  air
    is affordable and practical and can be made without a real risk of  him
    suffering persecution or serious harm nor would any difficulties on the
    journey make relocation unduly harsh.

61. However on the findings of fact made by the FTTJ, the Appellant has  no
    valid CSID or Iraqi passport and also was not  likely  to  be  able  to
    obtain one given the difficulties outlined by the judge.  The  guidance
    goes on to state that such a person without a CS ID or a valid passport
    would be unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the IKR.
    The  guidance  goes  on  to  state  that  such  a  person  would   face
    considerable difficulty making the journey between Baghdad and the  IKR
    by land without a CSID or valid passport. The decision makes  reference
    to the numerous checkpoints en route, including two checkpoints in  the
    immediate vicinity of the airport. If the Appellant has neither a  CSID
    nor a valid passport, the Tribunal state that there is a real  risk  of
    such person being detained at a  checkpoint  until  such  time  as  the
    security personnel are able to verify P's identity. It is  stated  that
    it is not reasonable to require such person to travel  between  Baghdad
    and the I KR by land absent the ability of P to verify his identity  at
    a checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance of  a  male  family
    member and production of identity documents but may also be achieved by
    calling upon "connections" higher up in the chain of command.

62. On the findings of facts that were made, as the Appellant has neither a
    CSID nor a valid passport, there is a real risk of  being  detained  at
    the checkpoint. As to being able to  verify  his  identity,  the  judge
    found that he would not be able to access his identity documentation as
    he has had no contact with his relatives  and  because  his  home  city
    where the documentation is could not be accessed in safety and  was  in
    any event described as a "ghost town".  No  male  family  members  were
    identified and as the judge had found he had no family support or  knew
    anyone in Baghdad, it could not be said  that  his  identity  could  be
    verified at a checkpoint by calling upon "connections" higher up in the
    chain of command.

63. Therefore I accept the submission made by Miss Pickering that  even  if
    the Tribunal applied the most recent country guidance, which was not in
    existence at the time of the hearing, the findings of facts  that  were
    made would demonstrate that the judge did not  materially  err  in  law
    because it could not be said  that  he  could  relocate  to  the  I  KR
    reasonably without undue harshness. Therefore I am satisfied that  even
    if the judge did  err  in  law  by  not  making  a  further  assessment
    concerning relocation to the IKR, that  such  error  was  not  material
    given the findings of fact that were made and the outcome to allow  the
    appeal would have been the same. Therefore  I  do  not  set  aside  the
    decision but affirm the conclusion that the  judge  reached;  that  the
    appeal should allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Respondent is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal shall stand; the appeal is allowed on humanitarian  protection
grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed  Upper   Tribunal   Judge   Reeds                                Date
31/10/2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
