
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08428/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 November 2013                           |On 3 December 2013           |
|Prepared 27 November 2013                     |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                    smha
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Lawland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 25 February 1953.   He
    appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Katherine Gordon who in  a  determination  promulgated  on  16
    September 2013 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse leave to remain.

2.    In  a  letter  DATED  2  September  2013  refusing   the   appellant's
    application the respondent stated that the appellant had first come  to
    the attention of the Home Office when he had endeavoured to have an ILR
    stamp in his old passport  transferred  to  a  new  passport.   It  was
    considered to  be  a  fraudulent  stamp.   The  appellant  had  shortly
    thereafter been encountered on a police visit to an address in Bookham,
    Surrey and, having being served with  removal  directions  on  27  July
    2013, had applied for leave to remain.

3.   It appears that that was followed by a request that  the  appellant  be
    granted leave to remain under the long residence provisions.

4.   The Secretary of State treated the appellant's initial application  for
    leave to remain as an application  for  asylum  and  set  out  detailed
    reasons for refusing that in the letter of  2  September.   The  letter
    also noted the appellant's claim that he had arrived in  Britain  as  a
    visitor in 1973, had travelled in and out of Britain  thereafter  until
    1989 when he had been granted indefinite leave to remain, the stamp beg
    placed in his passport at Heathrow.

5.   The appellant claimed that a further indefinite leave to  remain  stamp
    had been put into his passport in  1999  and  that  thereafter  he  had
    travelled to Bangladesh on a number of  occasions  in  2001,  2002  and
    2003.  The appellant  however  did  not  have  the  principals  of  the
    passports which he had used as he claimed that  these  had  been  lost.
    Instead he produced copies of the passports with copies of  the  stamps
    submitted therein.

6.   Not only did the Secretary of State refuse the appellant's  application
    for asylum but also found that he did not qualify for leave  to  remain
    on the basis of his rights under Article  8  of  the  ECHR  nor,  in  a
    separate decision that  he  was  entitled  to  remain  under  the  long
    residence provisions.

7.   The judge dealt with the appeal under the Fast  Track  procedure.   She
    first considered the issue of the various  stamps  in  the  appellant's
    passport.  The appellant claimed that he had had no problems travelling
    in and out of Britain in 2001, 2002 and 2003. The judge considered  the
    copy passports which he had submitted.  She concluded in  paragraph  37
    of the determination that the appellant's evidence was not credible and
    further concluded that the respondent  had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof and had been correct to state that the indefinite leave to remain
    stamp had been obtained fraudulently.  She stated that  she  considered
    the appellant had never  obtained  any  form  of  leave  to  remain  in
    Britain.

8.   In paragraphs 39 onwards she set out her findings of fact.  She  stated
    there was evidence of the appellant's  presence  in  Britain  in  about
    January 1993 and that she found the appellant had been in Britain since
    January 1993.  However she repeated that she did not consider the  copy
    passports in the appellant's bundle to be reliable.

9.   In paragraph 42 she stated that she found that the appellant  had  been
    in  Britain  for  twenty  years,  stating  "one  requirement   of   the
    Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE is satisfied".  However she  said
    that she should also consider whether or not the appellant had any ties
    in Bangladesh.  She considered that the appellant still had ties  there
    and indeed still might well  have  a  share  in  property  there.   She
    concluded  that she found  that  the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to
    proceed "on the new long residence Rules set  out  in  the  Immigration
    Rules paragraph 276ADE".

10.  She went on to consider the rights of the appellant under Article 8  of
    the ECHR.  She considered that he was exercising a rather weak  private
    life here and that his removal would not be disproportionate.

11.  She therefore dismissed the appellant's appeal.

12.  The grounds of appeal stated that the judge had erred  in  her  reading
    of paragraph 276ADE stating that it was wrong that she should have gone
    on to make a finding on whether or not the appellant had  any  ties  in
    Bangladesh.

13.  It was also  claimed  that  she  had  failed  to  disallow  prejudicial
    evidence as certain documents placed before her by the  respondent  had
    not been served before the hearing.  It was also asserted that she  had
    erred in her assessment of the burden of proof upon the appellant  when
    she had found that he had been using a fraudulent passport.

14.  Further grounds of appeal  argued  that  the  appeal  should  not  have
    remained in the fast track.  That assertion is undoubtedly correct  but
    in any event the appeal was taken out of  the  fast  track  before  the
    hearing before me.

15.  Mr Nath accepted that there were errors of law in the approach  of  the
    judge to the application of Rule 276ADE.  The judge had  clearly  mixed
    up the provisions of sub-paragraph (iii) and sub-paragraph (vi) -  that
    last sub-paragraph relating to an appellant having  no  ties  with  the
    country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  Britain  -
    when these are alternatives  as shown by the "or"  after  sub-paragraph
    (iii).

16.  However sub-paragraph 276ADE(i) states that the  applicant  would  meet
    the requirements of the application for leave to remain if he "does not
    fall for refusal under any of the grounds  in  Section  S-LTR1.2  -  S-
    LTR2.3 and S-LTR3.1 in Appendix FM.  The reality is that Section  S-LTR
    2.2 refers to an applicant  normally  being  refused  where  (a)  false
    information,  representations  or  documents  have  been  submitted  in
    relation to the application (including false information  submitted  to
    any person to obtain a document used in support of the application)  or
    (b) there has been a failure to disclose material facts in relation  to
    the  application.   The  judge  again  clearly  erred  in  law  in  not
    considering that sub-paragraph -  it  may  be  indeed  that  that  sub-
    paragraph was a reason for her  finding  that  the  appeal  should  not
    succeed.

17.  While Mr  Martin  argued  that  the  finding  of  the  judge  that  the
    appellant had lived in Britain for twenty years was sufficient for  me,
    having found a material error of law in the determination to allow  the
    appeal, I do not consider that there is sufficient logical  clarity  in
    the determination for me to find that  that  would  be  an  appropriate
    course of action.

18.  The reality is that the judge, who had clearly  noted  the  appellant's
    evidence that he had travelled outside Britain and indeed had not  been
    entitled to use a passport with an indefinite leave  to  remain  stamp,
    and also found that his evidence was not credible had given no  reasons
    for then concluding that the appellant had been in Britain  for  twenty
    years and therefore met a requirement of paragraph 276ADE.

19.  For the above reasons, having found that there is a material  error  of
    law in this determination and I set aside the determination.  I  direct
    that the appeal should proceed to a hearing on all issues.  It will  be
    necessary for the Tribunal hearing the appeal -  I  consider  that  the
    appeal should be heard by a Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    - should focus on the issue of whether or not the appellant  meets  the
    requirements of Rule 276ADE and in so doing consider the provisions  of
    Rule S-LTR2.2 of Appendix FM  and  therefore  make  clear  findings  on
    whether or not a false document had been submitted in relation  to  the
    application which was originally made by the appellant.

20.  I further consider that this appeal  should  now  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal as I consider that the requirements of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement Paragraph 7.2(a) are met.


Decision
  The appeal is allowed to the limited extend that it  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier tribunal to be heard afresh on all issues.

Directions

The appellant's representatives will  serve  on  the  Tribunal  and  on  the
respondent an indexed and paginated bundle of all documents  including  each
and every page of the appellant's claimed copies  of  the  appellant's  four
passports within 14 days from the date of promulgation of this decision.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

