
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08998/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2016                      |On 23 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                    L W W
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr David Jones, counsel instructed by  Fisher,  Jones
                    and Greenwood solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Stephen Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                       ERROR OF LAW DECISION & REASONS

    1.     The Appellant is a national of Kenya, born  on  [  ]  1961.  She
         arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 September 2001 with six  months
         leave to enter and the applied for but was refused leave to  remain
         as a student. She subsequently  obtained  a  false  refugee  travel
         document which she utilised to work in the UK. On 11 February 2015,
         she pleaded guilty to two counts of using  a  false  document  with
         intent to deceive and she was  given  a  suspended  sentence  of  6
         months' imprisonment in respect of both counts.

    2.     On 18 July 2013, the Appellant claimed asylum on  the  basis  of
         her sexual orientation, as a consequence of which she feared  being
         killed or harmed  if  returned  to  Kenya.  She  had  undergone  an
         arranged marriage in 1980 but in 1999 she had met EW and  they  had
         commenced a sexual  relationship.  She  told  her  husband  of  the
         relationship and that she no longer had  feelings  for  him,  as  a
         result of which he attacked her with a knife, beat  her  and  raped
         her over a period from May 2000 to September 2001, when she fled to
         the UK.

    3.     The Respondent rejected her asylum claim for reasons set out  in
         a decision dated 2 June 2015.  The  Respondent  accepted  that  the
         Appellant had been abused by her  husband  in  Kenya  but  did  not
         accept her sexual orientation. An appeal was  lodged  against  this
         decision and the  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Twydell for hearing on 28 April 2016. In  a  decision  and  reasons
         promulgated on 17 May 2016, she dismissed the appeal. At  [35]  the
         Judge  found:  "I  find  the  appellant  did   not   have   lesbian
         relationships with either EW  or  MM.  Further,  I  find  that  the
         Appellant is not a lesbian."

    4.     An application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
         was made on 31 May 2016. The grounds in support of the  application
         asserted that: (i) the judge had made an error of law in failing to
         consider all  the  evidence  in  the  round  prior  to  reaching  a
         determination of risk on return; (ii) the judge failed to determine
         the appeal in accordance with the appropriate  standard  of  proof;
         (iii) the judge failed  to  consider  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
         submissions made on behalf  of  the  Appellant;  (iv)  the  judge's
         findings in relation to alternative findings as to the availability
         of internal relocation/sufficiency of  protection  were  irrational
         and/or  perverse   and   (v)   the   judge   irrationally   invoked
         "inconsistencies."

    5.     In a decision dated 10 June  2016,  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Holmes granted the application for  permission  to  appeal  on  all
         grounds.

    Hearing

    6.     At the hearing before us, Mr Jones made detailed submissions  in
         line with the  grounds  of  appeal.  In  particular,  he  made  the
         following criticisms of the Judge's decision and reasons:

         (i)      the Judge erred in her approach  to  the  complex  factual
             issue of the Appellant's sexuality,  in  that  she  failed  to
             apply the DSSH method, which  has  been  incorporated  by  the
             Respondent into her caseworking guidelines and  was  drawn  to
             her attention in the written submissions before her;

         (ii)     the  Judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  the  Appellant's
             credibility and failed to factor in the context  and  history,
             including the fact that she  was  interviewed  whilst  in  the
             detained  fast  track  process  and  broke  down  on  numerous
             occasions during the interview and clearly presents as someone
             who is traumatized,  as  the  report  from  the  Helen  Bamber
             Foundation  confirms.  All   this   amounts   to   significant
             corroborative evidence;

         (iii)    the Judge erred in her approach to the Appellant's  sexual
             orientation in that she rejected the Appellant's claim to be a
             lesbian  despite  accepting  that  LK  (her  landlady)  was  a
             credible witness and the Appellant  has  put  herself  forward
             consistently to LK as a lesbian: [20] and [38] refer;

         (iv)      in  respect  of  the  delay  in  disclosing  her   sexual
             orientation,   the   judgment   of   the   CJEU   in   ABC   v
             Staatssecretaris  van  Veiligheid   en   Justitie   (Directive
             2004/83/EC) Joined  Cases  C-148/13  to  C-150/13  at  [7]  is
             material in that caution has to be applied to  criticizing  or
             challenging delayed disclosure:  it  cannot  be  the  decisive
             factor and this is particularly the case when,  as  here,  the
             Appellant hails from a  country  where  homosexuality  is  not
             tolerated;

         (v)      the Judge's approach to the Appellant's evidence was  very
             narrow and her basis for asserting at [29] that the  Appellant
             was evasive is improper and fails to consider the  Appellant's
             answers to Q's 129, 145, 146 and 208 of the  asylum  interview
             as to how she and EW managed to conduct  a  relationship.  The
             Judge further gave  no  reasons  at  [32]  for  rejecting  the
             Appellant's account of having a relationship  with  MM,  apart
             from her generalized negative credibility finding based on the
             Appellant's immigration history and conviction. This fails  to
             take account of the very detailed account of the  relationship
             given by the Appellant at interview.  The  evidence  of  third
             parties was disregarded: whilst it may not be decisive, it was
             an error to treat it as  not  assisting.  Mr  Jones  submitted
             that, had the  Judge  approached  the  evaluative  process  of
             assessing the Appellant's  credibility  properly  a  different
             outcome could not be excluded.

    7.     In response, Mr Whitwell submitted  that,  irrespective  of  the
         caseworking policy and the DSSH approach, it was common ground that
         this issue was only raised in the written submissions  and  is  not
         the centrepiece of those submissions  and  it  was  not  clear  how
         vigorously counsel pursued this before the First tier Tribunal.  He
         sought to reply on the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Sarkar
         [2014] EWCA Civ 195. Mr Whitwell submitted that at [23]  the  Judge
         has taken the Appellant's immigration  history  in  the  round  and
         summarised the evidence at [29] and at [32]  the  evidence  of  the
         relationship with MM and at [34] the LGBT route. At [35] the  Judge
         makes the clear finding that  she  rejects  the  Appellant's  claim
         based on her sexual orientation and is  not  starting  off  on  the
         premise of her poor immigration history. In respect of the  Judge's
         findings at [31]-[32] regarding inconsistencies and the break up of
         the relationship this all clearly goes to the issue of credibility.



    Decision and reasons

    8.     We found that the First tier Tribunal Judge erred materially  in
         law in  her  approach  to  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  sexual
         orientation and announced our decision at the hearing. We now  give
         our reasons.

    9.     Whilst it was not  incumbent  upon  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Twydell to  accept  the  Appellant's  evidence  as  to  her  sexual
         orientation, given that there were arguably inconsistencies in  her
         account and given  that  she  made  her  asylum  claim  only  after
         residing in the United Kingdom as an overstayer for a period of tie
         in excess of 11 years, we consider that  the  Judge  erred  in  her
         approach to this issue in that:

         9.1.     there was  before  the  Judge  corroborative  evidence  in
             support  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  a  lesbian.  The
             Appellant's friend and  landlady,  LK,  did  attend  and  gave
             evidence  that  the  Appellant  had   discussed   her   sexual
             orientation with her and she had also seen gay  literature  in
             the accommodation that they share. The Judge at [38]  accepted
             this witness' evidence as credible but at  [35]  rejected  the
             Appellant's claimed sexual  orientation,  without  giving  any
             reasons as to why she did  not  accept  the  evidence  of  the
             witness or give  reasons  as  to  why  she  had  reached  this
             conclusion despite the evidence  of  the  witness,  which  she
             accepted. Consequently, we find that the  Judge's  finding  at
             [35] that the Appellant is not a lesbian is unsustainable;

         9.2.     whilst it is the case that  the  Appellant  disclosed  her
             sexual orientation as part of her asylum claim at a very  late
             stage, given the length of time that she had resided in the UK
             unlawfully, we accept Mr Jones' submissions, based on the CJEU
             judgment in ABC at [7] that  caution  has  to  be  applied  to
             criticizing  or  challenging  delayed  disclosure  of   sexual
             orientation: it cannot be the  decisive  factor  and  this  is
             particularly the case when, as here, the Appellant hails  from
             a country where homosexuality is not tolerated;

         9.3.     we  agree  with  Mr  Jones  that,  in  making  an  adverse
             credibility finding in respect of  the  Appellant,  the  First
             tier Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the  very
             detailed account of her relationship with EW in Kenya given by
             the Appellant at her asylum interview, conducted when she  was
             in the detained fast track  process.  It  is  clear  from  the
             record of  that  interview  that  the  Appellant  was  clearly
             distressed and broke down in the course of  the  interview  on
             several occasions and  we  agree  that  her  presentation  was
             consistent with that of a person who has suffered  trauma,  as
             was confirmed by the report from the Helen Bamber Foundation;

         9.4.     we further find that, whilst accepting that the First tier
             Tribunal Judge was entitled to attach  little  weight  to  the
             evidence in relation to the Appellant's relationship with  MM,
             she erred in failing to give any reasons  for  rejecting  this
             evidence  apart  from  her  generalized  negative  credibility
             finding based  on  the  Appellant's  immigration  history  and
             conviction.

    10.    Consequently, the decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  is
         vitiated by material errors of law and cannot stand. We  remit  the
         appeal for a hearing de novo before a  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
         other than Judge Twydell.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

22 July 2016


                                 DIRECTIONS

1.    The appeal is to be remitted back to the First tier Tribunal.

2.    The appeal is to be listed for 3 hours at Taylor House.

3.    The Appellant's solicitors will inform the Tribunal as  to  number  of
witnesses.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Chapman

22 July 2016

