
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08190/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice,|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 19 October 2015                   |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        MAHMOUD SALAMAN SHTEWI SWELAM
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
Appellant:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office presenting Officer
Respondent:   Ms K Lincoln, of MSM Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has its origins in the  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary  of  State")
    dated 02 October 2014, whereby the Respondent's application for  asylum
    was refused.  His ensuing appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT")
    was allowed. Permission to appeal to this Tribunal has been granted  in
    the following terms:

         "[There is] ...  an arguable error of law in that the Judge has not
         made clear findings.  The Respondent is entitled  to  know  exactly
         why the Judge found the Appellant's account to be credible ...

         The Judge has found  that  the  Appellant's  failure  to  recollect
         detail does not materially undermine his story.  There is a paucity
         of reasoning in this decision to explain what allowances the  Judge
         has made for the Appellant's failure to recollect detail ... [There
         are] inadequate findings of fact."

    There is no Rule 24 Notice on behalf of the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of  Egypt,  aged  39  years.   He  was  the
    beneficiary of a family visit visa spanning the period December 2013 to
    June 2014.  He made his asylum application on 04 April  2014.   In  the
    refusal letter his claim is formulated in these terms:

         "Your claim for asylum is based  on  your  fear  that  if  you  are
         returned to Egypt you will be killed by the police,  army  and  the
         government because of your political opinion because you voted  for
         the Muslim Brotherhood."

    The Respondent claimed that during a period of some years he  had  been
    considered by the Egyptian security forces to be an enemy of the  state
    on account of his Muslim religion.  He  alleged  several  instances  of
    arbitrary detention and torture, each of several days duration and  one
    lasting for 40 days.  He suggested that he was identifiable as a Muslim
    by his beard.  He further claimed to  be  a  supporter  of  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood.  The consistent theme of his questioning when detained was
    his religion and his political beliefs. Finally,  he  claimed  to  have
    been arrested and detentioned for 24 hours  at  Cairo  Airport  on  the
    occasion of his departure for the United Kingdom.

 3. In brief compass, the refusal decision is based upon an analysis of the
    various claims and assertions made by the Respondent  when  interviewed
    and  a  resulting  catalogue  of  discrepancies,  giving  rise  to  the
    conclusion that his story was not worthy of belief.

 4. The  decision  of  the  FtT,  focusing  on  the  Secretary  of  State's
    assessment  of  the  Respondent  as  an  unreliable  and   unbelievable
    historian, contains the following passage:

         "The Appellant deals with these matters in his examination in chief
         and under cross-examination.  He has also provided statements which
         go some way to explaining the difficulty that arises  in  recalling
         these events.  It is clear on today's evidence that he has not been
         consistent or able to give  full  and  detailed  answers  to  every
         question posed of him."

    This is followed by:

         "I am satisfied on the evidence before me today that he  could  not
         be expected to give such detailed and  accurate  answers  to  every
         question, given the time scale over which these events occurred.  I
         find that his failure  to  recollect  detail  does  not  materially
         undermine his story.  The Appellant need only  satisfy  me  to  the
         lower standard ...

         When I take all of the evidence including the explanations  in  the
         round, I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  met  the  relevant
         standard of proof in providing the history ...."

    Next, the Judge summarises  the  decision  maker's  scepticism  of  the
    Respondent's tale, making  no  specific  findings  in  respect  of  the
    factors highlighted: see [18].  At [19]  he  accepts  the  Respondent's
    explanation that he returned to his home area from Cairo because:

         "... this is the area in which he lives and he  had  other  reasons
         for returning there."

    The only  other  issue  addressed  by  the  Judge  is  the  background,
    objective evidence.  This, he finds, establishes that the area  of  the
    Respondent's residence -

         "... is one of turmoil and high tension.  Many people are  stopped,
         questioned and some are arrested and detained for periods of  time.
         I accept that the Appellant  was  one  of  these  people  who  were
         stopped regularly, detained and subjected to inhuman and  degrading
         treatment on some occasions ...

         I find that the Appellant's claim fits well into the context of the
         background material.  The account is inherently plausible  and,  in
         spite  of  probing  and  robust  cross  examination,  no   material
         inconsistencies emerged."

    The Judge then repeats his evaluation of the Respondent as  a  credible
    historian and his acceptance of his account in full. This was  followed
    by a conclusion that he had been  persecuted  on  the  grounds  of  his
    political opinions and religious beliefs.  The appeal was allowed under
    the Refugee Convention, Articles 2 and  3  ECHR  and  the  humanitarian
    protection provisions of the Immigration Rules.

DECISION

 5. It is axiomatic  that  the  decision  of  every  Tribunal  contain  all
    necessary findings, complimented by sufficient reasons.  See  MK  (Duty
    to Give Reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  641  (IAC)  and,  in  particular
    [11]:

         "The depth and extent of the duty to give reasons  will  inevitably
         vary  from  one  case  to  another.   The  duty   is   contextually
         sensitive."

    In the same passage, it is noted that in Shizad [2013] UKUT  35  (IAC),
    the Upper Tribunal observed that reasons need not be extensive  if  the
    decision makes sense as a whole.  I also  draw  attention  to,  without
    repeating, [12] of the decision in MK.

 6. The determination of appeals of  this  nature  requires  an  evaluative
    judgment on the part of the Upper Tribunal, standing back and examining
    the first instance decision as a  whole  and  in  the  round.   In  the
    performance of such an exercise it is essential to identify the central
    issues.  To reflect the repeated exhortation by appellate  courts  that
    minute,  forensic  dissection  of  first  instance  judgments  is   not
    appropriate and, further,  that  rehearsal  of  all  the  evidence  and
    findings on every contentious issue is not required, a certain latitude
    must be accorded to the trial judge.  In the particular context of this
    appeal, two considerations stand out.  First, it was not incumbent upon
    the FtT to resolve conflicts between the evidence of the Appellant  and
    that of other witnesses: this did not arise.  Second, in  circumstances
    where  the  fundamental  question  was  whether   the   Appellant   was
    believable, the Judge had the benefit and advantage  of  assessing  his
    demeanour and, as highlighted in the decision,  his  performance  under
    cross examination.

 7. Approached in this way, I find no merit in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal.  The FtT's decision suffices to convey to the parties  why  the
    Appellant succeeded and the Secretary of State failed and, overall,  it
    makes coherent sense. I dismiss the appeal and affirm the  decision  of
    the FtT.


                                                           Bernard McCloskey


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 19 October 2015
