
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08434/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 19 May 2016                         | on 11 July 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                   Between

                                 Geron Lita
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Krystelle Wass, counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer
For the respondent:    Mr Stephan Kotas

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    This is an appeal from a first-tier decision, by Judge Richard  Cassel,
    sitting at Taylor House on 25 February, by a citizen of  Albania,  born
    there on 24  October  1998,  his  age  by  now  making  'anonymization'
    unnecessary.  In 2014 he arrived and claimed asylum  in  this  country,
    giving a history of a blood feud which had begun in 2001 or  2002.   He
    said his father and paternal uncle had fled to Greece in 2002, and  his
    father had been back twice a year since to  see  him  and  his  mother.
    Eventually the appellant became involved in the blood feud himself, and
    had to leave Albania.

2.   An important part of the Home Office's reasons for refusal appeared  at
    paragraph 98 of the very detailed refusal letter, and began like this:

         "Attempts were made to trace your family in Albania and a  response
         was received on 20 April 2015.   The  report  confirmed  that  your
         father has only ever travelled out of  Albania  on  two  occasions;
         three days to and from Greece in 2011 and  one  day  to  travel  to
         Montenegro in 2014.  In relation to the responses you  provided  in
         your asylum interview, these  findings  were  found  to  completely
         undermine your responses ..."

    and the letter goes on:

         "It is further noted that your father does not reside in Greece but
         is in fact currently in Albania and has been since his return  from
         Montenegro in 2014.  These findings therefore deem  your  responses
         regarding the  blood  feud  with  these  families  to  be  entirely
         inconsistent and absent of credibility."

3.   The judge dealt with those points at paragraphs 37 to 38,  and  related
    Miss Wass's submissions for the appellant, to the effect that there was
    "... no supporting evidence for  the  conclusion  that  is  reached  at
    paragraph 98 as to the movements of his father and  that  he  had  left
    Albania on just two occasions".

4.   The need for supporting evidence for an assertion made in  the  refusal
    letter, or elsewhere in the respondent's case, is made  clear  at  rule
    24(1)(d) of the current 2014 Procedure Rules requiring  the  respondent
    to provide the Tribunal with "any other unpublished document  which  is
    referred to in a document mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) or relied upon
    by the respondent", and that by sub-paragraph (a) includes the  refusal
    letter.

5.   As the judge correctly went on to note,  there  had  been  no  specific
    challenge before that stage to the assertion at paragraph 98;  nor  had
    there been any request for disclosure of material to support it.  If it
    had not been for the terms of what is now rule 24, the judge might have
    been well justified in relying on those points, and not  allowing  such
    late and unheralded challenges on this point.

6.   However, the predecessor of rule 24 was  in  identical  terms  and  was
    dealt with in MH  [2010]  UKUT  168.   The  panel  cited  the  relevant
    provisions.  At paragraph 13 they said this:

         "The requirements of rule 13 are  mandatory.   Their  intention  is
        clear: it is to enable the appellant to know the  case  he  has  to
        meet, and the Tribunal to have the material upon which the case can
        be judged."

     The panel went on to mention the section 108 procedure, then  available
    in cases of forgery; but it is quite clear that their decision was  not
    limited to cases of forgery or falsity of documents, but based  on  the
    wording of the rule, which remains the same.  Surprising as the  effect
    may be, where there had been no request for disclosure of the  material
    relied on, it seems to me that I ought to follow it, as  a  ''reported'
    decision of this Tribunal.

7.   The remaining point is the one raised by Mr Kotas to the  effect  that,
    even if the judge was wrong on that point his mistake was not  material
    to  the  result,  since  there  were  certainly   other   grounds   for
    disbelieving the appellant's account of his family's  movements,  which
    appear at paragraphs 32 to 33.

8.   However, turning to the way in which  the  judge  ended  paragraph  38,
    dealing with the material mentioned at paragraph 98 and saying this: "I
    find that the information is reliable and it  significantly  undermines
    the account given by the appellant", it would be hard to  say  that  it
    was not material to his credibility decision and I do not think I can.

9.   The other points raised by Mr Kotas refer to the history of  subsequent
    difficulties, or lack of them, given by the appellant and dealt with by
    the judge at paragraphs 41 to 44, those paragraphs refer to the killing
    of a member of the opposing clan in 2001 and goes on:

         "41. ... No attempts have been made to take revenge since then  and
             no direct problems have been suffered by the appellant and  no
             attempt by the Koka family have been made to take revenge.

         42.  On the appellant's account no member of his family has had any
             direct problems from either of the aggressor families  and  on
             his account he regularly attended school until he left Albania
             and was not located or targeted.

         43.  On the appellant's account his father worked for  the  police,
             although he resiled  from  his  position  in  giving  evidence
             stating that he was told to claim that to be the case  by  his
             mother.  There is no credible evidence that the  police  would
             not provide protection to the family or to the appellant.

         44.  Similarly there is no  credible  evidence  that  there  is  an
             active blood feud affecting him personally."

    Looking back at the cross-examination of the appellant  about  that  at
    paragraph 11, there clearly was some inconsistency between the accounts
    he had given at different stages as  to  when  he  had  been  going  to
    school.

10.  At paragraph 29 the  appellant's  statement  is  dealt  with,  and  the
    question of what had been the involvement of his  grandmother  and  his
    mother.  However, it is clear from paragraph 30  that  the  appellant's
    account was this: "His problems were compounded in March 2014 when  the
    Zhupani family also declared a blood feud against him".

11.  So it was equally clear that  the  appellant's  case,  well-founded  or
    not, was that he remained at  risk  in  Albania  at  the  time  of  his
    departure, and it is impossible to say that the  judge's  treatment  of
    this point, at paragraphs 41 to 44, involved treating  his  account  at
    its highest throughout, in which case the question of  his  credibility
    might not have been material.

12.  The remaining point arises on the judge's paragraphs 45 to 48,  dealing
    with internal relocation.  The  judge  did  refer  to  the  appellant's
    account at paragraph 46 and dealt with this point  on  the  basis  that
    there had been "an active act of violence" but  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant was being actively pursued.

13.  The judge went on to say  that,  on  his  account,  the  appellant  had
    failed to demonstrate that the authorities were unable or unwilling  to
    provide him with a reasonable level of protection and that, even if  he
    were likely  to  be  at  risk  in  his  home  area,  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect him to relocate.



14.  The appellant's case about his movements is set out at paragraph  9  in
    the course of his cross-examination to the effect that  "he  had  moved
    around a lot in Albania but lived at his last place  of  residence  for
    somewhere between four and five years".  That does not  suggest  to  me
    that this was  a  young  man  who  would  necessarily  find  relocation
    difficult.  The question is whether  the  judge,  despite  the  mistake
    about the paragraph 98 material, was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant would not be at any real risk outside his home area, and this
    is the point which gave me serious cause for reflection.

15.  It seemed to me that Miss Wass was right in saying that in  a  case  of
    this kind there had to be a valid determination of what risk it was the
    appellant faced in his home area, before deciding whether he  would  be
    reasonably likely to face that risk elsewhere too.  That  was  not  the
    case here, for the reasons I have given, and the result must be a fresh
    hearing before another first-tier judge.

Appeal allowed: first-tier decision set aside
Fresh first-tier hearing, not before Judge Cassel

                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                                 25 May 2016



