
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08781/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2017                           |On 25th January 2017          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                            NAJIBULLAH WALIKHEIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sarwar of the Birmingham Law Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Afghanistan born on 13th  May  1994.
    The Appellant entered the UK illegally on 25th March 2009  and  applied
    for asylum that day.  That application was refused  but  the  Appellant
    was granted a period of discretionary leave on the basis  of  his  then
    age.  He made a subsequent application for leave  to  remain  and  that
    application was refused on 10th October 2014 for the reasons  given  in
    the Respondent's Notice  of  Decision  of  that  date.   The  Appellant
    appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Ford (the Judge) sitting  at  Birmingham  on  16th  August  2016.   She
    decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in  her  Decision
    dated 30th August 2016.  The Appellant  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision, and on 27th September 2016 such permission was granted.

 2. Error of Law

    I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

    The Judge dismissed the appeal because she found the  Appellant  to  be
    lacking in credibility and did not believe most of his account  of  his
    experiences in Afghanistan.  One  of  a  number  of  reasons  for  that
    conclusion given by the Judge was that the Appellant  was  inconsistent
    in stating in his most recent  statement  that  his  father  was  dead,
    whereas earlier the Appellant had only claimed that his father had been
    kidnapped by the Taliban.  At the hearing, Mr Sarwar  argued  that  the
    Judge had erred in law in this respect.  Permission to appeal had  been
    granted on a single ground being that there had been an  error  by  the
    Appellant's then representatives in preparing his most recent statement
    as the Appellant had never claimed that his father was dead.

    Mr Sarwar submitted that the Judge had erred in  law  by  relying  upon
    this apparent discrepancy in order to find  the  Appellant  lacking  in
    credibility.  This was clear from what the Judge wrote at paragraph  34
    of her Decision.  The Judge had not been aware of the  mistake  by  the
    representatives, but it was explained in the documents annexed  to  the
    grounds of application.  The Appellant had assumed that  his  statement
    would be corrected by his  representatives  when  he  had  brought  the
    mistake to their attention prior to the hearing.  At  paragraph  46  of
    the Decision, the Judge had described the mistake as  an  embellishment
    to the Appellant's evidence and it was apparent that  the  mistake  had
    infected the Judge's view of the Appellant's  credibility.   The  error
    was material because this factor could not be viewed in isolation.

    In response, Mr Mills referred to the Rule 24 response and acknowledged
    that there may have been a mistake of fact in the Appellant's statement
    which he had tried to correct.  However, it was accepted that the Judge
    had not been made aware of the mistake, and therefore her reliance upon
    it could not amount to an error of law.  The Judge had  to  decide  the
    appeal on the evidence before her taken at its  face  value.   Further,
    there was nothing from  the  Appellant's  previous  representatives,  a
    reputable firm of solicitors, that such a mistake had  been  made.   In
    any event, any such error of law was not  material  as  the  Judge  had
    given a number of other significant reasons for finding  the  Appellant
    and his witness lacking in credibility.

    I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  therefore  I
    do not set aside.  Even if it is the case that the Judge relied to some
    extent on an error of fact in the statement of the Appellant  drawn  by
    his previous representatives, it is common ground that  the  Judge  was
    not made aware of the error and therefore it cannot be an error of  law
    for the Judge to rely in part on the mistake when making her finding as
    to credibility.  As Mr Mills argued, the Judge had to decide the appeal
    upon the evidence before her and it was not for her to  go  behind  any
    written statement made by the Appellant.  It is to be  noted  that  the
    Appellant was represented at the hearing by Counsel and  therefore  had
    ample opportunity then to correct any errors in his statement.  In  any
    event, if there was a mistake of fact in the way claimed,  it  did  not
    amount to a material error of law as  the  Judge  gave  examples  of  a
    number of other inconsistencies in the Appellant's  evidence  and  also
    that of his witness Mr Ferozi.  The Judge's finding as  to  credibility
    cannot be impeached because of one unintentional error of  fact  relied
    upon by the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date 25/01/2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
