
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: AA/08684/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                   |Decision signed:   08.08.2015        |
|On 06.08.2015                        |sent out:  17.08.2015                |


                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judges
                       John FREEMAN and Kate MARKUS QC


                                  Between:

                                 Wise ZADAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  David Chirico (counsel instructed by Luqmani Thompson &
                    Partners)
For the respondent: Mr Steven Walker


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Anthony Metzer), sitting at Taylor House on 27 January,
    to  an asylum and human rights appeal by a citizen of Afghanistan, born
    2 March 1996. The appellant had arrived in 2010, and in view of his age
    then, had been placed with a foster family and, though refused  asylum,
    given exceptional  leave  to  remain  till  a  month  before  his  18th
    birthday. Before it ran out, he claimed asylum again; but again he  was
    refused, on 13 October 2014.

 2. The Home Office were given permission to appeal in the  Upper  Tribunal
    on the basis of the general lack of reasons in the judge's decision. It
    has to be said that this was a somewhat slipshod production: there  are
    two points, at paragraphs 1 and 20, where an obvious plea for  help  by
    the typist in her draft was left uncorrected to  pass  into  the  final
    decision. This however  is  not  the  main  point  with  which  we  are
    concerned, which is  whether  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    decision he did, for the reasons he gave.

 3. The judge's credibility findings were extremely thin but  his  decision
    was not challenged on that ground, so we can move on to his conclusions
    on risk on return. These were very much based  on  a  'country  expert'
    report by Dr Antonio Giustozzi, well known in cases such as  this.  The
    Home Office's best point on the judge's decision itself was his  signal
    failure to take any account of the  lapse  of  time  since  the  events
    related by the appellant: he had by the date of the hearing been out of
    Afghanistan for over four years. Since his  claim  was  based,  not  on
    anything he himself might have done or been thought to have  done  when
    he was only 14, but on the killing of his  father,  apparently  by  the
    Taleban, this was on the face of it a very  serious  point,  which  the
    judge was clearly wrong to disregard.

 4. The answer to it comes not from anything the judge said  himself,  even
    in his summary of Dr Giustozzi's report, but from  passages  in  it  to
    which we were  referred  by  Mr  Chirico.  The  judge  had  alluded  at
    paragraph 19 to Dr Giustozzi's opinion  that  the  appellant  would  be
    unable to find accommodation in a district  of  Kabul  where  he  would
    receive effective protection from  the  Taleban,  if  they  were  still
    interested in him. However, the main question in this case is why  they
    should still be interested in the  son  of  a  man  of  whom  they  had
    disposed in a rather final, not to say brutal way in early 2010?

 5. The answer is in Dr Giustozzi's report in his long paragraph 12, at  pp
    14 - 16 of the report.

         "Now that the father has  disappeared,  the  Taliban  do  not  need
         anymore [sic] to target [the appellant] in order to intimidate him.
         However, in the Afghan cultural context, they will assume that [the
         appellant] now has a grudge  against  the  Taliban  and  will  seek
         revenge against them, because of what they did to his  father.  ...
         Avenging death is a matter  of  opportunity;  cases  are  known  of
         families who waited for tens of years before making an  attempt  to
         take revenge."

 6. Though the judge  does  not  cite  this  passage,  he  referred  to  Dr
    Giustozzi's opinion that the appellant would be  considered  a  hostile
    element because of his father's past employment, and it is  clear  from
    the judge's uncritical acceptance of  those  parts  of  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report he did cite that it would have formed part of  his  reasons  for
    allowing the appeal.  However  opportunistic  some  of  Dr  Giustozzi's
    conclusions might have seemed on closer examination, he is a recognized
    'country expert' in these  cases,  on  whose  evidence  the  judge  was
    entitled to rely. We do have some sympathy for Judge Metzer.  First  of
    all, he was faced with the usual  problem  in  these  cases  of  having
    expert evidence on one side only; then the appellant had the  advantage
    of being represented by Mr Chirico,

 7. We share Mr Walker's concern about the way this decision  was  reached;
    but, as he acknowledged himself, it is hard for us  to  say  that  this
    involved any material error of law on the part of the judge. So long as
    judges are placed in  as  much  temptation  as  here  to  allow  expert
    witnesses effectively to decide cases for them, there  will  inevitably
    be times when they do so; but that is not what the public pays for,  or
    has a right to expect.

 8. The solution, if there is one, is in the hands of the Home  Office,  to
    give judges the tools to do a better job. That could be done either  by
    instructing 'country experts' themselves in suitable cases; or, as  now
    happens in many  personal  injury  cases,  taking  steps  to  agree  an
    impartial joint report  on  behalf  of  both  sides;  or  at  least  by
    providing presenting officers with training on  the  difficult  art  of
    challenging expert evidence.

Appeal



                               [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)

