
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08467/2015 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th January 2021               |On 19th February 2021              |


                                   Before:

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


                                  Between:

                                     Y L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, instructed by Islington Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born in 1999. He appeals  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge L Rahman, dated 5 April  2016
    and promulgated on 5 June  2020,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    refusal of his protection claim on asylum, humanitarian protection  and
    human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant came to the UK in January 2014 as an unaccompanied  minor
    and was granted limited leave to remain until 27 July 2016. His  asylum
    claim was refused on 13 May  2015  and  his  appeal  was  heard  on  22
    February 2016 and 21 March  2016.  The  Appellant  attended  the  first
    appeal hearing and gave evidence through an  Albanian  interpreter.  He
    was represented by counsel instructed  by  Caveat  Solicitors.  At  the
    conclusion of his oral evidence, a matter arose as to whether he had  a
    sister in the UK who had made a claim for asylum and was represented by
    Caveat Solicitors.  Counsel  was  unable  to  contact  his  instructing
    solicitors and, given it was late in the day, the hearing was adjourned
    part heard.

 3. On 29 February 2016, Caveat Solicitors informed the Tribunal that  they
    were no longer acting for the Appellant. The Appellant did  not  attend
    the adjourned hearing. The judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    credible and dismissed his appeal.

 4. The Appellant  was  referred  to  Islington  Law  Centre,  his  current
    representatives, on  22  April  2020.  They  made  enquiries  with  the
    Tribunal  and  the  decision  refusing  the  Appellant's   appeal   was
    promulgated on 5 June 2020.  His caseworker  is  of  the  view  that  a
    medico-legal report is required to assess  whether  the  Appellant  had
    capacity to engage in the proceedings  in  2016.  There  were  concerns
    about possible learning difficulties and whether the  Appellant  was  a
    victim of trafficking.

 5. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  on  25  June
    2020 on the ground that it was arguable the credibility assessment  was
    flawed  given  the  Appellant's  age,  and  his  absence  and  lack  of
    representation at the adjourned hearing.

 6. In her Rule  24  response,  the  Respondent  stated  the  decision  was
    originally promulgated in April 2016 and expressed surprise at the  re-
    promulgation in 2020. She submitted there was no evidence at  the  date
    of hearing that the Appellant had an undisclosed medical issue and  the
    Appellant had been given every opportunity to put his case.

 7. In response to directions issued by the Upper Tribunal,  the  Appellant
    applied for an adjournment of the error of  law  hearing  to  obtain  a
    psychiatric/ psychological assessment. It was submitted  the  Appellant
    was denied a fair hearing and the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The hearing was listed for a remote hearing on  25  January  2021.  The
    Appellant applied for an adjournment on the basis the Appellant had  an
    appointment with Dr Rachel Thomas on 12 January  2021  and  her  report
    would not be available before 9 March 2021. The error  of  law  hearing
    was converted to a CMR via Skype.  Mr  Tufan  agreed  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier tribunal given the unusual history
    of the proceedings and the Appellant's vulnerability.

 9. I find that there has been procedural unfairness in the conduct of  the
    proceedings giving rise to an error of law. The Appellant was  a  minor
    at the date of hearing and there was evidence which cast doubt  on  his
    capacity to give evidence. Further, his representatives  withdrew  soon
    after the appeal was adjourned part-heard and the appeal  proceeded  in
    the Appellant's absence. The delay in promulgating the decision is also
    a factor which I have taken into account in concluding that the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The decision dated 5 April 2016, promulgated on 5  June  2020,  is  set
    aside and remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.  None  of  the  judge's
    findings are preserved. The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

11. I make the following directions:

      a) The  Respondent  to  file  and  serve,  on  the  Tribunal  and  the
         Appellant, a  copy  of  the  Respondent's  bundle,  and  any  other
         relevant documents which appear on the Home Office file, by 4pm  on
         8 March 2021.

      b) The Appellant to file and serve a copy of the expert report and any
         other documentation upon which he intends to  rely  by  4pm  on  29
         March 2021.

      c) The appeal to be listed before the First-tier Tribunal on the first
         open date after 12 April 2021.

      d) The Appellant and Respondent to file skeleton  arguments  no  later
         than 7 days before the date of hearing.



Notice of decision

Appeal allowed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 25 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
The appeal remains outstanding.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 25 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

