
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08853/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons issued          |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      A
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs F Farrell of P G Farrell Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   Having  exhausted  previous
    appeal procedures, she made a fresh claim, asserting for the first time
    that she is bisexual and would be at risk on the basis of  the  lesbian
    aspect of her identity if returned to Nigeria.  The respondent  refused
    that claim for reasons explained in  a  decision  dated  28  May  2015.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge P A Grant-Hutchison  allowed  her  appeal  by
    determination promulgated on 17 November 2015.

 3. The SSHD obtained permission to appeal on one ground, which  is  headed
    "failing to resolve conflicts or opinion on a  material  matter".   The
    ground might be better expressed as failure to  give  reasons  for  the
    crucial conclusion in the determination, which is at paragraph 20:

         "... she would be returning as an outspoken bisexual with  a  young
         child.  There is a real risk of persecution ..."

 4. Mrs O'Brien submitted  as  follows.   The  determination  contained  no
    examination of the evidence to explain why the appellant  might  behave
    as an "outspoken bisexual" in Nigeria.  That conclusion did not  follow
    from and indeed went against the rehearsal  and  consideration  of  the
    evidence before it, in particular at paragraphs 17-19.   The  appellant
    did not claim to have so behaved when in Nigeria previously.   She  was
    found to be in a relationship with a female partner in the UK but  that
    was a discreet one,  in  a  country  which  did  not  impose  the  same
    limitations on behaviour.  There was nothing in  the  determination  to
    explain why the appeal succeeded in terms of the tests  in  HJ  and  HT
    [2010] UKSC31, an issue raised in the respondent's decision.    On  all
    the evidence, the appeal should have gone the other way.   The  outcome
    should be reversed.  Alternatively, the case should be remitted  for  a
    rehearing.

 5. Mrs Farrell submitted that the  judge  was  entitled  to  come  to  the
    finding he did, and  by  reference  to  the  background  evidence  that
    clearly resulted in a risk  of  persecution.   The  discretion  in  the
    relationship in the UK arose from the particular reasons  explained  by
    the appellant's partner, not from the nature of the appellant's general
    behaviour.   There  had  been  support  from  other  witnesses  and  in
    supporting letters for the way the appellant said she expressed herself
    in the UK.  The witness whose evidence was quoted at paragraph  19  had
    been found to be a candid and considered  witness  who  gave  the  most
    convincing evidence  in  the  case.   Those  were  sufficient  reasons.
    Alternatively, on the  basis  of  the  country  background  information
    provided  by  the  respondent  and  quoted  at  paragraph  19  of   the
    determination, even if she were not found to be "an outspoken bisexual"
    the situation for LGBT persons in Nigeria is so  dire  that  protection
    was merited in any event.

 6. Mrs O'Brien  in  response  said  that  the  evidence  provided  by  the
    respondent and  cited  at  paragraph  19  does  not  serve  to  provide
    protection for all LGBT persons from Nigeria.  As to the interpretation
    of paragraph 19 offered by Mrs Farrell,  she  submitted  that  the  two
    sentences were not written so as to be read in the way suggested.

 7. I reserved my determination.

 8. I do not accept the submission that the  background  evidence  is  such
    that all LGBT persons from Nigeria are entitled to protection.

 9. It is hardly surprising that the respondent was  loath  to  accept  the
    appellant's claim, coming after the lengthy and unedifying  immigration
    history set out in the papers on file.  On the merits  of  that  claim,
    the judge recognised considerable force in the respondent's  criticisms
    (paragraph 18).  He declined to accept the appellant's claims regarding
    the results of her bisexuality while she was in Nigeria.  He then  went
    on to note various supporting evidence, the most  convincing  of  which
    was from Ms PA.  Paragraph 19 includes the following:

         "The appellant is now in  a  relationship  with  a  female  partner
         albeit a discreet one.  As Ms PA states  at  paragraph  12  of  her
         written statement:

             "For me she is inspiring  about  how  loud  and  open  she  is
             talking about her sexuality and clearly she could not live  as
             an openly bisexual woman in Nigeria.""

10. Mrs O'Brien  contended  that  those  two  sentences  do  not  sit  well
    together, that they do not justify the finding  at  paragraph  20,  and
    that it has no other underpinning.  She  submitted  that  to  bear  the
    interpretation sought by Mrs Farrell, the two sentences would  have  to
    be run together "... a discreet one, but as Ms PA states ..."

11. The question is whether the judge has given legally adequate reasons to
    support the conclusion at paragraph 20.  He  has  carefully  considered
    what goes against that conclusion.  He recites some of the support  for
    it at paragraph 18, and explains why he accepts that the  appellant  is
    indeed bisexual.  There is rather less to support the  conclusion  that
    she would live as  an  openly  bisexual  woman  in  Nigeria,  but  that
    material is there, from an individual witness found to be  particularly
    impressive, and in supporting letters.  The case may, on  the  face  of
    it, have been "touch and go", such that another judge might  well  have
    concluded differently.  However, the judge had the advantage of hearing
    from the appellant and her two witnesses - her partner FA, and  Ms  FA.
    I do not think that the SSHD shows that  the  judge  failed  either  to
    resolve the issue before him or to give legally  adequate  reasons  for
    coming down on the side which he did.

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           5 February 2016


