
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/08357/2015
     AA/08356/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                     |On 20 April 2016                     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     MAH
                                     AA
                             (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Mohzam, Lawrence & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
               (Delivered orally at the hearing of 8 February)

Anonymity

I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant  to
Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   Unless  the
Upper Tribunal or other appropriate Court or Tribunal orders  otherwise,  no
report of any proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall  directly
or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellants.   This  prohibition  applies  to,
amongst others, all parties and their representatives.



Introduction



 1. The first appellant is a male national of Egypt, born in October  1979.
    The second appellant is his wife and also a national of Egypt, born  in
    1985.  The couple have a child together who  is  dependent  upon  their
    claim but is not an appellant in her own right in these proceedings.

Grounds of appeal

 2. The appellants brought an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against the
    respondent's decision to remove them from the United Kingdom to  Egypt,
    following a refusal of their asylum  and  human  rights  claims.   That
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Graves  at  Harmondsworth
    on 26 October 2015 and dismissed on all grounds in a  lengthy  decision
    promulgated on 4 November 2015.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew in a decision  of  27  November  2015,
    paragraph 2 of which states as follows:

         "I am not satisfied that it is a material error of law to link  the
         cases of the appellant and his wife together.  They were both based
         on similar facts.  In general the respondent accepted the appellant
         was  a  credible  witness  other  than  as  to  his  attendance  at
         demonstrations.  He was able to give evidence as to this and proper
         findings were made.  However, it is an arguable error  of  law  for
         the judge not to have considered risk on return  if  the  appellant
         were to demonstrate against the current  government  in  Egypt  but
         only not to do so because of fear of  persecution.   Permission  is
         granted on this point alone."

 3. Thus the matter came before me on one ground, which was pleaded in  the
    following terms:

         "3.  The  'Judge'  failed  to  make  findings  as  to  whether  the
             Appellant would be at risk if he return [sic] to  Egypt.   The
             Appellant had stated  in  his  oral  evidence  that  he  would
             demonstrate against the current government, but that he  would
             not do  so,  only  for  the  reason  that  he  would  then  be
             persecuted by the authorities, see  RZ  (Zimbabwe)  and  HJ  (
             Iran).  (Please note that  the  Respondent  accepts  that  the
             Appellant was a supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood;  and  had
             participated in demonstrations and also has a face book page)

         4.      The 'Judge' materially erred  in  law  by  not  making  any
             finding in regards to risk of return to Egypt."

Discussion

 4. The facts upon which the appellants sought to found their cases are set
    out extensively in the First-tier Tribunal's decision,  but  given  the
    limitations on the grounds that the appellant is now entitled  to  rely
    upon I only need to identify the following:

          i) The appellants, and their family members,  are  supportive  of
             the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt;

         ii) The appellants have continued their  support  for  the  Muslim
             Brotherhood whilst living in  the  United  Kingdom,  attending
             around ten demonstrations and blogging their  political  views
             on Facebook whilst here;

        iii) The  second  appellant  initially  posted  her  views  on  her
             husband's Facebook account but later, in 2014, set her up  her
             own account, on which she continued to assert her views;

 5. It further stated that at the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the appellants asserted that if returned to Egypt they  would  wish  to
    demonstrate on behalf of the Muslim Brotherhood but  would  not  do  so
    because of a fear of being persecuted if they did. Despite the lack  of
    clear evidence regarding this, I proceed on the  basis  that  this  was
    indeed how the appellants put their case to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. Moving on, the appellants' ground of appeal is underpinned by the point
    of legal principle set forth in the Supreme  Court's  judgement  in  HJ
    (Iran) [2011] 1AC 596, a case in which the Court recognised that a  gay
    man would be a refugee in circumstances where (i) if he were to  return
    to his country of nationality and live openly as a homosexual he  would
    face a real risk of persecution on the ground of his sexual orientation
    but (ii) he would not in fact face such a risk because he  would  carry
    on any future homosexual relationship  discreetly  in  order  to  avoid
    being persecuted.

 7. The ratio of HJ (Iran) was explored further in the context of political
    beliefs in the later judgment of the Supreme  Court  in  RT  (Zimbabwe)
    [2012] UKSC 38.  In  RT  the  Court  found  that  the  legal  principle
    identified in HJ (Iran)  could  be  applied  to  a  person  who  has  a
    particular political belief and who would be obliged  to  conceal  that
    belief in order to avoid being persecuted if he were to reveal it.

 8. Turning back to the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  it  is  not  in
    dispute that the First-tier Tribunal properly directed  itself  to  the
    standard and burden of proof, and other relevant matters, in paragraphs
    24 and 25 of its determination.

 9. At paragraph 26 the Tribunal concluded:

        "...I am mindful of the lower standard of proof and accept  that  he
        [the first appellant] may have attended some demonstrations in  this
        country. However, I do not find that this discharges the  burden  of
        proof to the lower standard with regard to  establishing  that  this
        would  bring  him  to  the  adverse  attention   of   the   Egyptian
        authorities."

10. Then, in paragraph 28, the following unchallenged finding is made:

         "...I  do  not  find  that  the  material  before  me  demonstrates
         membership of the Brotherhood or that the Appellant in  the  United
         Kingdom or abroad has done any more than express some criticisms of
         the Egyptian Government or sympathy for demonstrators.  Nor do  any
         of the posts  before  me  provide  any  mention  of  the  Appellant
         attending demonstrations or having any contact or  connection  with
         the Muslim Brotherhood or any other party."

11. Paragraph 30 is also of significance in the  consideration  of  whether
    there is merit in the appellants' ground:

         "In terms of the appellant's support for the Muslim Brotherhood, he
         has not become a member and does not know the identity  of  any  of
         the individuals who organise the  events  and  meetings.   Mr  Rana
         asked him if he knew where their offices are, he said that he  did,
         but he has  not  been  inside  and  never  attended  any  of  their
         meetings.  While Mr Mohzam argues that the appellant would continue
         his support for them if returned to Egypt and this by itself  would
         place him at risk, I do not accept this.   If  the  Appellant  were
         such a committed supporter, it is not consistent with that  claimed
         depth of conviction and support that he has  never  been  to  their
         offices, despite there being no restriction on him doing so...

         The Appellant was well aware that the Respondent  does  not  accept
         that he  is  actively  involved  or  any  more  than  a  low  level
         supporter, since it was clearly set out  in  the  decision  in  May
         2015, yet  he  has  not  provided  any  evidence  to  address  that
         finding." (my emphasis)

12. The grounds, if read literally, assert no more than that the First-tier
    Tribunal failed to engage in a consideration of whether the  appellants
    would be at risk upon return as a consequence  of  their  intention  to
    demonstrate on behalf of the Muslim Brotherhood. Reading the emphasised
    sentence in paragraph 11 above immediately disposes of  this  argument.
    Therein the First-tier Tribunal identified  the  manner  in  which  the
    appellant put his claim in this regard, and clearly rejected it.

13. Even if it assumed that the pleaded ground is intended to be  wider  in
    its scope than that which I have identified  above,  it  still  has  no
    merit.  Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  mention  of  the
    decisions in HJ Iran and RT Zimbabwe, and it is clear  that  given  the
    way in which the appellants put their  claims  best  practice  dictates
    that it ought to have done so, this of itself is not sufficient to lead
    to its decision being set aside.

14. It is plain from reading the decision as a  whole,  and  in  particular
    paragraph 30 thereof, that the First-tier Tribunal's findings as to the
    level of support displayed by the appellants for the Muslim Brotherhood
    (both whilst in the United Kingdom and prior to arriving here)  led  it
    to conclude that the appellants would not act  in  a  way  which  would
    cause them to be persecuted upon return to Egypt,  for  reasons  wholly
    unconnected  to  their  claimed  fear  of  persecution.  Once   it   is
    established that there is no nexus between the appellants not acting in
    a way which would lead them to be persecuted in Egypt and their claimed
    fear of being persecuted if they did so, it is clear that ratio  of  HJ
    (Iran) cannot be deployed in their favour.

15. At the hearing Mr Mohzam sought to amend his  grounds,  albeit  without
    formally asking permission do so, by challenging the rationality of the
    finding highlighted in paragraph 12 above. In doing so, he relied  upon
    a claimed acceptance by the Secretary of State in  her  refusal  letter
    that the appellants  both  support  the  Muslim  Brotherhood,  and  had
    attended demonstrations and posted on Facebook in furtherance  of  such
    support.

16. I reject this ground for two reasons. First,  I  refuse  to  allow  the
    appellants to amend their grounds. Insofar as there is  an  application
    to amend before me it was, without explanation, not made until the  day
    of the hearing and was not made on notice to  the  respondent.  In  any
    event, if I were to have allowed such amendment I would have  concluded
    that the ground has no merit. The First-tier  Tribunal  provided  clear
    reasons for its conclusions in paragraph 30 of its decision and  in  my
    view its conclusion, when read in the context  of  the  decision  as  a
    whole, cannot be described as being irrational.

17. I further observe, although I did not do  so  when  this  decision  was
    delivered orally, that although it is clear the Secretary of State  did
    accept the fact of the appellants support for  the  Muslim  Brotherhood
    she did not, as asserted, accept that this  support  was  furthered  by
    attendance at demonstrations and posting on Facebook (See paragraphs 31
    & 42 of her decision letter of 11 May 2015 and paragraphs 16 and 17  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision).

18. For these reasons I dismiss the appellants'  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal's decision stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

