
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08750/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 8 May 2017                       |On 19 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                    M I N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bayati instructed by Amirthan & Suresh Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 24 November  2016
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble which refused the  protection  and
    human rights claim of the appellant.

 3. The appellant's claim is that after the tsunami in Sri Lanka in 2005 he
    was involved in support work for survivors and came in contact  with  S
    who, unbeknownst to him, was involved with the LTTE.  He maintains that
    in 2007 he was beaten up after attending an opposition  party  meeting.
    He later found out that S  had  been  involved  in  the  killing  of  a
    government minister. The appellant feared that this would place him  at
    harm so he came to the UK to study, albeit he returned to Sri Lanka  on
    at least one occasion.

 4. In 2014 the appellant heard from his father that  the  authorities  had
    visited the family home asking about the appellant. His father had been
    shown an arrest warrant for the appellant.  The  family  were  informed
    that the applicant was suspected of  helping  the  LTTE  to  carry  out
    attacks in Colombo.  The applicant then  claimed  asylum  on  4  August
    2014.

 5. The applicant also maintained that on  21  July  2016  the  authorities
    again went to his home and  showed  his  parents  a  photo  which  they
    maintained showed the appellant at an opposition demonstration  in  the
    UK. The appellant's father was beaten and arrested  after  he  and  his
    mother denied that the photo showed  the  appellant.   His  father  was
    detained for two months and on  release  was  subjected  to  a  monthly
    reporting condition.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  find  the  appellant's  claim  to  be
    credible.  The appellant challenges those  credibility  findings  on  a
    number of grounds, three of which were  argued  before  me  and  proved
    sufficient to show a material error on a point of  law  such  that  the
    decision had to be set  aside.   It  was  therefore  not  necessary  to
    consider the remaining grounds.

 7. The first ground which had merit was ground 1  which  argued  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in making no findings at all on the  evidence
    of the appellant's wife.  Her  evidence  was  contained  in  a  witness
    statement dated 3 November 2016 and it is also recorded in the decision
    that she gave oral evidence.

 8. The statement of the appellant's wife indicated  in  paragraph  4  that
    after the couple married in 2011 she was aware of the appellant  having
    nightmares and when she asked why he  would  tell  her  that  this  was
    because he had been beaten up by the army.   This  was  evidence  going
    towards the appellant's claim  of  having  been  beaten  in  2007.   In
    paragraph 7 of her statement the appellant's wife records her knowledge
    that the appellant received  a  call  from  his  family  in  July  2014
    informing him that the authorities had visited the home looking for him
    and that the family had been shown an arrest warrant.  In  paragraph  9
    of the witness statement the appellant's wife states that she was  also
    aware that in July 2016 the family in Sri Lanka informed  her  and  her
    husband that the appellant's father had been  arrested  after  a  visit
    from  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  where  the  family  were  shown  a
    photograph of the appellant at a demonstration in the UK.

 9. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  makes  no  findings  on  the
    evidence of the appellant's wife. As indicated above, it  went  to  the
    core of his claim of being mistreated in 2007 and  the  family  in  Sri
    Lanka having been subjected to adverse treatment including being  shown
    an  arrest  warrant  and  photo  of  the  appellant  at  an  opposition
    demonstration in the UK. This evidence had the potential to corroborate
    the appellant's claim. Where the decision makes no reference to  it  in
    the findings and does not give any indication whether it  was  rejected
    or why that might be so, a material error of law arises.

10. The appellant's second ground of appeal concerns the  finding  in  [67]
    that the appellant's claim to have been  mistreated  in  2007  was  not
    credible.  The judge says this towards the end of [67]:

         "... What I cannot accept is that between  July  2014  and  October
         2016 until the account given to Dr Dhumad there is  no  account  of
         this event at all and the appellant is specific to Dr Lawrence that
         there was no traumatic event."

11. The difficulty with this finding is that the appellant did mention  his
    mistreatment in 2007 between July 2014 and October 2016. He did  so  in
    his screening interview conducted in August 2014 and in his substantive
    asylum interview conducted in December 2014.

12. Also, the appellant's claim before the First-tier Tribunal was that  he
    did not seek to rely on his first witness statement which  came  within
    the period mentioned here. That was because it had not been  read  back
    to him and was not signed by him as a result. He had concerns about the
    conduct of his previous solicitors which had been taken up for  him  by
    his current advisers. His case was these matters precluded weight being
    placed on the absence of a reference to the 2007 incident in the  first
    witness statement. The decision here draws an adverse  conclusion  from
    the failure  to  mention  the  2007  incident  without  addressing  the
    appellant's evidence as to why it was not a reliable document.  It  was
    for the judge to decide whether or not the appellant's  case  regarding
    the reliability of the first witness statement was made out  but  where
    no findings were made, a further potentially material error arises.

13. Further, the appellant also set out why he did  not  mention  the  2007
    incident to Dr Lawrence who prepared a medical  report.  He  maintained
    that the interview with Dr Lawrence had been problematic as his  mental
    state at that time had led him to be extremely suspicious. The evidence
    of the appellant's wife was that he had been so unwell at that time she
    had been obliged to tell him that the interview with  Dr  Lawrence  was
    for her in order to induce him even to attend.  Again,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal draws an adverse inference from the  failure  to  mention  the
    2007 incident in the report of Dr Lawrence but  does  not  address  the
    appellant's explanation for that.

14. The appellant's fifth ground concerned  an  arrest  warrant  which  was
    provided by his previous solicitors to the respondent.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal deals with this document at [73] of the  decision  stating  as
    follows:

         "Secondly it is a fact that reliance was placed  by  the  appellant
         himself from the very first stage of the process on  the  existence
         of an arrest warrant as he uses it as the reason for his claim.  In
         turning to the arrest warrant it cannot be verified as genuine  and
         the appellant now seeks to place no reliance on it,  accepting  now
         that it was not genuine.  The issue with the warrant is not how  it
         came to be produced in my view, or who sent it to  the  respondent.
         The issue is that the appellant's  account  has  consistently  been
         that it is real because his  father  has  seen  it.   His  father's
         account was that he too had seen it and it was real.  Regardless of
         the alleged conduct of the appellant's former representatives it is
         correct to note that the entirety of the case until  shortly  after
         the appellant changed solicitors hinged on  the  existence  of  and
         genuine nature of the warrant for the appellant arising out of  the
         arrest of S."

15. The appellant's case  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the
    provenance of  the  arrest  warrant  was  important  in  assessing  his
    credibility, however. The appellant had never claimed that he  obtained
    or requested the arrest warrant from Sri Lanka but  that  his  previous
    advisers told him that they could obtain it for him and that  they  did
    so. He had concerns  about  this  which  he  raised  with  his  current
    advisers.  They  wrote  to  the  previous  advisers  on  29  July  2016
    requesting information about how the arrest warrant had been  obtained.
    This occurred two months before  the  respondent  provided  a  Document
    Verification Report (DVR) indicating that the arrest  warrant  was  not
    genuine.  The appellant provided additional evidence to try to  address
    this concern as his current advisers  instructed  a  solicitor  in  Sri
    Lanka to  investigate  the  arrest  warrant  and  that  solicitor  also
    confirmed that it was not genuine.

16. The appellant's argument was, therefore, that this was not a  situation
    where he had changed his evidence regarding the arrest warrant  because
    of investigations of the respondent but because of his own  independent
    concerns which  were  objectively  verified  by  the  letter  from  his
    solicitors to the previous advisers.  It remained his  claim  that  his
    father had told him  that  he  had  seen  an  arrest  warrant  and  the
    appellant continues  to  maintain  that  aspect  of  his  case,  albeit
    accepting that a copy of the arrest warrant  seen  by  his  father  has
    never been obtained.

17. In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal here  was  obliged  to  consider
    this aspect of the evidence rather than proceeding on the narrow  basis
    that the appellant had sought to rely on the arrest  warrant  and  then
    gone back on this.  This incorrect approach amounted to a further error
    on a core part of the appellant's claim

18. It is therefore my conclusion, on the individual points set out in  the
    three  grounds  considered  above   and   certainly   when   considered
    cumulatively, that a material error of law arises  here.  The  holistic
    nature of a credibility assessment means that the credibility  findings
    here are undermined to the extent that  they must be set aside entirely
    and remade de novo.

19. Where there are no extant findings on the facts of this appeal,  it  is
    appropriate for it to be  remitted  to  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in line with the Senior President's Practice Direction.

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

21. The appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal, not before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gribble.

22. Since the hearing of the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant  has  moved
    to London and the remaking of the appeal will be at Taylor House.


Signed   [pic]                               Date:15 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
