

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal number: AA/08221/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Promulgated                 |
|On March 15, 2016                    |On April 12, 2016           |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   MR I K
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sultani (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran.  The  appellant  left  Iran  on
       October 30, 2014 and entered the  United  Kingdom  on  November  14,
       2014. He was found by the police and claimed asylum  the  same  day.
       The respondent refused  his  asylum  claim  on  May  8,  2015  under
       paragraph 336 HC 395.

    2. The appellant appealed that decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on May 22, 2015.

    3. The appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hand
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on August 27, 2015 and  in  a
       decision  promulgated  on  September  14,  2015  she   refused   the
       appellant's appeal on all grounds.

    4. The appellant  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  September  17,  2015
       submitting the Judge had erred in her approach to the assessment  of
       the appellant's Christianity claim. Permission to appeal was granted
       by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Appleyard on November
       3, 2015.

    5. In a Rule 24 letter dated November 16, 2015 the  respondent  opposed
       the appeal.

    6. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives. I agreed that if there was  an  error  in
       law I would retain  the  matter  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  give
       directions where appropriate.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and pursuant  to
       Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  I
       extend that order in the light of the sensitive  matters  raised  in
       this appeal arising out of the appellant's international  protection
       claim. This order prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly
       (including by the parties) of the identity  of  the  appellant.  Any
       disclosure in breach of this order  may  amount  to  a  contempt  of
       court. This order shall remain in force unless revoked or varied  by
       a Tribunal or Court.

SUBMISSIONS

    8. Ms Sultani adopted the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
       Judge had primarily erred in her approach to the genuineness of  the
       appellant's conversion. The Judge acknowledged  that  the  appellant
       had shown great interest in the Christian  faith,  introduced  other
       Iranians to the church, had been baptised, regularly attended church
       and assisted both in and around the church but found his  conversion
       was not genuine because of factors unconnected  to  his  conversion.
       The Judge had failed to  give  sufficient  weight  to  the  positive
       matters highlighted in her decision or have regard  to  all  of  the
       witness evidence including statements from  witnesses  who  had  not
       attended. The Judge's approach in paragraph [33] of her decision was
       inconsistent with the guidance in SA (Iran) v SSHD [2012] EWHC  2675
       (Admin). The Judge had erred in finding he was not a genuine convert
       because she had failed to give any reasons for  why  his  conversion
       was not genuine.

    9. Mr Mangion relied on the Rule 24 response and  submitted  the  Judge
       had reached a finding that had been open to  her.  When  considering
       credibility, the scales were already heavily against  the  appellant
       in light of the adverse findings made on his  claim.  Those  adverse
       findings were relevant  when  considering  whether  he  was  genuine
       convert and the fact the Judge had made positive  findings  did  not
       undermine her ultimate conclusion that he had converted  to  enhance
       his claim. Although he called evidence  to  support  his  claim  the
       Judge found that evidence did not shift the burden  sufficiently  in
       the appellant's favour.

   10. I reserved my decision.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   11. The appellant had  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  entered
       clandestinely. During his screening interview the appellant  claimed
       asylum based on political problems and stated that his religion  was
       "Muslim-Shia". On April 16, 2015 he was interviewed about his asylum
       claim and from Q35 he explained his fears and at Q118 he stated that
       he was claiming asylum because his life was in danger. Between  Q137
       and 141 he explained that he had discussed Christianity in Iran  and
       had been accused of advertising Christianity. As is evidenced by the
       various witness statements and the evidence given to the  Judge  the
       appellant had, since arriving here, been baptised and  converted  to
       Christianity.

   12. The Judge's finding on his core claim have not  been  challenged  in
       this appeal. The Judge found in paragraph [21] of her decision:

      a. He  had  given  inconsistent  evidence  about  his  dismissal  from
         university and she found he had not been dismissed from teaching in
         either 2000 or 2008.
      b. He gave inconsistent evidence about collecting funds  for  MEK  and
         whether there was direct contact between him and them.
      c. He had been unable to give details about his work for MEK and where
         or how money was sent to MEK and he spoke only in general terms.
      d. He was unable to explain why he chose to support MEK.
      e. He had neither been arrested nor detained by  the  authorities  for
         involvement with MEK.
      f.        She rejected his account of what happened in 2009 and  found
         he had not been arrested.
      g. She rejected his claims about MEK in 2014
      h. The appellant had not given a true account of events in Iran.

   13. Ms Sultani submits that having made those findings the Judge did not
       give sufficient regard to a separate aspect of his claim namely that
       he was a genuine convert.

   14. The evidence submitted supports his claim to have converted and  the
       Judge accepted that he had converted but quite  properly  posed  the
       question she had to consider in paragraph  [28]  namely  whether  he
       would genuinely practise the Christian faith in Iran.

   15. Mr Mangion and Ms Sultani agree on this point namely the  Judge  was
       entitled to have regard to  her  earlier  credibility  findings  but
       where they disagree is whether those findings outweigh the  positive
       evidence about his religious beliefs.

   16. Ms Sultani referred in her grounds of  appeal  to  the  case  of  SA
       (Iran) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 2675 (Admin) and in  particular  paragraph
       [24]. The Court stated:

         "... What appears to have impressed the immigration judge, and then
         the  Home  Secretary,  is  that  the   Claimant's   conversion   to
         Christianity was not regarded by  him  as  genuine,  and  had  been
         manufactured to assist her asylum claim.


         It is a dangerous thing for anyone, and perhaps especially a judge,
         to peer into what some call a man or woman's soul to assess whether
         a professed faith is genuinely held, and especially not when it was
         and is agreed that she was and is a frequent participant in  church
         services. It is a type  of  judicial  exercise  very  popular  some
         centuries ago in some fora, but rather rarely exercised today. I am
         also uneasy when  a  judge,  even  with  the  knowledge  one  gains
         judicially in a city as diverse as Manchester, is  bold  enough  to
         seek to reach firm conclusions about a professed  conversion,  made
         by a woman raised in another culture, from  the  version  of  Islam
         practised therein, to an evangelical church in  Bolton  within  one
         strand of Christianity. I am at a loss to understand how that is to
         be tested by anything other than  considering  whether  she  is  an
         active participant in the  new  church.  But  I  accept  that  such
         judicial  boldness  as  this  judge  showed  does  not  necessarily
         undermine a decision in law if he does so, and his decision was not
         successfully appealed. But that is not the only point.  There  must
         be a real risk that if she has professed herself to be a Christian,
         and conducted herself as one, that profession, whether true or not,
         may be taken in Iran as evidence of apostasy. On the basis  of  the
         Home Secretary's now stated position, that amounts to a potentially
         different circumstance  from  that  addressed  by  the  Immigration
         Judge."

   17. Mr Mangion submitted that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
       conclusion she did in paragraph  [36]  and  demonstrated  engagement
       with the evidence between paragraphs [28] and [41] of her  decision.
       Ms Sultani submits that he has placed too much weight on the adverse
       findings made on the appellant's core claim and that  this  has  led
       her to not consider the appellant's conversion fully.

   18. In assessing whether the Judge erred it is important not to look  at
       sentences in isolation. It is the Judge's overall approach that  has
       to be considered for the simple reason that people  record  findings
       differently.

   19. Her findings on the appellant's  conversion  can  be  summarised  as
       follows:

      a. The appellant taught Farsi literature and although there were poems
         that explored Christianity he did not seek further information,  at
         that time, about the Christian faith.
      b. After arriving in the United  Kingdom  he  decided  to  pursue  his
         interest in the Christian faith.
      c. The appellant demonstrated great interest in  the  Christian  faith
         and introduced other Iranians to the church. He had  been  baptised
         and continued to study the bible and attend courses. He assisted in
         various ways in and around the church and its activities.
      d. His family may have viewed his baptism on the web but the broadcast
         would not have come to the attention of the authorities.
      e. The evidence of Reverend Waugh, Mrs  Martin  and  Mr  Dawson  added
         little weight to the claim. The Reverend had  little  knowledge  of
         him and based his evidence on what he had  been  told.  Mrs  Martin
         narrated his inquisitive nature about the wording in the bible  and
         that he kept her garden tidy and attended at the drop in centre for
         asylum seekers. Mr Dawson was an elder  and  was  satisfied  having
         spoken with him that he was a genuine convert.

   20. The Judge then concluded having  regard  to  his  actions  prior  to
       leaving Iran and since being here that he was not a genuine  convert
       and she further found that it was  not  reasonably  likely  that  he
       would pursue this faith in Iran.

   21. Ms Sultani submits that the Judge's approach was flawed and that  he
       paid no regard to statements from witnesses who had not attended the
       hearing.

   22. Issues on credibility are a matter for the Judge  and  she  had  the
       benefit  of  hearing  the  appellant  and  other  witnesses   giving
       evidence. She accepted he had been baptised and that he was actively
       following the  Christian  faith  but  concluded  that  this  was  to
       "enhance his asylum claim".

   23. Ms Sultani pointed out  that  he  followed  the  religion  after  he
       arrived in the United Kingdom. Mr Mangion referred me  to  the  fact
       the appellant had not sought to follow the religion in Iran  and  he
       submits that the Judge was entitled to reach the finding he did.

   24. I accept Ms Sultani's submission that rejecting his conversion claim
       because of adverse findings  on  his  core  claim  would  be  wrong.
       However, having carefully read the Judge's decision I  am  satisfied
       this was not the case here.

   25. The Judge did reject his claim  but  she  then  considered  evidence
       about the appellant's conversion. A lot of what the  witnesses  said
       was not disputed. What was disputed, and this was a matter  for  the
       Judge alone to decide, was whether his conversion was genuine.


   26. A claim made in bad  faith  does  not  mean  it  cannot  succeed  as
       evidenced by the decisions in Danian v SSHD [2002] IMM AR 96 and  YB
       (Eritrea) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360.  The  fact  the  appellant
       converted  after  his  arrival  does  not  mean  the  Judge   should
       automatically reject the claim. The Judge was required  to  consider
       the evidence and make appropriate findings. In this case  the  Judge
       considered the evidence.

   27. She was entitled to make  the  findings  she  did  about  the  three
       witnesses because the Reverend had limited dealings  with  him.  She
       further found Mrs Martin's involvement appeared more  social  rather
       than religious and that Mr Dawson had a vested  interest  in  people
       joining the church and  the  appellant  had  a  vested  interest  in
       persuading him he was genuine.


   28. The findings she made were open to her and she cannot be  criticised
       for making those findings. There were other statements but it is the
       Reverend's evidence that carries most weight.

   29. The grounds of appeal referred to HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31. However, Ms Sultani accepted  at
       the hearing that if the appellant was not a genuine convert then his
       activities in Iran would not be an issue and in line with  the  test
       set out in paragraph [35] of HJ there is no need to go  any  further
       if he is not a genuine convert.

   30. The fact the Judge accepted the appellant was doing what he  claimed
       was something she had to consider. However, the fact  he  was  doing
       what he claimed could not be looked at in isolation in much the same
       way refusing his claim to have converted could be  rejected  because
       his core claim had been rejected.

   31. Based on what was placed before the Judge I am  satisfied  that  the
       conclusion she came to was one that was open to her.

DECISION

   32. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a point of law. I uphold the First-
       tier decision.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
