
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/08494/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 21st October 2015             |On the 3rd November 2015              |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          MR GHULAMOHAIDIN ATSAKZAI
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant (The  Secretary  of  State):   Mr  Staunton  (Home  Office
                                        Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent/Claimant (Mr Atsakzai):   Ms McCarthy (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department's  appeal
         against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn promulgated
         on the 29th July 2015 in which he allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
         against the Respondent's decision against the Secretary of  State's
         decision dated the 4th October 2014  on  asylum  and  human  rights
         grounds.  The purposes of clarity throughout this decision, I  will
         refer to Mr Atsakzai as "the Claimant"  and  to  the  Secretary  of
         State as "the Secretary of State".

Background

      2. The Claimant in this case is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born
         on the 15th September 1996, and who is therefore now aged 19  years
         old. The Claimant  claimed  asylum  on  the  29th  September  2011,
         stating that he had entered the United  Kingdom  illegally  on  the
         19th September 2011. His case is that he feared the Taliban, who it
         is said had kidnapped him following the death  of  his  father  and
         wanted him to be a suicide bomber. It was the Claimant's case  that
         he ran away having been left unsupervised at the side of the  road,
         but that he was kidnapped again and managed to  escape  and  sought
         refuge with his uncle, who arranged for him to  leave  Afghanistan.
         It was the Claimant's case that he had been targeted by the Taliban
         for 3 years, during which time they had sought to kidnap  him.  The
         Claimant's initial asylum claim was rejected by  the  Secretary  of
         State, but  he  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  that
         original appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Taylor on the 5th January 2012 at Taylor House, London.

      3. First Tier Tribunal Judge Taylor did not accept that  the  Claimant
         was recruited by the Taliban as a suicide bomber  or  that  he  had
         managed to escape as claimed.  Judge  Taylor  had  found  that  the
         Claimant had given three different accounts of  when  his  problems
         with the Taliban had begun. Judge Taylor found  that  it  was  also
         implausible that the Taliban had attempted to recruit him for up to
         3  years,  but  were  unable  to  do  so  and  that  he  had  given
         inconsistent answers on the frequency of the visits by the  Taliban
         after his father's death and found that it was  not  credible  that
         the Taliban had never come at night or at a time when the  Claimant
         was likely to be at home. Further,  Judge  Taylor  initially  found
         that it was not credible that  the  Taliban  would  have  left  the
         Appellant on his own on two  occasions  unsupervised,  leaving  him
         free to escape and discard his suicide belt having  spent  a  great
         deal of time and effort to recruit him on the Claimant's case.

      4. However, following the refusal of his asylum claim the Claimant was
         granted discretionary Leave to Remain, as a minor, and on the  13th
         March 2014, the Claimant made an application of  extension  of  his
         stay in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Home  Office
         Policies on Discretionary Leave and that application was considered
         in  accordance  with  the  Home  Office  Asylum   Instructions   on
         Consideration of  an  Asylum  Claim,  Refugee  Leave,  Humanitarian
         Protection and  Discretionary  Leave.  His  claim  for  asylum  was
         reconsidered, but again was rejected in the  Refusal  Notice  dated
         the 23rd September 2014, which led to the appeal before  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Flynn. The Claimant's account that  if  returned  he
         would face mistreatment due to his imputed political opinion,  such
         that he was  entitled  to  asylum,  or  that  he  was  entitled  to
         humanitarian protection on the basis of  there  being  a  state  of
         international or internal armed conflict or indiscriminate violence
         such that he as an individual would be at a real risk upon  return,
         such that he was entitled to protection, and  his  claim  that  his
         removal would be a breach  of  his  rights  under  Article  8  were
         rejected.

      5. However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn,  in  his  decision  found
         that having heard from a  witness  AK,  that  this  was  sufficient
         justification for reaching a different conclusion  from  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Taylor and that AK was a truthful witness  and  that
         the Claimant did have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
         Convention reason and that he was entitled to asylum and  that  his
         return would breach his human rights  under  Article  3.  The  full
         reasons for the decision are set out within the judgement of First-
         tier Tribunal  Judge  Flynn.   This  is  a  matter  of  record  and
         therefore is not repeated in full  here.  The  Secretary  of  State
         sought to appeal that decision.

      6. Permission to appeal has been granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Cox on the 24th August 2015, on  both  of  the  grounds  of  appeal
         submitted by the Secretary of State and that it was  arguable  that
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge had materially erred, in  respect  of
         ground one, in that the Judge arguably failed  adequately  to  take
         into account the  adverse  credibility  findings  in  the  previous
         determination, failed to resolve a conflict  in  the  evidence  and
         failed to give adequate  reasons  for  preferring  one  account  to
         another and that further the Judge had arguably erred in respect of
         ground two by not addressing  adequately  the  issue  of  potential
         family support upon return from the Claimant  maternal  uncle.   It
         was on this basis that the appeal  proceedings  before  me  in  the
         Upper Tribunal.

Submissions

      7. In his submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Staunton
         argued  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Flynn  had   not   given
         sufficient weight to the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Taylor and had been wrong at [30] in finding that the core  of  the
         Claimant's account concerned the death of  his  father,  which  she
         found reasonably likely to be truthful, whereas  the  core  of  the
         Claimant's account related to being targeted by the  Taliban  after
         the death of the Claimant's father.  He  further  argued  that  the
         Judge had been wrong to  find  the  witness  AK  credible,  without
         comparing and contrasting it to the  Claimant's  own  evidence  and
         that whereas the witness AK had said that the Claimant's father had
         been killed several years before, the Claimant  himself  said  that
         his father had died from a heart attack  and  that  the  Judge  had
         failed to deal with this inconsistency in the evidence. He  further
         argued that the Judge had  not  given  clear  reasons  or  adequate
         reasons as to why she accepted the  evidence  of  AK.  Mr  Staunton
         further argued that Judge Flynn had failed to properly explain  why
         the Claimant's maternal uncle would not be able to provide  support
         if the Appellant were to be returned. He sought to  rely  upon  the
         Grounds of Appeal.

      8. Ms McCarthy on behalf of the  Claimant  Mr  Atsakzai,  argued  that
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn had been entitled in light  of  the
         new evidence available from witness AK to depart from the  findings
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor. She argued that the Judge  had
         explained between [31] and [33], why she considered  him  to  be  a
         truthful witness and as to why she had found  that  the  Claimant's
         father had died and that there was now new evidence  from  AK  that
         the Claimant's village was  under  Taliban  control  and  that  his
         family had been killed and that the Judge had  simply  gone  on  to
         consider the risk to a boy of fighting age, who as a  result  could
         not be returned. She  argued  that  witness  AK  did  not  have  to
         displace the Claimant's evidence, as the  new  witness  had  simply
         given evidence regarding  the  up-to-date  circumstances  that  the
         Claimant would face upon return and the attack  on  the  Claimant's
         village. She agreed that the Judge had not clearly set out that the
         evidence of AK  simply  related  to  the  new  risk  faced  by  the
         Appellant upon return, irrespective of the Claimant's own  account,
         but indicated that this was clear and could be  inferred  from  the
         evidence that AK gave. She argued that the new witness evidence was
         not contaminated  by  any  previous  adverse  credibility  findings
         against the Appellant.

      9. In respect of ground 2, she argued that the Judge had taken account
         of the fact that attempts have been made to  trace  the  Claimant's
         family and that the reasons given as to why she found  that  family
         support would not be available were sufficient.

     10. Both representatives asked me to remit the case back to the  First-
         tier Tribunal, if I were to find that there was a material error of
         law in the case.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

     11. Although First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn did mention  the  case  of
         Devaseelan at [29], she did not set out the guidance  given  within
         that case as to the circumstances in which  a  Judge  on  a  second
         appeal could or should depart from  finding  of  facts  made  by  a
         previous First-tier Tribunal Judge, at a subsequent appeal hearing.
         Judge Flynn's reasoning at [30] for departing from the  conclusions
         reached by First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor  at  [30]  were  wholly
         inadequate and insufficient. Her finding that she  agreed  with  Mr
         Palmer that the evidence of AK was independent confirmation core of
         the Claimant's claim  which  entitled  her  to  reach  a  different
         conclusion, and her finding that the core of the Claimant's account
         concerned the death of his father that she found reasonably  likely
         to be truthful, was insufficient  reason  for  departing  from  the
         conclusions  reached  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor,   in
         circumstances where she also accepted and adopted the discrepancies
         that First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor had found in  the  Claimant's
         evidence at [30]. She has failed to explain why simply the death of
         his father being considered truthful is sufficient reason to depart
         from the conclusions of First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor  regarding
         the credibility of the manger the appellant's account regarding him
         being targeted by and kidnapped by the Taliban.  The  reasoning  in
         this regard is not adequately explained, such as to mean  that  the
         losing party knows why they lost.

     12. Although it had been  argued  by  Ms  McCarthy  on  behalf  of  the
         Claimant that the evidence of AK was  new  evidence  regarding  the
         risk faced by  the  Appellant  upon  return,  irrespective  of  the
         previous adverse credibility findings against  the  Claimant,  this
         has not been stated specifically  by  Judge  Flynn,  who  makes  no
         reference to the evidence of AK being new  evidence  regarding  the
         risk currently faced  by  him  upon  return,  such  as  to  justify
         departing from the findings of Judge Taylor  and  the  only  reason
         given by Judge Flynn is the fact that AK's account  is  independent
         confirmation of the core of the Claimant's account.

     13. First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn further erred in finding  that  the
         core of the Claimant's account did  relate  to  the  death  of  his
         father. It is clear that the core of the Claimant's account in fact
         related to the risk to him having been  targeted  by  the  Taliban,
         after the death of his father, having eventually being kidnapped by
         them and then wanting him to be a suicide bomber,  and  him  having
         escaped twice from the Taliban, having been kidnapped by them.  The
         First-tier Tribunal Judge has therefore misinterpreted the core  of
         the Claimant's account.  This clearly amounts to an error of law.

     14. I further find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn erred in law in
         simply agreeing that AK's evidence was independent confirmation  of
         the Claimant's account  of  the  death  of  his  father,  when  the
         Claimant's evidence was that his father  died  from  heart  attack,
         whereas AK's evidence was that he had  been  killed  several  years
         previously. First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn  failed  to  deal  with
         this discrepancy within the evidence and again, her failure to deal
         with this discrepancy means that her reasoning for  departing  from
         the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor  are  inadequately
         reasoned and insufficient. I  therefore  find  that  the  reasoning
         given by Judge Flynn for departing from the previous  determination
         of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  are  both  inadequate  and
         insufficient and do amount to material errors of law.

     15. In respect of the second  ground  of  appeal,  although  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Flynn at [41] accepted that the Claimant's  maternal
         uncle may still be alive, the Judge found that the Appellant  would
         be without the support of his paternal family, the normal  unit  of
         supporting in Afghanistan, such that the Claimant  would  still  be
         described as a vulnerable person, despite having recently obtaining
         his majority. However, although the  paternal  family  may  be  the
         normal unit of support in Afghanistan, the Judge has not adequately
         dealt with the question as to whether or not in fact  the  Claimant
         could obtain support from his maternal uncle and  has  not  made  a
         clear finding as to whether or not his maternal uncle was  actually
         still alive or able to provide such support. The Judge should  have
         more fully considered the issue regarding whether  or  not  support
         was available from the Claimant's maternal uncle, and  her  failure
         to do so again amounts to material error of law.

     16. In my judgement, for the reasons set out  above,  the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn does  contain  material  errors  of
         law, such is appropriate for the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Flynn to be set aside. Given that the material  errors  go  to  the
         assessment of the Claimant's account and the  risk  that  he  faces
         upon return, such evidence would have to be heard fresh in  respect
         of the case, and wholly new findings of fact made, I consider  that
         it is in the interests of justice that the case be remitted back to
         the First-tier Tribunal, in order for the case to be  reheard.  The
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn having  therefore  been
         set aside the case is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to
         be heard by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn containing  material  errors
of law, the decision is set aside;

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  reheard  before
any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn;

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order was made before me.  No
such order is made.


Signed      Dated 23rd October 2015
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
