
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA081332013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2016                              |On 17 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     ma
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, MA, is a male citizen of Yemen born in 1983.
     The appellant appeals against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom having refused his asylum  claim  (9
    August 2013).  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Turnock),  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 27 November 2014, allowed the appeal on  asylum/Articles
    2 and 3 ECHR  grounds.   The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claimed to be an active member of the  Southern  Movement
    (Al-Hirak).   For  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Presenting  Officer
    accepted that if the appellant's evidence were to be considered by  the
    Tribunal as credible, then he should be recognised as a refugee  as  he
    would face a real risk of persecution in Yemen.  The grounds of  appeal
    note, Judge Turnock found certain parts  of  the  appellant's  evidence
    "surprising" and noted [58] that there were "a number of aspects of the
    appellant's claim ... which I  find  troubling."   However,  the  judge
    accepted the core of the appellant's account as true and accurate as he
    did documentary evidence supplied by the  appellant.   As  regards  the
    latter, the grounds of appeal argue that the judge has failed to  apply
    Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318.  Granting permission in  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    the judge stated that,

         "Whilst ordinarily the assessment of the evidence would be a matter
         for the judge this is only so if the conclusions reached have  been
         adequately reasoned.  What is arguably missing in the determination
         is the reasoning at paragraph  41  for  accepting  the  documentary
         evidence relied on and the failure to provide adequate reasons  for
         why the core of the case  is  intact  in  light  of  the  extensive
         problems  identified  in  the  evidence  which  make  the  decision
         arguably irrational."

 3. I find that the Secretary of State's appeal  should  be  dismissed.   I
    have reached that conclusion for the following reasons.  I  agree  with
    the judge who granted permission and with Miss Khan, who  appeared  for
    the appellant before the Upper Tribunal, that a  decision  in  which  a
    judge finds part of an account credible  and  part  incredible  is  not
    necessarily flawed in law provided the judge gives cogent and  adequate
    reasons for his/her findings.  Significantly in the  present  decision,
    the judge did not find the appellant had lied in respect of any part of
    his account; rather, the judge has been careful to record that he found
    parts of the appellant's evidence "troubling" "concerning".  Crucially,
    at [58], the  judge  has  explained  why  he  found  the  core  of  the
    appellant's account credible whilst other aspects of the  evidence  may
    have troubled him.  The judge stated that he had  "taken  into  account
    and borne in mind that  asylum  seekers  may  seek  to  exaggerate  and
    embellish their case but nevertheless the core of their  claim  may  be
    truthful.  ...  I remained aware that an account, though improbable may
    nevertheless be the truth." I find that the judge has been alive to the
    problems which may occur when only part of an  appellant's  account  is
    found to be reliable and he has given adequate reasons to  explain  the
    findings he has made.

 4. Secondly, there was no reason to believe that the judge  departed  from
    the principles of Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318 which he enunciated at  [32].
    The judge properly considered the documentary evidence in  the  context
    of the remainder of the appellant's evidence which he  either  accepted
    as true or "found troubling".  The fact that the judge found  parts  of
    the evidence "troubling" did not compel him to disbelieve the appellant
    entirely or to reject out of hand his documentary evidence.  Miss  Khan
    relied upon the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  HS  (Afghanistan)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 771.At [34], the Court of Appeal wrote:

         "I conclude that the appeal should succeed. I would make one  other
         point. I referred in  HF  (Algeria)  to  the  inherently  imperfect
         nature of the enquiry which has to take  place  in  these  sort  of
         cases. Assessing credibility of harrowing accounts  of  this  kind,
         relating to events in a part of the world of which the  immigration
         judges will not have  direct  familiarity,  is  a  inevitably  very
         difficult task. I do not find it necessary to go on to consider the
         reasoning of the final panel, but it is perhaps illustrative of the
         point. Whereas Immigration Judge Martins regarded the appellant as
         giving direct and persuasive evidence,  and  was  assisted  by  the
         support given by the psychologist, the latter tribunal took exactly
         the  opposite  view.  What  was  seen  by  the  first  tribunal  as
         convincing  directness  was  seen  by  the   second   tribunal   as
         "feistiness", and as apparently throwing doubt on  the  conclusions
         reached by Dr Russell based on her demeanour at her interview. I do
         not need to go into the appropriateness of the tribunal making that
         sort of judgment in relation to expert evidence. But the difference
         illustrates how difficult  these  cases  can  be,  and  why  it  is
         important that there should be  a  presumption  of  respecting  the
         first decision, unless there is something materially wrong with  it
         in law, or unless the reasons really  are  so  defective  that  one
         simply cannot work out what was the basis of the decision."

 5. Then, at [29] the court noted:

         "A claim that the reasons are inadequate must be distinguished from
         a claim that the reasons are wrong. That  is  only  permissible  in
         this jurisdiction if it can be  shown  that  the  reasons  are  not
         merely wrong, in the sense that the conclusions are not  ones  with
         which the appellant or indeed the court might agree, but that  they
         are irrational. In this case, as I say, the  challenge  is  to  the
         adequacy of the reasons. So we have to  ask  ourselves  whether  we
         have any serious doubt about  Immigration Judge Martins,  thought
         processes leading to her decision. For my part, I do  not  see  any
         real difficulty in that. On the credibility  issue  she  relied  on
         having heard and observed the appellant and on the way in which her
         evidence was given, and she looked at that against  the  background
         of the objective evidence and the  doctor's  report.  That  was  an
         entirely appropriate approach for a judge, and indeed that was  her
         job. She also relied on the fact that "the core" of the appellant's
         husband's account had been accepted. That reference to the core  is
         in fact a reference back to the decision  in  her  husband's  case,
         where the judge did indeed accept, as he  said,  the  core  in  his
         case; although he did not accept  his  evidence  on  certain  other
         aspects."

 6. I have no difficulty in following the thought processes which  led  the
    judge to allow this appeal.  The judge was required to act as a  robust
    finder of facts, a task which he has properly carried out  in  reaching
    decisions  which  are  supported  by  coherent  reasoning.   What   are
    described in the grounds as "material discrepancies"  were,  on  proper
    examination of the decision, considered by the judge to be  "troubling"
    but not so troubling as to persuade  the  judge  that  the  appellant's
    entire account was untrue. There were no glaring  deficiencies  in  the
    account which might compel the judge to reject it out  of  hand  whilst
    the judge has explained why he has accepted the core of the appellant's
    account.  The grounds of appeal also ignore  the  fact  the  judge  had
    before him a witness (Mr  A)  whose  evidence  supported  that  of  the
    appellant and whom  the  judge  found  credible  [40].   As  Miss  Khan
    submitted, the evidence of the witness "put the appellant at the  heart
    of political meetings taking place in Yemen."  It was  the  appellant's
    claim to have taken part in such meetings which exposed  him  for  what
    the Secretary of State herself accepted was a real risk of  persecution
    in Yemen.

 7. In the circumstance, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date 1 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
