
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08582/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 May 2015                       |On 8 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                     EN
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Bassiri-Dezfouli, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Children are involved in these proceedings and it is  appropriate  that
    the anonymity order made previously should continue.

 2. The appellant claimed to have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  14
    October 1995 and claimed asylum two days thereafter.  That  application
    was refused on 7 October 1995 and  he  lodged  an  appeal  against  the
    decision.  However, a letter from his then solicitors was  received  by
    the respondent on 29 January 1997 with  an  attached  copy  of  a  form
    withdrawing his asylum claim.  The respondent's records  indicate  that
    the appellant was removed from the United Kingdom on  31  January  1997
    but that he appears to have re-entered the United Kingdom on an unknown
    date and waited until 2009 when he presented further submissions  dated
    2 December 2009 which are the subject of the appellant's latest refusal
    contained within a Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 8 October 2014.

 3. The appellant's appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davidson who in a decision promulgated on 25 March 2015 dismissed it on
    human rights grounds with particular reference to Article 8.  It was on
    the basis that at the hearing the appellant's Counsel indicated that it
    was  not  his  intention  to  pursue  either  asylum  or   Humanitarian
    Protection claims.

 4. Paragraph 12 of the judge's decision recorded that there  were  at  the
    hearing a number of agreed facts between the parties.   The  respondent
    accepted that the appellant has children, of whom there are four, being
    H born 23 October 1997, M born 17 October 2003, A born 30 January  2006
    and Aa born 10 June 2010.  They live with their mother;  that  all  the
    children except the eldest had been in the United Kingdom  since  birth
    (the eldest having been born in the Gambia); the  respondent  does  not
    dispute the children have not left the United Kingdom; all the children
    are in education.  It was though disputed that the eldest child was  in
    education.

 5. The judge found the appellant not to be credible  in  relation  to  his
    asylum claim.  He found that the circumstances of his arrival  in  1995
    and the undisputed findings of the respondent at  that  time  detracted
    from the appellant's credibility in relation to this appeal.  He  found
    that the appellant was not truthful in his claim to have  been  in  the
    United Kingdom continuously since 1995 and that it  was  "more  likely"
    that the appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2003 because his  wife
    said that she "brought her son" when she entered the country  in  2003.
    Her visit visa was valid from 3 November 2002 until 13 May 2003 and she
    had a Gambian immigration stamp in her passport dated  23  April  2002.
    The judge suspected that she was pregnant with her child when  entering
    the United Kingdom in April 2003 and that her child had been  conceived
    in the Gambia prior to the appellant leaving.  He found  the  appellant
    preceded her by a month or so.  Further that the appellant has been  in
    the United Kingdom illegally since 2003  having  entered  clandestinely
    knowing that he had no right to enter and would not be granted leave to
    remain in view of his previous immigration history.  Further  that  the
    evidence is that the appellant and his family have been  attempting  to
    live clandestinely in the United Kingdom since 2003 based  on  evidence
    to the effect that the appellant's wife, also a Gambian national,  said
    that the family was not registered for council tax  and  that  all  the
    bills of the household are in  the  name  of  her  sister-in-law.   The
    appellant had accepted that  he  could  not  make  a  valid  in-country
    application  to  remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  therefore
    submitted a request to be considered outside of the  Immigration  Rules
    on 2 December 2009 along  with  correspondence  of  17  June  2013  and
    enclosures of 23 July 2014 resulting in the refusal letter  before  the
    judge dated 8 October 2014.

 6. The judge then went on to consider Article 8 taking account of relevant
    authorities, Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 and Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009.  He had subsumed within his Article 8 analysis the  situation  of
    the appellant's dependent wife and four children.  The  judge  did  not
    find the appellant to be a reliable witness in view of the fact that he
    found he had left the United Kingdom between January 1997, contrary  to
    his evidence, and then entered the United Kingdom clandestinely and has
    been living illegally.  He accepted that the appellant was married  and
    had four children all born in the United Kingdom with the exception  of
    the eldest, H.  He found that neither  the  appellant's  wife  nor  the
    children had any right to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the
    youngest three were born in National Health Service hospitals at public
    expense, and the eldest three had been educated from time  to  time  at
    public expense without entitlement.  There was little evidence that the
    appellant lived with his wife and children.  The  judge  then  analysed
    other evidence including that if removed the appellant would return  to
    his native Gambia and that his  family  would  in  all  probability  be
    returned as a family unit with him.  The appellant's wife accepted that
    she had extended family in that country and that there  was  no  reason
    why family support could not continue if they were removed.   He  found
    the appellant to be young and healthy and that he could be expected  to
    work to support his family upon their  return.   He  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom at all times  illegally  and  that  the  factors  within
    Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    outweigh the respondent's respect for the appellant's family  life  and
    that it would not be disproportionate to interfere with the appellant's
    family life to expect him to return to the Gambia.  The judge then went
    on to analyse the position of the children as minors within Section  55
    of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  taking  into
    account  various  authorities   including   Azimi-Moayed   and   Others
    (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197  (IAC)
    and EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

 7. The judge found at paragraph 51 of his decision that the best interests
    of the younger children in this case are that they  remain  with  their
    parents in the family unit and rejected the suggestion of the appellant
    and his wife that their best interests remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    education system because the standard of education is superior to  that
    in the Gambia.  He weighed all the factors against  the  countervailing
    consideration that it was in their best interests to remain with  their
    parents.  He took account of the younger three children's private lives
    and the position of the elder child, H, whom he found to have  been  in
    the United Kingdom for some twelve years.  Whilst  the  appellant  gave
    evidence that she was in full-time education at a college, there was no
    independent evidence to corroborate this and in light  of  evidence  to
    the effect that the appellant and his wife were in receipt of child tax
    credit for only three of the children he concluded  that  that  was  an
    indicator, particularly when coupled with his findings of the appellant
    being  unreliable  in  his  evidence  that  he  was  not  in  full-time
    education.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  This was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Saffer on 16 April 2015.  At paragraph 4  of
    his reasons for so doing he stated:-

         "4.  I am satisfied that it is arguable that M is  entitled  to  be
             registered as a British citizen  by  virtue  of  Section  1(4)
             British Nationality Act  1981  and  that  this  has  not  been
             considered within the Section 55 assessment.  It  is  arguable
             that there is a knock-on effect to the rest  of  the  family's
             Article 8 rights.  All grounds may be argued."

    Thus the appeal came before me today.

 9. Mrs Bassiri-Dezfouli relied on the grounds seeking permission to appeal
    arguing that the judge failed to adequately consider what  was  in  the
    child M's best interest beyond remaining with his parents.  M was  born
    in the United Kingdom on 17 October 2003 and is nearly 12 years old and
    has lived in this country all his life.  He has never left  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Tribunal failed to give sufficient consideration  to  his
    entitlement to register as a British citizen under Section 1(4) of  the
    British Nationality Act 1981 having been born in the United Kingdom  on
    or after 1 January 1983; being 10 years of age or over and having spent
    no more than 90 days outside the United Kingdom in each  of  the  first
    ten years of his life and that he is of good character.  M  would  have
    severe difficulties in adjusting to life in the Gambia  and  lawfulness
    of residence is an irrelevant factor for this provision.   Further  the
    appellant's elder daughter H, who was born in the Gambia, came  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2002 when she was only 4 years old.  She is 17  years
    old.  She has lived in the United Kingdom continuously for a period  of
    over thirteen years and is entitled to residence under the  Immigration
    Rules and particularly Rule 276ADE and Section EX.  Residence  of  over
    seven years with children well integrated into the  educational  system
    in the United Kingdom was an indicator that the welfare of the children
    favours regularisation of the status of mother and children.  She  also
    submitted that the judge had failed to take into consideration guidance
    given by the President of the Upper Tribunal in  the  case  of  JL  and
    Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00547 (IAC).  She urged me
    to accept that because the judge  had  concentrated  too  much  on  the
    appellant's lack of credibility he had failed to consider  individually
    the private lives of the children and had failed to take  into  account
    documents within  the  appellant's  bundle  including  school  reports.
    Furthermore  he  has  incorrectly   applied   the   authority   of   EV
    (Philippines) particularly concluding that none  of  the  children  are
    British citizens.  In any event the appellant's children have  been  in
    the United Kingdom  longer  than  those  within  the  authority  of  EV
    (Philippines).

10. Contrary to this Mr Walker argued that the judge had  properly  applied
    the authority of EV (Philippines) and that it was always  the  position
    that the appellant and his family had tenuous status within the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge had not materially erred and cannot  be  criticised
    for failing to consider the "mere possibility" that M  is  entitled  to
    register as a British citizen. The fact of the matter is  that  he  had
    not so registered either at the time of decision or hearing.

11. I have deliberately set out in some detail the content of  the  judge's
    decision.  There was ample justification for  his  adverse  credibility
    findings and indeed these were not challenged  within  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  factual  matrix  is
    therefore not in dispute.  Contrary to Mrs Bassiri-Dezfouli submissions
    the judge has taken into account the information  from  the  children's
    schools.  At paragraph 10 of his decision he sets out  the  appellant's
    evidence and at paragraph  11  confirms  that  he  has  both  read  and
    considered it.  Indeed that becomes clear from  the  informed  findings
    made later in his decision.

12. Whilst the judge had considered M's best interest  in  the  context  of
    remaining with his parents he has also taken account M's time spent  in
    the United Kingdom and concludes  that  like  his  siblings  he  has  a
    private life that one would expect the school children of his age.  The
    judge can hardly be criticised for failing to give sufficient weight or
    consideration to the fact that M is entitled to register as  a  British
    citizen under the British Nationality Act of 1981.  The  facts  of  the
    case were that this had not happened.  It is not for the judge to  deal
    in speculation.

13. The judge has fully considered H's position  at  paragraph  53  of  his
    decision.  He  has  taken  account  of  the  issues  that  fell  to  be
    considered under Rule 276ADE.  However the reality of H's  position  is
    in these proceedings that of a dependant upon her  father's  Article  8
    claim.

14. The judge had subsumed within his analysis of Article 8 all appropriate
    and necessary considerations in  relation  to  the  children  including
    those  demanded  by  Section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009.  Appropriate case law has been applied and he has
    looked at this appeal on an individual basis  and  has  not  materially
    erred, as is asserted, by making no direct reference to  the  authority
    of JL and Others (Section 55 Duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).

15. The judge had carefully analysed the position  of  the  appellant,  his
    dependent wife and children and carried out the balancing exercise that
    was required of him taking all factors into account including the  best
    interests of the children, Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and Section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.   The  judge  has  provided  reasoning  which  is
    legally adequate and  which  takes  proper  account  not  only  of  the
    evidence that was before him but also relevant statute  and  case  law.
    The conclusions that he has come to  were  open  to  be  made  on  that
    evidence.  The grounds seeking permission to appeal are no more than an
    argument or dispute with findings that were open  to  be  made  on  the
    individual facts of this appeal.

Conclusions

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

17. I do not set aside the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Dated: 5 June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
