
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/08976/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 March 2016                           |On 27 April 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [s o]

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr John Kingham, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Marian Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday
Reeves Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  a  panel  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against a fresh decision taken on 13  October  2014
    to refuse the respondent's asylum claim and to  remove  the  respondent
    from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of Eritrea born in 1983. He claims that  he
    was rounded up in June 1999 and  received  military  training  for  six
    months. He served at the front in Kisad Eka  but  attempted  to  desert
    with a friend and was taken to a prison in Asmara to serve hard labour.
    One day when being transported from the detention centre to  the  place
    of work, the respondent and his friend tried to escape. The friend  was
    shot and killed and the respondent was taken to a high security  prison
    for a year. He eventually escaped again and  fled  to  Sudan  in  about
    2005. After arriving in the UK the respondent sent money to his wife to
    pay the fine for his desertion.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded  that  his  account  was  not  credible.  The
    respondent's first appeal was heard in Newport on 31 July 2009 and  was
    dismissed. Further submissions were made in 2010, 2011  and  2012.  The
    Secretary of State eventually  made  a  fresh  decision  in  which  the
    respondent was again found not to be credible and because he  had  left
    Eritrea before August/September 2008 he had failed to demonstrate  that
    he had left illegally.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent again appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  and  attended
    an oral hearing North Shields on 10 March 2015. He was  represented  by
    Ms McCrae of Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal considered various expert
    reports including a report from Dr Schroder. The panel found  that  the
    places named by the  respondent  were  known  to  exist,  escapes  were
    possible from Eritrean prisons and the  report  from  Dr  Schroder  was
    significant and important. That report explained  the  reason  for  the
    inconsistencies for which the previous  judge  had  found  insufficient
    basis to allow the respondent's appeal. The core  of  the  respondent's
    account had remained unaltered and had been repeated on many occasions.
    The panel gave weight to the documentary evidence that  the  respondent
    had made a payment to his wife in Eritrea and the expert evidence  that
    the wife would be required to make payment. The panel  found  that  the
    respondent was a deserter from the Eritrean army who had  left  Eritrea
    illegally. His asylum claim therefore succeeded.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law
    because the medical evidence was of poor  quality  and  the  panel  had
    failed to explain why the expert report from Dr Schroder supported  the
    respondent's account to such an extent that they reached  the  opposite
    conclusion on credibility to the original judge.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey  on  1
    July 2015. It was arguable that the panel wrongly decided that  it  was
    consistent with Devaseelan guidelines to find that the  respondent  was
    now credible on the strength of an expert report, aspects of  which  on
    their own findings were dubious and it was not at all clear  that  they
    were entitled to  conclude  that  the  respondent's  account  could  in
    hindsight be seen as consistent.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Kingham submitted that there was insufficient evidence in the expert
    report to justify departure from the findings of  the  previous  judge.
    The evidence included an  acceptance  that  part  of  the  account  was
    fabricated but that was denied in paragraph 14 of the decision. It  was
    not  clear   where   the   expert   report   actually   explained   the
    inconsistencies. The general view was that Eritreans will  alter  their
    accounts where necessary to improve credibility. The medical point  had
    already been rejected. Dr Schroder was not an expert on credibility. We
    do not know how questions put by Dr Schroder were assessed or even  who
    assessed them. The expert report was insufficient to move away from the
    conclusions of the previous judge. Mr Kingham accepted that the core of
    the respondent's  account  had  remained  consistent  but  as  soon  as
    anything was analysed  it  fell  to  pieces.  That  strongly  suggested
    fabrication.

10. Ms Cleghorn submitted that the panel assessed credibility. At paragraph
    27 of  the  decision,  Dr  Schroder's  expertise  was  not  questioned.
    Paragraph 29 recognises that the expert report was not  entirely  clear
    on how Dr Schroder concluded that the respondent  was  not  consciously
    seeking to deceive. At paragraph 31, the places named by the respondent
    are known to exist. At paragraph 45, the panel recognised that a higher
    level of evidence was required because of the starting point.  However,
    the respondent did not need to be telling the truth  about  everything.
    The panel had other documents including the letter. The respondent  has
    trauma focussed therapy three years post  the  previous  decision.  The
    trauma could have affected the evidence given and  the  respondent  has
    attempted to hang himself. He is suffering from mental health problems.
    Photographs of the respondent in military uniform were  submitted.  The
    expert was able to identify the uniform as Eritrean.  Payment  vouchers
    were issued to people who were required to pay compensation. The  panel
    made it clear that the starting point was the previous decision but  on
    balance was satisfied that the core elements of the account  should  be
    accepted.

11. Mr Kingham submitted in response that the panel found at  paragraph  45
    that the only real change in the evidence was the  expert  report.  The
    panel considered the medical evidence but found it to be lacking. There
    was no finding that the military photographs depict the respondent. The
    respondent left before 2008 and it  cannot  be  assumed  that  he  left
    illegally. He says that he was in Sudan by 2005. If he was not credible
    then illegal exit could not be assumed.

12. I find that the panel did take care in considering the evidence in  its
    entirety. At paragraph 15, the panel noted the payment voucher  showing
    payment of 50,000 Nakfa because of the unlawful departure from  Eritrea
    rendering the respondent's wife liable for the fine. At  paragraph  48,
    the panel found force in the submission that one needs to ask  why  the
    voucher was produced and further found that there  was  consistency  in
    the core of the claim because the wife would, on the  basis  of  expert
    evidence, be required to make payment. I find  that  was  an  important
    change in the evidence because the payment voucher is not mentioned  at
    all in the previous decision from 2009.

13. I accept that the panel did not give any great weight  to  the  medical
    evidence and noted at paragraph 47 of the decision that the  respondent
    had not attended for further medical treatment.  The  medical  evidence
    was  not  particularly  diagnostic  other  than  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder being raised with further investigations proposed. In relation
    to the military photographs, the panel found at paragraph 26 that  they
    were not at all clear and it was not possible to say whether the person
    in the uniform was the respondent.

14. I find that it is clear from paragraphs 28-49 that the expert  evidence
    from Dr Schroder was an important element in the  decision  along  with
    the new evidence. The panel gave weight to the fact that the time  when
    the respondent said that he was drafted into the  army  was  consistent
    with the background material, the respondent  was  able  to  give  some
    accurate information about his  battalion,  the  places  named  by  the
    respondent are known to exist, there were ample opportunities to escape
    from low technology Eritrean prisons  and  the  practice  of  financial
    penalties for family members had an objective basis. I find that all of
    those  elements  were  important  pieces  of  evidence  that  were  not
    available to the previous judge.

15. At paragraph 28, the panel noted that Dr Schroder  reminded  them  that
    Eritreans tend in their narrative to jump  forwards  and  backwards  in
    time starting with what are considered to be  the  most  relevant  main
    events and then build the account around it. Inconsistencies  regarding
    time had to be seen in the context of the manner in which  events  were
    related and also the  different  calendar  used  by  some  sections  of
    society in Eritrea. The confusion in the accounts given was  attributed
    to memory problems due to the respondent's health condition.

16. The panel also found at paragraph 29 that it was not entirely clear how
    Dr Schroder concluded that the confusion in  the  respondent's  account
    was not the result of a conscious attempt to deceive. At paragraph  31,
    it was not possible to clearly reconstruct from  the  statements  given
    when and how often the respondent was arrested. At  paragraph  45,  the
    panel  found  that  Dr  Schroder  had  explained  the  reason  for  the
    inconsistencies which led the previous judge to reject the respondent's
    account. The panel found at paragraph 46 that the inconsistency in  the
    respondent's accounts had been explained. Taking those  findings  as  a
    whole, I am satisfied that the panel accepted that the  inconsistencies
    in the respondent's accounts were not fatal to his claim  because  they
    were due to the factors mentioned at  paragraph  15  above.  The  panel
    correctly emphasised that  the  core  of  the  respondent's  claim  had
    remained consistent and had been repeated on many occasions.

17. Looking at the  decision  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the  panel  had
    sufficient basis in terms of evidence that was not before the  previous
    judge to depart  from  the  previous  findings.  The  limited  concerns
    expressed by the panel regarding Dr Schroder's expert evidence  do  not
    amount to any kind of rejection of the  report  as  a  whole.  The  key
    elements of the expert report that support the respondent's  claim  are
    fully set out in the decision. There was  an  adequate  basis  for  the
    panel to find that the respondent was a deserter from the Eritrean army
    who had left Eritrea illegally. That is  sufficient  to  establish  his
    claim.

18. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of law and  its  decision
    stands.

Decision

19. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.


Signed   [pic]                      Date 24 April 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
