
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08012/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke          |     Decision and Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 12th June 2015                      |     On 24th June 2015              |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                            EVARISTE MBODA MBODA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam, Solicitor of Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion, I shall continue to refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.



Background

 2. On  16th  April  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Page  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal A J Parker in which he allowed  the  appeal  on
    all grounds against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse  asylum,
    humanitarian and human rights protection to  the  appellant,  an  adult
    citizen of Cameroon.

 3. In granting permission Judge Page noted that the grounds of application
    contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  making  favourable  credibility
    findings based upon the appellant's evidence.  Further, a contradiction
    in expert evidence  had  been  relied  upon  in  connection  with  risk
    allegedly caused by the appellant's ethnic  background.   It  was  also
    contended that the judge had entirely failed to deal with the issue  of
    a national passport to the appellant who  had  allegedly  escaped  from
    detention whilst facing the serious charge of attempting to assassinate
    the president of Cameroon.  Judge Page thought all of these points were
    arguable.

Error on a Point of Law

 4. At the hearing before me  Mr  McVeety  confirmed  that  the  respondent
    relied upon the grounds of application and  the  permission.   He  then
    expanded on the grounds by emphasising that,  although  the  judge  had
    found  that  the  appellant  had  been   accused   of   the   attempted
    assassination, he  made  no  reference  to  the  ease  with  which  the
    appellant had left the country using his own  passport  having  escaped
    from detention.  The background evidence  before  the  judge  suggested
    that he would have been arrested at the airport.

 5. Mr Mohzam submitted that the expert evidence  showed  the  difficulties
    created during a presidential visit, it being  open  to  the  judge  to
    decide whether the appellant had been actually  arrested  or  not.   He
    asserted that the judge  had  made  proper  reasoned  findings  on  the
    available evidence.  Further, the judge did not have to address all the
    issues raised  in  the  refusal,  particularly  that  relating  to  the
    passport although  he  conceded  that  this  was  not  covered  in  the
    decision.

 6. After considering the matter for a few moments I announced that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision showed errors on points of law such that it
    should be set aside  and  re-made.   My  reasons  for  that  conclusion
    follow.

 7. Although the grounds of application amount to a disagreement  with  the
    findings of the judge there are good reasons for the respondent  taking
    that position.  The judge assessed the appellant's ethnicity (Bamileke)
    as a factor which made his situation worse.  Although the judge  refers
    to the expert report (pages 25 and 26) as supporting  that  conclusion,
    the judge appears to have overlooked the  significant  point  that  the
    Bamileke are a group who dominate politically in Cameroon  and,  whilst
    the expert report refers to  discrimination  against  them,  no  actual
    incidents are referred to.

 8. Whilst the above discrepancy, alone, might not  amount  to  a  material
    error, it must also be seen in the light of the judge's failure to deal
    with the relevant  circumstances  of  the  appellant's  departure  from
    Cameroon through the airport using his own passport (which contained  a
    UK visa) at a time when he had been detained on suspicion of attempting
    to assassinate the president and had allegedly escaped from prison.  In
    failing to consider this matter the judge also failed to deal with  the
    allegation in the refusal letter that the Cameroonian authorities  have
    checks in place to look for wanted individuals (paragraph 23).   It  is
    not possible to say that, even if the judge had taken this  issue  into
    consideration, he would have reached the  same  favourable  credibility
    findings.  The judge's failure  to  take  into  account  this  material
    evidence amounts to an error on a point of law.

 9. As the judge's credibility findings cannot stand because of the  errors
    to which I have referred it is appropriate that this appeal  should  be
    heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.   This  course  of  action  is
    consistent with paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement of  the  Senior
    President of Tribunals issued on 10th February 2010.

DIRECTIONS

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  and  the  appeal
    will be heard afresh  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  the  Stoke
    Hearing Centre on 4th December 2015.

11. The appeal should not be before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  A  J
    Parker.

12. The time estimate for the hearing is three hours.

13. An interpreter in French (Cameroonian dialect) will be required.

Anonymity

An anonymity direction was not requested before the Upper Tribunal  and  nor
did I consider it appropriate.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

