
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08734/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 August 2016                    |On 01 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                  Mr U [S]
                        (Anonymity DIRECTION not madE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lane (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision
    of a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (hereinafter  "the  panel")
    promulgated  on  22  April  2015  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 14 October 2014 refusing to grant  him  asylum
    or any other form of international protection and  deciding  to  remove
    him from the UK. In fact, after a hearing of 26 April 2016 I decided to
    set aside the decision of the panel because of my conclusion  that  the
    making of the panel's decision involved the making  of  two  errors  of
    law. The errors were as follows;

         "i.  The panel did not consider or make findings about an  argument
         advanced on behalf of the appellant that he would be at  real  risk
         of serious ill treatment upon return to his home country of Myanmar
         because there was a reasonable likelihood of his  being  imprisoned
         in circumstances where detention  would  breach  his  rights  under
         Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR)  as  a
         consequence of his not  paying  overseas  tax  whilst  out  of  the
         country;

         ii.  The panel did not carry out a proper assessment as to  whether
         or not a new passport  or  an  extension  of  the  appellant's  old
         passport would be issued by the Myanmar authorities in the UK so as
         to allow the appellant to return to Myanmar legally  and,  thereby,
         avoid  risk  which  would  attach  to  persons  returning   without
         appropriate documentation.

 2. My precise reasons for setting the panel's decision aside are contained
    in a Determination promulgated on 26 May 2016  and  those  reasons  are
    incorporated,  by  reference,  into  this  Determination.  It  is   not
    necessary for me to repeat them. I did  preserve  the  various  factual
    findings which the panel had made. The remainder of this Determination,
    therefore, is concerned with the way I have gone  about  re-making  the
    decision in light of what was said  at  a  hearing  convened  for  that
    purpose and which took place on 24 August 2016. It is relatively  brief
    in view of an important concession made on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State by Mrs Aboni to which I shall refer below.

 3. By way of brief background, the appellant is a male national of Myanmar
    and was born on 7 May 1946. He is a Muslim. He came to the UK  as  long
    ago as 20 March 2001, having travelled  here  using  a  validly  issued
    passport and in possession of a validly obtained  visitor's  visa.   He
    was accompanied by his  son  one  Myo  Myint  who  is  now  very  sadly
    deceased.   At the time of his arrival he had various family members in
    Myanmar and in the UK. The appellant's son returned to Myanmar in  2004
    and was arrested. In preserved findings the panel accepted that between
    2004 and 2008 the son had spent a number of spells in detention  though
    the frequency and duration of those spells  was  not  established.   It
    noted that the appellant's family had indicated that the reason for the
    son's detention was because of non-payment of overseas taxes  and  that
    whilst detained he had been questioned  about  oppositionist  political
    activity, presumably activity thought to have been carried out  in  the
    UK.  The panel accepted that the appellant's son had passed away on  11
    April 2008 and that the family suspected he had died  as  a  result  of
    some injuries suffered whilst in detention though  it  found  that  the
    evidence fell short of actually demonstrating that death  had  resulted
    from any injuries  caused  by  ill  treatment  during  detention.   The
    appellant has indicated that,  to  his  knowledge,  his  son  had  been
    questioned a number of times about his political views  and  activities
    and that other family members who had seen him in  Myanmar  during  the
    periods when he had his liberty had said that he looked both unwell and
    frightened.

 4. The appellant had been able to obtain extensions to the validity of his
    passport whilst in the UK. That passport has now expired and is in  the
    hands of the Home Office. The appellant, in pursuing his asylum  claim,
    had advanced multiple reasons as to why he would be at risk if he  were
    to be returned to Myanmar. He had said that, although the overseas  tax
    requirements had been abolished in 2011 he  had  been  liable  to  make
    those payments prior to the date of abolition, had  not   done  so  and
    that  the  authorities  would  have  an  adverse  interest  in  him  in
    consequence of his failure to do so which was likely  to  lead  to  his
    imprisonment. He said he would be at risk because he would not be  able
    to return in possession of a valid  passport  and  that  that  too  was
    likely to lead to his detention.  He also said that he would  face  ill
    treatment as a Muslim in Myanmar.  Finally,  he  claimed  he  would  be
    suspected of being an oppositionist, albeit that he is not a member  of
    an oppositionist party, because of the extensive period of time he  had
    spent in the UK.

 5. The panel found that there was nothing to suggest  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk of persecution due to imputed political activities  or
    as a consequence of his religious faith.  It  did  not  deal  with  the
    overseas tax issue (see above) and it concluded, on the  basis  of  the
    evidence then available, that he would be  able  to  have  his  expired
    passport validated, with the assistance of the Home Office,  such  that
    he could make a lawful and, therefore, risk-free return.

 6. By the time the appeal came before me on 24 April 2016 the respondent's
    position, with respect to the passport, had  changed.   The  respondent
    had  previously  argued,  throughout  the   whole   course   of   these
    proceedings, that the passport could be re-validated by the Home Office
    sending it to the Myanmar authorities  in  the  UK  for  that  purpose.
    However, having looked at the matter closely, and having consulted  the
    Home Office "returns team", Mrs Aboni was able to tell me that she  now
    accepted that validation or re-validation of the passport would not  be
    possible. That was because the Myanmar authorities would only  validate
    or re-validate a Myanmar passport which had a current valid visa in it.
    The visa in  the  appellant's  passport,  of  course,  had  long  since
    expired. She also accepted that it would not be possible to remove  the
    appellant to Myanmar using an emergency travel  document.  She  further
    accepted,  following  what  had  been  said  in  the  country  guidance
    determination of HM (risk factors for Burmese citizens) Burma CG (2006)
    UK AIT 00012 that any return without a valid passport would be regarded
    by the Myanmar authorities as an unlawful return and was likely to lead
    to detention. She further  accepted  that  detention  conditions  would
    bring about a breach of Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights (ECHR). So, she accepted that the appellant would be entitled to
    humanitarian protection.  She did not accept that he should be entitled
    to asylum because the risk she was now conceding to  exist,  which  was
    based upon a return without a valid passport, did not relate to one  of
    the five reasons for persecution set out in the 1951 Refugee Convention
    being race, religion, nationality, membership of  a  particular  social
    group or political opinion. Further, whilst non-payment of the overseas
    tax may also lead to a sentence of imprisonment which  would,  in  turn
    and on the same basis lead to a breach of Article 3, any such treatment
    would be as a consequence of a civil offence rather that, for  example,
    imputed political opinion or, indeed, any other 1951 Convention reason.

7.   Mr Lane, whilst  gratefully  accepting  those  concessions,  sought  to
    argue that, in re-making the decision, I ought to allow the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds as opposed to merely on humanitarian protection  grounds
    or Article 3 ECHR grounds. He accepted, as I understand  it,  that  the
    risk stemming from the lack of a valid passport  did  not,  of  itself,
    when taken in isolation, relate to a 1951 Convention reason.   However,
    as to the overseas tax, he took me to a document appearing at 105 of  a
    consolidated  bundle  which  had  been  submitted  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors, and which indicated that although the overseas tax had been
    abolished in December  2011  liability  for  the  earlier  period,  for
    Myanmar  citizens  living  outside  of  Myanmar  during  that   period,
    remained. The document also indicated that returnees would be  expected
    to produce a tax payment receipt. The appellant, not  having  paid  the
    tax, would not be able to do that so he would be asked  about  what  he
    had been doing in the UK and, since he would be expected  to  tell  the
    truth, this would reveal his having made a claim for asylum. That, when
    one considers the previous fate of his son, would generate a real  risk
    of the authorities imputing an oppositionist political opinion to him.

8.   In re-making this decision I have carefully considered the  documentary
    evidence before me and the helpful submissions of the  representatives.
    I am grateful to both of them but particularly to  Mrs  Aboni  for  her
    efforts in clarifying the true position concerning the difficulties  in
    validating or re-validating the appellant's Myanmar  passport  and  for
    her realistic acceptance that her concession on the issue does lead  to
    a conclusion that the appellant is entitled to a grant of  humanitarian
    protection and is also entitled to succeed under article 3 of the ECHR.



9.   The remaining question for me, therefore, is whether the appellant  has
    succeeded in showing that he would face a real risk of persecution  for
    the reason of imputed  political  opinions.  I  should  add,  just  for
    clarity, that there has never been any suggestion that he would face  a
    real risk on the basis of actual political opinion because he has never
    been a political activist.

10.  I have concluded that the appellant has failed to demonstrate  that  he
    would face a real risk of persecution  on  the  basis  of  a  political
    opinion which would be imputed to him. That is for the reasons which  I
    set out below.

11.  Non-payment of taxes when taken in isolation  is  essentially,  as  Mrs
    Aboni submits, akin to a  civil  offence.   It  does  not,  of  itself,
    indicate that the appellant holds any sort of political  opinion.   Nor
    is there any evidence to suggest that the non-payment, of itself, would
    cause  the  authorities  to  attribute  a  political  opinion  to  him.
    Further, there is no clear evidence to indicate that despite his having
    been ill treated by the Myanmar authorities, the son  had  a  political
    opinion imputed to him simply or solely because of his failure  to  pay
    the overseas tax. Additionally, a considerable  number  of  years  have
    elapsed since any ill-treatment was meted out to the  appellant's  late
    son.  It is also apparent that there has been a degree of  improvement,
    albeit clearly limited, in the way the  authorities  now  approach  the
    issue of oppositionist  activity.  At  2.2.3  of  a  document  entitled
    "Country Information and Guidance Burma: Opposition to the Government",
    contained in the appellant's bundle, it is said that since  March  2011
    there have been improvements in regard to opposition  parties'  freedom
    to operate.  It is also the case that this appellant has not given  the
    Myanmar authorities any reason to conclude that he is or  might  be  an
    oppositionist.   He  does  not  claim  that  he  has  indulged  in  any
    oppositionist activity which might have come to  attention  in  Myanmar
    and he does not claim to have ever been a member  of  an  oppositionist
    party. I consider that all  of  these  matters,  when  taken  together,
    indicate that any  risk  based  on  imputed  political  opinion  cannot
    properly be regarded as a real risk.

12.  In re-making the decision, therefore, I conclude that the appellant  is
    not a refugee  but  that  he  is  a  person  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection. I also conclude he succeeds under article 3.



Decision

13.  a)  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  already  been  set
    aside.

    b)   In re-making the  decision  I  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    humanitarian grounds and on human rights  grounds  (Article  3)  but  I
    dismiss it on asylum grounds.

    c)   I make no anonymity direction.


     Signed   Date

     Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



To the Respondent
Fee Award

14.  I make no fee award.

     Signed   Date

     Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
