
                                    [pic]
St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08682/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 16th November 2015              |on 16th January 2017               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    P. G.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Kanaga Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. I refer to the parties as they were in the First tier Tribunal. This
       is the appellant's appeal from the decision of First-tier Immigration
       Judge Fox

    2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka. He claimed asylum on the
       basis he was at risk of persecution from the Sri Lankan authorities
       if returned. This was on the basis of political opinion, namely
       suspected involvement with the LTTE.

    3. He had been in the United Kingdom as a student from July 2010. He
       returned to Sri Lanka for a visit on 15 September 2013 accompanied by
       his wife. He claims that at the airport he was questioned and then
       released. Several days later the authorities came to his home and
       removed him. He was detained for 10 days, during which time he was
       questioned about LTTE activities and tortured. He was then released.
       With the help of an agent he was able to leave Sri Lanka in October
       2013, using his own passport passing through control at the airport.
       He claimed the agent had directed him to a particular immigration
       official who facilitated this.

    4. Immigration Judge Fox did not find the claim credible. Amongst the
       reasons advanced by the judge was the fact that the appellant claimed
       he was released and was able to depart from the airport (see
       paragraphs 48, 53 and 56 of the determination).

    5. In seeking leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal it was contended
       that insufficient account was given by the judge to the prevalence of
       bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka  as set out in the country
       guidance decision of GJ and Others  (post-civil war: returnees) Sri
       Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.(see para 170 for instance)

    6. The appellant's representatives had arranged a medical report in
       respect of scarring which was placed before the judge. In seeking
       leave it was contended that the decision indicates that the judge had
       already reached a view on credibility and only considered the medical
       evidence as confirming this rather than using it as part of the
       overall assessment process.(See JL (medical reports-credibility)
       China [2013]UKUT 00145.

    7. By letter dated 21 September 2015 the respondent has confirmed that
       the application is not being opposed.

    8. Having considered the grounds of appeal; the leave granted; and
       having heard from both representatives, I agree that the decision of
       First-tier Judge Fox cannot stand. The credibility assessment is
       fundamentally flawed by the approach taken to the medical evidence
       and does not adequately reflect the prevalence of corruption within
       the country. I direct that the matter be referred for a hearing de
       novo to the First Tier Tribunal.



Decision.

The decision of First-tier Judge Fox dismissing the appeal materially errs
in law and is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First tier Tribunal
for a de novo hearing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

