
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/08302/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th April 2015                   |On 10th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           MR Ijaz Afzal Choudhary
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Hashmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 27th  April  1990.   The
    Appellant arrived in the UK at London Heathrow on 17th  September  2011
    on a Tier 4 (General) Student visa valid until 7th  November  2012  and
    subsequently extended until 29th November 2013.  The Appellant returned
    to Pakistan on 22nd August 2013 for a two week period before  returning
    on 6th September 2013.  He claimed asylum on 14th January 2014.

 2. The Appellant's application for asylum was based on a fear that  if  he
    returned to Pakistan he would face mistreatment due to  the  murder  of
    his father who was a  prominent  political  figure  in  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant's application was refused by  Notice  of  Refusal  dated  1st
    October 2014.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Jacobs-Jones at Hatton Cross on 17th December 2014.  In a
    determination promulgated on 19th January 2014 the  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed on both asylum and human rights grounds and the Appellant
    was found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 4. On 4th February 2015  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended that the judge had erred in  failing
    to make any,  or  any  proper,  findings  on  issues  material  to  the
    Appellant's core claim,  had  failed  to  take  into  account  relevant
    evidence and had failed to assess the  Appellant's  claim  with  strict
    reference to the country information.

 5. On 16th February 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted permission
    to appeal.  Judge Ford noted that the Grounds of  Appeal  may  show  an
    arguable material error of law in that having:-

      a) found that the Appellant's father was a general councillor; and

      b) accepted the Appellant's account of his father being killed, and

      c) accepted that there was background evidence of political killing in
         Pakistan,

    that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  gone  on  to  find  that  the
    Appellant had exaggerated his father's importance and been inconsistent
    in his account of what had  happened  after  the  Appellant's  father's
    death.  Judge  Ford  considered  the  basis  on  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had made those adverse credibility findings may be  open
    to challenge.

 6. On 2nd March 2015 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule  24.   The  Rule  24  response  comments  that  in  a
    comprehensive determination the judge considered all the  evidence  and
    after having analysed the evidence made well-reasoned findings of fact.
     The Secretary of State contends that Judge Ford in granting permission
    to appeal simply states that the basis which  the  judge  made  adverse
    findings may be open to challenge.  The  Secretary  of  State  contends
    that there is no  reason  for  reaching  that  conclusion  because  the
    grounds which the judge summarises at  paragraph  3  of  the  grant  of
    permission are no more than the  mere  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    findings.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant  is  represented  by  his
    instructed Counsel Miss Hashmi and the Secretary of  State  appears  by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.



Submissions/Discussions

 8. Miss Hashmi relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  She goes  on  to  contend
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has not considered the issue of  the
    possibility of internal relocation and has merely attached reference to
    this as an appendix to the decision.  She submits that there has been a
    finding of fact that the Appellant's father was  a  general  councillor
    and that he was killed for political reasons.

 9. Mr McVeety quickly responds by stating that it is  incumbent  upon  the
    Tribunal to look at the grant of permission and that it has never  been
    accepted that the killing of the Appellant's father was  for  political
    reasons.  He criticises the grant of  permission.   In  particular  the
    specific reference:

         "Judge Jacobs went on to find that the  Appellant  had  exaggerated
         his father's importance and been inconsistent  in  his  account  of
         what had happened after the Appellant's father's death.  The  basis
         upon which he made those adverse credibility findings may  be  open
         to challenge."

    Mr McVeety submits that it would  be  necessary  for  such  credibility
    findings to be so perverse as to make the First-tier decision untenable
    and that that threshold is nowhere near approached.  He points out that
    Judge Ford in granting permission has not  said  why  the  grounds  are
    arguable and he submits that there is nothing wrong with what the judge
    said.

10. Mr McVeety goes further for  he  then  sets  out  in  some  detail  his
    critical response at paragraph 4 of the Grounds  of  Appeal  i.e.  that
    paragraph and subparagraph where it is submitted that the  judge  erred
    in making adverse findings.  Mr McVeety addresses paragraphs  4(i)  and
    (ii) together.  These are the paragraphs relating  to  the  Appellant's
    father's  political  career  and  position.   He   submits   that   the
    allegations made  therein  are  selectively  taken  and  refers  me  to
    paragraphs 20 and 21 of Judge Jacob-Jones' determination  pointing  out
    that the finding was that the Appellant's father was not  so  prominent
    as  claimed,  that  finding  was  not  challenged  by  the  Appellant's
    representatives.  He submits that the judge  made  an  overall  finding
    based on a reasoned analysis that the Appellant's  father  was  not  as
    political "as was claimed by the Appellant and that the allegation made
    by the Appellant's representatives in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  has  no
    merit".

11. As to the contention at 4(iii) that the judge had speculated as to  the
    reasons of the father's death without considering the evidence  in  the
    round and without reference to country information  Mr  McVeety  points
    out that that is not true and refers me to paragraphs 24 and 30 of  the
    determination submitting that therein  the  judge  had  spelt  out  the
    evidence, that he had addressed the  issue  and  that  the  ground  put
    forward is completely  misleading.   He  turns  to  the  submission  at
    paragraph 4(iv) relating to the attack on the Appellant's  father.   He
    points out that the final sentence therein in the grounds which states:
    "Whilst the judge considered his account of who attacked the  Appellant
    to be inconsistent the judge failed  to  consider  that  the  Appellant
    clarified in oral evidence before  the  Tribunal  that  these  men  had
    organised the attack" is not what the judge had said.  He submits  that
    the  judge  has  not  even  made  a  finding  and  refers  me  to   the
    determination and  submits  that  there  is  no  issue  of  consistency
    therefore no error and points out that the judge  did  not  hold  these
    events against the Appellant when reaching his decision.

12. Turning to paragraph 4(v) Mr McVeety asked me to read the determination
    in particular paragraphs 22 and 23 pointing out that  it  says  therein
    that the Appellant's father was involved in  politics  and  it  is  the
    Appellant himself who said this.  Further,  in  response  to  paragraph
    4(vii) Mr McVeety points  out  that  the  judge  has  referred  to  the
    political violence and that he considers the challenge to be insincere.
     He points out that documents had been provided saying that the  police
    had taken witness statements after the murder and  that  evidence  from
    the Appellant's representatives show the police had been  investigating
    it.

13. So far as Ground 4(viii) is  concerned  and  the  contention  that  the
    Appellant was found by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    to be eternally consistent in his claims to the events of 2nd September
    2014 he points out that that is of little relevance  and  it  does  not
    raise any new inconsistency argument.

14. In  response  Miss  Hashmi  notes  the  concerns  about  the  grant  of
    permission and reminds me that a councillor is a Member of Parliament -
    something which Mr McVeety accepts on behalf of the Secretary of State.
     She acknowledges that the grounds are selective but having  found  the
    evidence to be politically motivated she contends that  the  judge  has
    not addressed the issues in particular  that  of  internal  relocation.
    She points out that there is corruption within the  police  service  in
    Pakistan and the fact that they are investigating the matter really  is
    of little assistance.

15. In response Mr McVeety states that the case law supports the  claim  of
    sufficiency of protection and whilst he  acknowledges  that  relocation
    has not been considered by the judge, that is quite simply because  the
    judge has not found the Appellant to be credible.  He submits  that  it
    is only appropriate to go on to  consider  relocation  if  there  is  a
    finding the Appellant is at risk in his own area and such a finding has
    not been made.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

16.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

17. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

18. This is a very well-constructed determination.  The judge has given  at
    paragraph  2  full  details  of  the  application  for  asylum  and  at
    paragraphs 3 to 5 considered the reasons for refusal and at paragraph 6
    the Grounds for Appeal.  Having heard the evidence the judge  has  made
    detailed findings set out at paragraphs 18 to 35.  I endorse the  views
    expressed in response to the Grounds of  Appeal  by  Mr  McVeety.   The
    judge has given full and comprehensive reasons at paragraphs 19  to  23
    as to why he did not find the Appellant to be a prominent politician in
    Pakistan.  Those were findings that he was not only  entitled  to  make
    but ones which he made after a full  and  detailed  assessment  of  the
    evidence.  When looked at in the round  the  submissions  made  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal are nothing more than disagreement and argument.   It
    is perfectly reasonable for an Appellant's representative to make  such
    submissions providing they are sustainable.  In this case  when  cross-
    referenced back and looked at in context to the manner  in  which  this
    appeal was conducted and the findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge his analysis and reasoning is clear  and  thorough  and  he  made
    findings of fact which he  was  perfectly  entitled  to  based  on  the
    evidence that was before him.  Such conclusions consequently affect the
    credibility of the Appellant's claim.  A proper approach to credibility
    requires an assessment to the evidence and of the  general  claim.   In
    asylum claims, relevant factors are firstly the internal consistency of
    the claim; secondly the inherent plausibility of the claim and  thirdly
    the consistency  of  the  claim  with  external  factors  of  the  sort
    typically  found  in  country  guidance.   I  acknowledge  that  it  is
    theoretically correct that a Claimant need do no more  than  state  his
    claim but that claim still needs to be  examined  for  consistency  and
    inherent plausibility.  This is an approach that has, I  am  satisfied,
    been fully and properly adopted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in
    this matter.

19. The decision was one that was proper and open for the  judge  to  make.
    The judge has acknowledged that the Appellant's father was  killed  but
    it has not been shown to the First-tier Tribunal's satisfaction that he
    was killed by political opponents and the judge has set out his reasons
    for this in detail at paragraph 29 and the judge has made  findings  of
    fact at paragraph 31 which he  was  perfection  entitled  to  that  the
    Appellant did not tell the truth as to why  he  left  Pakistan  on  6th
    September 2013.

20. As to the issue of relocation, whilst  I  accept  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has not addressed this issue that  in  itself  does  not
    constitute a material error of law because in  this  instant  case  the
    judge had  made  adverse  findings  of  fact  and  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's testimony.  Whilst it might have been good practice to have
    put an additional sentence in it was not incumbent upon the judge to do
    so and his failure to do so bearing in mind his previous solid findings
    of fact and credibility means that the failure to  address  this  issue
    does not in any way disclose a material error of law.

21. For all the above reasons this is a sound decision which  discloses  no
    material error of law and the appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

