
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08540/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd July 2016                             |On 5th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     ASD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Ennals of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 9th November 2015.

 2. The Appellant is an Iranian citizen born in November 1964  who  claimed
    asylum fearing persecution in Iran because he had  publically  insulted
    Islam, and while in the United Kingdom had converted to Christianity.

 3. On 18th May 2015 the Respondent decided that the Appellant would not be
    at risk if returned to Iran and  therefore  decided  that  he  was  not
    entitled to a grant of  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection,  and  his
    removal from the United Kingdom would  not  breach  any  of  his  human
    rights protected by the 1950 European Convention on Human  Rights  (the
    1950 Convention).

 4. The Appellant's appeal was heard by the FtT on 6th  November  2015  and
    dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon three grounds which may be summarised as follows.

 6. Firstly it was contended that the judge had not  made  clear  findings,
    and had in fact made conflicting findings as to whether  the  Appellant
    had publically insulted Islam.

 7. Secondly it was contended that the FtT  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claimed conversion  to  Christianity  are  superficial  and
    perfunctory, and the FtT failed to take into account the evidence of  a
    church leader who attended the hearing to give evidence.   In  addition
    the FtT failed to take into account objective evidence that  Christians
    who have converted from Islam are at real risk of persecution in Iran.

 8. Thirdly the FtT misapplied SB (risk on return - illegal exit)  Iran  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00053 when considering the risk faced by the Appellant  on
    return to Iran.  Being accused of anti-Islamic  conduct  constitutes  a
    significant risk factor.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Parkes and I  set  out  below
    the grant of permission in part;

         2.   The judge found that the Appellant had not shown that  he  had
             genuinely converted to Christianity and that at best he was to
             be regarded as an "ordinary convert" and that he would not  be
             at risk in Iran for that reason or for having left illegally.

         3.   The grounds argue that the judge found  that  the  Appellant's
             account of the argument with his family plausible but went  on
             to find that the event did not happen.  It is also argued that
             the findings  in  relation  to  his  claimed  conversion  were
             perfunctory and that evidence from the  church  had  not  been
             considered.  It followed that he would be at risk on return.

         4.   The findings in relation to the argument with the  Appellant's
             family may be contradictory or the judge may have  found  that
             the argument occurred but not in public  as  he  had  claimed.
             However, it is not at all clear what the judge found  as  that
             forms part of the basis for the findings in  relation  to  his
             conversion and those findings are similarly affected.

         5.   The grounds are arguable and permission to appeal is granted.

10. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending in summary that the FtT directed itself  appropriately
    and did not err in law.

11. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. There was no attendance by the Appellant  or  his  representatives.   A
    telephone call made by the Tribunal  to  the  representatives  revealed
    that they, although notice of the hearing had been sent to them and  to
    the Appellant, had not appreciated that the hearing was to  take  place
    on 22nd July 2016.

13. I decided, following an indication given by Mr McVeety, that  it  would
    be appropriate and in the interests of  justice  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing notwithstanding that the Appellant and his representatives  had
    failed to attend.  In reaching this decision I took into  account,  not
    only the indication given by Mr McVeety that he would be conceding that
    the FtT had erred in law, but also took into account  rule  38  of  the
    2008 Rules, which provides that the Upper Tribunal may proceed  with  a
    hearing in a party's absence, if satisfied  that  the  party  has  been
    notified of the hearing, and that it is in the interests of justice  to
    proceed with the hearing.

14. Therefore I heard oral submissions from Mr McVeety who advised that  he
    did not rely upon the rule 24 response.  Mr McVeety,  very  fairly  and
    quite properly in my view, accepted that the FtT had in fact  erred  in
    law as contended in the grounds seeking permission to appeal.

15. Mr McVeety suggested that the decision of the FtT be set aside, and the
    appeal remitted back to the FtT to be heard afresh.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. With reference to the first ground of appeal, I find that the FtT erred
    in law by failing to make clear findings.   The  Appellant's  case  was
    that he was involved in a heated verbal  altercation  with  his  wife's
    family  in  connection  with  a  property  dispute,  during  which   he
    publically insulted Islam.

17. The FtT found at paragraph 22 that the account was plausible.

18. However in paragraph 25 the FtT finds  that  "in  the  absence  of  any
    corroboration for the incident" it  is  not  accepted  that  the  event
    happened.

19. There are therefore apparently  unresolved  conflicting  findings,  and
    inadequate reasons are given for concluding that the Appellant did  not
    publically insult Islam.  This is material,  as  the  Appellant  claims
    that it was this incident that put him at risk in Iran and  caused  him
    to flee.

20. Referring to the second ground of appeal,  the  FtT  does  not  provide
    adequate reasons for discounting the evidence of the church leader  who
    attended the hearing, to confirm the Appellant's baptism on  28th  June
    2015, and his genuine conversion.

21. In addition, the FtT failed to address and  analyse  material  evidence
    that was before it.  The Appellant's bundle contained extracts from the
    Respondent's own guidance on Christians and Christian converts in Iran.
     In summary section 1.3.3 of that guidance (page 30 of the  Appellant's
    bundle) states that Christians who have converted  from  Islam  are  at
    risk of  harm  from  the  state  authorities  as  they  are  considered
    apostates, a criminal offence in Iran.  Christian converts are said  to
    face physical attacks, harassment, surveillance, arrest and  detention,
    as well as torture and ill-treatment in detention.

22. Section 1.4 of the Respondent's guidance (page 31  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle) states that the right of Muslims to change  their  religion  is
    not recognised under Sharia law.  The religious conversion  of  Muslims
    is illegal in Iran.  Christians who have converted from  Islam  are  at
    real risk of persecution in Iran, and a grant of asylum is likely to be
    appropriate.

23. The above is independent evidence that was before the  FtT,  who  found
    firstly that the Appellant had not proved he had  genuinely  converted,
    and secondly if the conversion was genuine, the Appellant was  only  an
    'ordinary convert'.

24. The evidence of the church leader is relevant as to whether there is  a
    genuine conversion, and the independent evidence  in  the  Respondent's
    own guidance is relevant if the  Appellant  is  found  to  be  only  an
    'ordinary convert'.   The  FtT  has  not  given  adequate  reasons  for
    disregarding this evidence.

25. As I find a material error of law in relation to the first two grounds,
    it is not necessary to go on and consider the third ground of appeal.

26. It is accepted by the Respondent that the decision of the FtT is unsafe
    and therefore the decision is set aside with no findings preserved.

27. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back to
    the FtT because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding  that
    will be necessary in order for this decision to be re-made.

28. The appeal will be heard by the FtT at the  Manchester  Hearing  Centre
    and the parties will be advised of the time and  date  in  due  course.
    The appeal is to be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge Ennals.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of fact preserved.
Anonymity

The FtT made no anonymity direction, but as this  is  an  asylum  appeal,  I
believe it appropriate to make an anonymity order pursuant  to  rule  14  of
The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   Unless  and  until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date         25th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.






Signed                              Date         25th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
