

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08802/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Crown Court           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18 March 2016                          |On 1 April 2016                  |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [m f]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person (Unrepresented)
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on [ ]  1990.  She  arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 10 October 2011, with a  Tier  4  student  visa  valid
until 12 December 2012. She claimed asylum on 9 June  2014.  Her  claim  was
refused on 24 September 2014 and the same day a decision was made to  remove
her from the United Kingdom.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  her  appeal  was  heard
before the First-tier Tribunal  on  15  January  2015  and  dismissed  in  a
decision promulgated on 11 February 2015. Permission to appeal to the  Upper
Tribunal was granted on 10 April 2015.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claims to be at risk on  return  to  Pakistan.  Her  claim  as
initially stated was that, as a result of her marriage in 25 March  2012  to
a man whom she had met on the train when travelling to college  in  the  UK,
her parents wanted to kill her because she had  married  outside  her  caste
and had failed to marry the man chosen by her father. She claimed  that  she
had argued with her husband and he had hit her and thrown  her  out  of  the
house several months ago and that  she  had  then  gone  to  stay  with  her
brother until recently when she had to move out  because  her  sister-in-law
did not want her there.

The respondent, in refusing the  appellant's  claim,  did  not  believe  her
account of her relationship because she had failed to provide  any  evidence
of the marriage and knew little about  her  husband.  Although  her  claimed
husband was named on the birth certificate of her son  as  his  father,  the
respondent did not consider that that was evidence of  the  marriage.  Given
that the appellant's evidence was that she went to live  with  her  brother,
the respondent rejected her account of being at risk of  an  honour  killing
at the hands  of  her  family.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
appellant would be at risk on return to Pakistan and considered that in  any
event there was a sufficiency of protection available to her  and  that  she
could also safely relocate to another part of Pakistan.

The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  her
appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Siddiqi  on  15  January
2015. The appellant was not represented before the Tribunal. By the time  of
the hearing, the appellant's claim had changed. She  claimed  that  she  had
been unable to obtain proof of her marriage from the various mosques in  her
area and that, as a result, her  family  believed  that  she  had  not  been
married and that her son was illegitimate. She  was  therefore  at  risk  on
return to Pakistan from her family and the wider community as  an  unmarried
mother.


Judge Siddiqi found the appellant's account to be  lacking  in  credibility.
She did not believe  the  appellant's  initial  claim  to  be  credible  and
rejected her account of her relationship with the father of her son,  noting
the lack of documentary evidence to support her claim  to  have  lived  with
him.  She did not accept the appellant's account of threats from members  of
her family, she  did  not  accept  her  account  of  the  breakdown  of  her
relationship with her family and she did not accept that the  appellant  was
at risk from her family. She found that the  appellant  could  rely  on  the
support of her family on return to Pakistan,  but  even  if  not,  that  she
could relocate to another part of the country.  The  judge  found,  further,
that the appellant's removal to Pakistan would  not  breach  her  Article  8
rights. Accordingly she dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal.  With  her  application  for   permission   she   submitted   some
documentary evidence which she stated proved that she had been  living  with
her former partner. She asserted that it would be difficult  to  survive  in
Pakistan as a single mother with a child.

Permission to appeal was granted on 10 April 2015.

Hearing and submissions

At the hearing, Ms Johnstone relied on the respondent's  rule  24  response,
whereby the respondent submitted that the judge was entitled to  reject  the
appellant's claim to have lived with her  former  partner,  when  there  was
documentary evidence, including her driving  licence  and  her  son's  birth
certificate, showing her to  have  been  living  with  her  brother  at  the
relevant time. The judge  was  entitled  to  make  the  adverse  credibility
findings that she did. The judge's finding, that the appellant would  be  at
no risk on return as a single mother with a child, was consistent  with  the
country guidance in SM (lone women - ostracism) (CG) [2016] UKUT 67.

The appellant, in response, submitted  that  she  had  not  previously  been
asked to provide proof of cohabitation with her former partner but  was  now
producing such proof. She would be at risk  in  Pakistan  on  the  basis  of
having had a baby outside marriage. She had believed herself to  be  married
but, having contacted the mullahs, now realised that she  had  been  tricked
and that the marriage was not registered anywhere. She produced a  different
copy of her driving licence showing her address as the same as that  of  her
former partner.

Consideration and findings.

Permission was granted on the grounds that the judge had arguably failed  to
consider the appellant's explanation for having changed  the  basis  of  her
claim and had failed to explain the  significance  of  whether  or  not  the
appellant had lived with her child's father when her  claimed  fear  was  in
fact of having had a child out of wedlock. However, on a close  and  careful
reading of all the evidence in this case, it is clear  that  the  change  in
the basis  of  the  appellant's  fear  and  the  lack  of  evidence  of  her
relationship with her child's father were significant matters, in that  they
undermined the credibility of her account of  her  family  circumstances  in
the UK, which in turn  undermined  her  account  of  the  breakdown  of  her
relationship with her family in the UK and Pakistan and the threats made  to
her.

It seems to me that the judge was entitled to draw adverse conclusions  from
the fact that the appellant, having initially based her claim entirely  upon
the threats from her family as a result of her marriage outside  her  caste,
then claimed  for  the  first  time  at  the  hearing  before  her  to  have
discovered that her marriage was not in fact registered and that she was  at
risk on the basis of having an illegitimate child.   That  was  particularly
so when the change to the basis of her fear came several  months  after  the
refusal of her claim,  and  further  to  the  respondent  pointing  out  the
absence of any evidence to show that there had been a  marriage.  The  judge
pointed out at [36(c)] that the appellant made no reference, in her  grounds
of appeal, to any threats from her family as a result of the discovery  that
she was not married and was entitled to expect that if there was  a  genuine
reason for the change in the  basis  of  the  appellant's  claimed  fear  of
return, the appellant would have referred to that and to her  status  as  an
unmarried mother of an illegitimate child, at  that  stage.  The  judge  was
entitled to conclude that the  appellant's  entire  claim,  as  regards  her
relationship and the threats from her family, had been fabricated,  and  was
accordingly entitled, in my view, to place no weight upon her new  claim  to
be at risk from her family.

Whilst it is the case that the judge  did  not  specifically  refer  to  the
appellant's circumstances in the context of the country  guidance,  I  would
agree with Ms Johnstone that, on the evidence before  her,  her  conclusions
were consistent with recent guidance in SM (lone  women  -  ostracism)  (CG)
[2016] UKUT 67. The judge, for the reasons cogently given,  did  not  accept
the appellant's account of  the  breakdown  of  her  relationship  with  her
family and accordingly considered that the appellant would have the  benefit
of their support on return. As such, she would  not  fall  within  the  risk
factors identified in SM. The judge found,  in  the  alternative,  that  the
appellant, being a  well-educated  woman,  would  be  able  to  re-establish
herself in another part of the country. For the reasons given,  and  on  the
basis of the limited and unreliable  evidence  before  her,  the  judge  was
entitled to conclude that the appellant had failed to demonstrate  that  she
would be at risk on return.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.






                               Signed


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
