

                                [pic]

 Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: AA/08454/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


 Heard at Field House
    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
 On 12 February 2016
     On 22 February 2016



                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                                     RS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)



             Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Mr R Sharma, counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
 Solicitors
 For the Respondent:   Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                         DECISION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Maka,  promulgated  on  2
     December 2015. Permission to appeal was granted on 7 January  2016  by
     FTTJ Osborne.




     Background


  2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  11  August  2014  with
     leave to enter as a visitor. She attended the Asylum Screening Unit in
     April 2015, whereby she applied for asylum.

  3. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that as a  Sunni  Muslim,
     she fears her family on account of her marriage to a Shia Muslim  man,
     namely HS. HS was residing at the time in the United Kingdom where  he
     was studying. In short, the appellant's  family  was  not  willing  to
     allow her to marry HS and arranged for her to marry  her  cousin,  KH,
     instead. When the  appellant  objected  to  marrying  KH,  her  father
     assaulted her and her mother. Thereafter, the  appellant  resumed  her
     work as a teacher and accountant and travelled to the United  Kingdom.
     Upon arriving in the United Kingdom, the appellant learned that HS  no
     longer  had  leave  to  remain.  The  appellant  became  pregnant  and
     underwent a religious marriage with HS in November 2014.

  4. The only aspect of the appellant's account, which was accepted by  the
     Secretary of State, was her nationality and place of birth.

  5. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the
     FTTJ heard evidence from the appellant and from HS. The FTTJ found the
     appellant's claim to lack credibility owing to her inability  to  give
     details, inconsistencies in the oral evidence, as well as a number  of
     implausible matters. In addition, the FTTJ noted  that  there  was  no
     documentary evidence before him to support the claim  that  HS  was  a
     Shia Muslim. The appellant's Article 8 claim was also  rejected,  both
     within and outside the Rules.


      Error of law


    6. Permission to appeal was sought, in essence, on the basis that it was
       arguable that the FTTJ misdirected himself in relation to the  manner
       in which he arrived at his credibility findings.

    7. The FTTJ granting permission did so on all grounds and  commented  as
       follows;

      "In an otherwise careful and  focused  decision  and  reasons,  it  is
nonetheless arguable that the     judge      erred in law at [65]  where  he
did not accept that the Appellant would describe herself      as  single  in
her visa application if she was at that time engaged to be married.  If  the
Appellant was engaged to be married then it is arguable that she was not  at
that time yet    married. The finding of the judge is     arguably  material
to his assessment of the Appellant's    credibility and in that  context  is
arguably    material to the Appellant's appeal generally."

    8. The Secretary of State's Rule 24 response of 13 January  2016  stated
       that the respondent opposed the appeal as it was considered that  the
       FTTJ appropriately directed himself. In addition, the  response  made
       reference to the numerous credibility findings made by the FTTJ other
       than those in the grounds. Reference was made to  VHR  (unmeritorious
       grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC);

      "Appeals should not be mounted on the basis of a  litany  of  forensic
criticisms of    particular  findings of the  First  Tier  Tribunal,  whilst
ignoring the basic legal test which the appellant  has to meet."


 The hearing


  9. Mr Sharma had not seen the Secretary of State's Rule  24  response.  I
     loaned him a copy from the file and  gave  him  time  to  consider  it
     before hearing from him. In summary, he submitted that  there  were  a
     number of material errors in the FTTJ's decision and reasons.

 10. While indicating that he relied upon the grounds of appeal as a whole,
     Mr Sharma focused on just two matters. The first was what he described
     as the FTTJ's conflation of religious and cultural matters at [60]  of
     the decision. He submitted that the appellant's evidence was that  her
     family was not culturally strict, in  that  they  allowed  her  to  be
     educated and to  work.   In  relation  to  the  second  matter,  which
     concerned the FTTJ's findings that there were inconsistencies  between
     the evidence of the appellant and her husband as to how they  met,  Mr
     Sharma asked me to find that their accounts  of  the  first  encounter
     with one another were not mutually exclusive and  that  there  was  no
     real inconsistency.

 11. Ms Fijiwala relied on the Rule 24 response as well as the decisions in
     VHR and VV(grounds of appeal) Lithuania  [2016]  UKUT  53  (IAC).  She
     argued that the grounds did not show an  error  of  law.  Ms  Fijiwala
     addressed each and every matter raised in the grounds and asked me  to
     find that the FTTJ's findings were sound. She also drew  my  attention
     to a number of core findings, which went unchallenged in the  grounds.
     One of those matters concerned the complete  absence  of  evidence  to
     support the claim that the appellant's husband was a Shia  Muslim,  at
     [70] of the decision and reasons. In addition, the FTTJ's findings  at
     [73]; that both the appellant and her husband were both Sunni  Muslims
     and that they were already married in Pakistan with  the  blessing  of
     their families.

 12. In response, Mr Sharma argued that at [72] the FTTJ had noted the lack
     of evidence of cohabitation and questioned why he would  need  to  see
     evidence of their relationship.  He referred  me  to  the  grounds  of
     appeal in  relation  to  the  oral  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's
     employment and the relevance of the address in the  visa  application.
     He maintained that the FTTJ's decision  was  inconsistent  as  between
     [52] and [34/35]. Mr Sharma submitted that the  FTT's  inference  that
     one of the first questions the appellant's parents would pose would be
     about religious background was incorrect  and  he  asserted  that  the
     difference between Sunni and Shia Muslims would be more of caste  than
     religion.

Decision on Error of Law

 13. I upheld the decision of the FTTJ  as  I  found  he  was  entitled  to
     conclude that the appellant's account was  not  credible.  The  FTTJ's
     alternative finding that the appellant could internally relocate  with
     her husband was also sound. My reasons are as follows.

 14. In reaching my decision, I have been guided by  the  decision  in  VV,
     with particular reference to the following part of the headnote;

      "(1) An application  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the  grounds  of
inadequacy of reasoning in the    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must
generally demonstrate by reference to the material  and    arguments  placed
before that Tribunal that  (a)  the  matter  involved  a  substantial  issue
between     the parties at first instance and (b) that the  Tribunal  either
failed to deal with that matter at      all, or gave reasons on  that  point
which are so unclear that they may well conceal an error of   law."

 15. I consider the grounds of appeal to be a  challenge  to  some  of  the
     reasons given by the FTTJ for finding the appellant's  account  to  be
     lacking in credibility. It is abundantly apparent in  this  case  that
     the FTTJ considered all the  evidence  before  him  in  his  carefully
     drafted and detailed decision and reasons. His findings  of  fact  are
     set out over 5 pages of the  decision,  between  paragraphs  [59]  and
     [78].

 16. The grounds criticise the FTTJ's findings at  [60]  of  the  decision,
     where he commented as follows; "I do not  accept  that  the  Appellant
     came from an extremely religious family. If that were the case,  I  do
     not find credible the fact her family allowed her  to  live  and  work
     away by herself for at least 2 years."  The  grounds  argue  that  the
     FTTJ's assumption that the commitment of the  appellant's  parents  to
     their Sunni  religious  views  meant  that  they  were  repressive  or
     misogynistic was a material misdirection. I have  had  regard  to  the
     FTTJ's record of the oral evidence, which was set out in his  decision
     between [34] to [57].  At [36] the  appellant  agreed,  during  cross-
     examination that "she was religious and her parents were  strict."  It
     was therefore the appellant's  own  evidence  that  her  parents  were
     strict and not an assumption made by the FTTJ.

 17. The grounds dispute the FTTJ's finding  that  the  appellant  and  her
     husband  had  given  inconsistent  evidence  regarding   their   first
     encounter. Rather than directly address the  inconsistencies  referred
     to in the decision, the grounds focus on the consistent aspects of the
     oral evidence. The grounds amount to no more than further  submissions
     on the issue and do not argue that the FTTJ failed to  deal  with  the
     issue  or  made  unclear  findings.  Nonetheless,  I  have   carefully
     considered the issue of the first encounter and whether the FTTJ erred
     in finding that there were inconsistencies.

 18. According to [35] of the decision, during her oral evidence before the
     FTTJ, the appellant stated that  the  first  time  she  spoke  to  her
     husband, he telephoned her and asked to speak to  "some  woman  called
     Sanja." The appellant had then hung up and  "told  him  not  to  phone
     again." The account of the appellant's husband is at [51] and he  told
     the FTTJ that he had called the appellant accidentally  and  asked  to
     speak to a man called  "Asif  Rashid."  He  further  stated  that  the
     appellant said that she could not hear him and "told him to call  back
     later."


 19. In these circumstances, the FTTJ did not err in  concluding  that  the
     evidence of the appellant and her husband as to their first  encounter
     was contradictory and according to the record of the hearing  set  out
     in the decision and reasons, no adequate explanation was  put  forward
     for this. I therefore do not accept Mr Sharma's  submission  that  the
     two accounts were not mutually exclusive.

 20. The grounds assert that the FTTJ gave inconsistent findings  regarding
     HS's studies. A casual reading of the decision shows this  not  to  be
     the case. At [62], the FTTJ was  focusing  on  the  appellant's  vague
     evidence regarding her husband's studies.  While  at  [70],  the  FTTJ
     noted the absence of evidence regarding  the  husband's  studies.  The
     FTTJ did not reject the claim that the husband was studying, after all
     he was known to have been granted leave to enter under Tier 4; it  was
     more that the  FTTJ  was  commenting  on  the  less  than  transparent
     immigration history of the husband as a somewhat  minor  part  of  his
     conclusion that he was not a witness of truth.

 21. The grounds disagree with the FTTJ's reluctance  to  accept  that  the
     appellant's parents would not have enquired of HS as to his  religious
     background when they spoke to him on the telephone.  I  find  that  it
     cannot be said that the FTTJ misdirected in this regard in view of the
     appellant's evidence that her family were  religious  and  strict.  Mr
     Sharma's submission, or perhaps unsupported opinion, as  to  Shia  and
     Sunni being caste issues rather than religious issues does not  assist
     in this matter.

 22. It was also open to the FTTJ to conclude that it  was  not  reasonably
     likely that the appellant would be able to return to working away from
     home after being beaten,  forcibly  engaged  and  considered  to  have
     dishonoured the family by wishing to marry a Shia Muslim.

 23. There is at first glance, some merit in  the  argument  regarding  the
     FTTJ's  mention  of  the  appellant's  marital  status  on  the   visa
     application form, where  she  described  herself  as  single.  If  the
     appellant's account were true, this indeed would have been  the  case.
     However, the FTTJ concluded that the appellant  had  not  provided  an
     honest account of her circumstances in Pakistan and he found that  she
     had, in reality, married her husband  in  Pakistan  and  came  to  the
     United Kingdom with the blessing of her family.  In  which  case,  the
     appellant ought to have given her marital status as married. The  FTTJ
     was correct to further note that the appellant's father  had  provided
     up-to-date bank documents as well as a supporting letter in  order  to
     support the visit visa application and that her husband's  cousin  had
     sponsored her visit (not her own cousin as  she  had  claimed  on  the
     VAF). Those findings indicate  that  the  appellant  did  not  flee  a
     violent family in Pakistan but misused the visit visa route  in  order
     to be reunited with her husband in the United Kingdom.

 24. As identified by Ms Fijiwala, there was no  challenge  to  the  FTTJ's
     findings at [70] that there was no evidence before him regarding  HS's
     claimed Shia beliefs or at [73] that both parties to the marriage were
     Sunni Muslims.

 25. The grounds argue at [71] that  the  FTTJ  fell  into  speculation  in
     rejecting the appellant's account  of  having  undergone  a  telephone
     marriage. However, the FTTJ was told of no reason for  not  having  an
     Islamic marriage in the United Kingdom. He was not told that this  was
     even attempted.

 26. There was no evidence from the Imam in Pakistan who was said  to  have
     conducted the Nikah. The grounds themselves fall into  speculation  in
     providing an explanation, which was not put forward at the hearing.

 27. At [76], the  FTTJ  put  aside  his  conclusions  on  credibility  and
     considered whether an internal  relocation  alternative  existed.   He
     concluded, in view of the fact that he rejected  the  claim  that  the
     appellant's relatives  were  influential  that  she  could  return  to
     Pakistan without her family's knowledge in the same  way  she  claimed
     she left.  There is no error in the FTTJ's approach to this issue

 28. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

 29. An anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ. I consider it appropriate
     that this be continued and  therefore  make  the  following  anonymity
     direction:

        "Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "


Conclusions


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
     the making of an error on a point of law.

     I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.



 Signed     Date: 14 February 2016


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara







