

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: aa/08413/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                            |Decision signed: 10.11.2014  |
|on 27.10.2014                                 |sent out: on 19.11.2014      |


                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN


                                  Between:

                                Sharif GHAZAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Daniel Bazini (counsel instructed by Leonard & Co)
For the respondent: Mr S Kandola


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1. This is an appeal, by the ,  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal (Judge Elisabeth Davidge), sitting at Newport on 2 May, to   an
   asylum and human rights appeal by a  citizen  of  Afghanistan,  who  she
   found was born on 10 April 1993. Permission was  granted  on  the  basis
   that the judge might have relied too much on things  the  appellant  did
   not mention at his screening interview on 5 April 2013, despite his  age
   at the time; and on the lack of support for his case from  his  brothers
   in this country.

2. The first point taken for the appellant was that, though the  judge  had
   made a finding of fact in the appellant's favour on his age at paragraph
   25, all she took from that at 26 was to say that it "... counts  to  his
   credit in the context of assessing credibility because I  find  that  he
   has not exercised deceit as the respondent thought". The suggestion  was
   that the judge should have added something about the need for caution in
   dealing with the appellant's evidence on the points in question, bearing
   in mind not only his age at the time, but that his source of information
   had been his mother and brother. I am satisfied there is nothing in this
   point: the very experienced judge  would  have  had  it  well  in  mind,
   especially as she had  just  made  a  finding  of  fact  on  it  in  the
   appellant's favour.

3. The next point was about the way the judge had treated the  evidence  of
   the 'country expert' Dr Antonio Giustozzi at paragraphs 27 - 35: as will
   already be clear from that,  she  had  dealt  with  it  in  considerable
   detail.  The  judge's  first  point,  at  paragraph  27,  was  that  the
   appellant's claim that his sister had been  under  pressure  from  their
   uncle to sign the land  transfer  was  contrary  to  what  the  'country
   expert' had said at paragraph 7 of his report:

       In Afghan inheritance law, sons inherit the property of  the  father.
       [The appellant's] mother could have  sold  or  transferred  the  land
       before he or his brothers reached the age of 18, but the uncle  might
       [my emphasis] not have dared to put pressure on  the  mother  because
       bullying a widow would also have been seen  very  negatively  in  the
       community and [the appellant] and his brothers could  have  contested
       the property transfer once over 18.

4. However, what the judge took from this at paragraphs 28 - 29 was not any
   reason to disbelieve the appellant on this point, but a basis for saying
   that the 'country expert's evidence did not add any weight to his on it.
   While Dr Giustozzi had expressed the opinion that the appellant's  claim
   was generally plausible, it was not unreasonable for the judge to  point
   out that his clearly knowledgeable evidence had shown  that  a  transfer
   made under these circumstances could have been contested later; so I  do
   not accept the criticism made of her on this either.

5. Next the judge pointed out,  at  paragraphs  30  -  31,  first  that  Dr
   Giustozzi had mentioned that  the  appellant's  brothers  were  in  this
   country; but in fact, according to him, two were in  Pakistan,  and  one
   was already over 18. This was a point the judge was  entitled  to  note;
   but it had no possible bearing, either on the appellant's credibility or
   Dr Giustozzi's expertise on Afghanistan, and there is nothing to suggest
   that she thought it did.

6. Then, at paragraph 32, the judge had pointed out that the appellant  had
   never said (see his statement, paragraphs 8 - 10)  that  his  uncle  had
   threatened to kill him, as Dr Giustozzi seemed  to  have  assumed.  Once
   again, this added nothing to the issues on hand.

7. The next point made by the judge on the 'country expert' evidence,  also
   at paragraph 32, was that a transfer of their shares by  the  appellant,
   or his  brothers,  would  not  have  disposed  of  their  four  sisters'
   respective half-shares. This too was correct, on Dr Giustozzi's  account
   of Afghan law.

8. Next the judge pointed out, at paragraph 34, that what Dr Giustozzi  had
   said about the involvement of the local politician Hajji Mohaqiq did not
   add to the appellant's credibility on this. It was  suggested  that  the
   judge should have given him credit for knowing about  Hajji  Mohaqiq  in
   the first place; but in my view that was a perfectly reasonable comment,
   which the judge was well entitled to make.

9. The judge's next point, at paragraphs 37 - 38, was  that  the  appellant
   had apparently said nothing about Hajji Mohaqiq at  his  age  assessment
   interview, and had said he had been learning English, as  he  wanted  to
   join his brothers in this country. The criticism on  this  is  that  the
   judge should have taken  no  account  at  all  of  the  report  on  that
   interview, since it was not 'Merton-compliant'. I see no real  force  in
   this; whatever the report's deficiencies as a finding on the appellant's
   age (on which after all the judge had found  in  his  favour),  she  was
   entitled to take account of it as a record of what he  had  said.  While
   the report was concerned with  his  age,  rather  than  his  history  in
   Afghanistan, there is nothing to show that the judge took undue  account
   of it in that light.

10. The final point was about the judge's treatment of the  previous  first-
   tier decision, made following a hearing on 4 October 2013, but later set
   aside by the Upper Tribunal on grounds partly relating to  the  lack  of
   any finding on the appellant's age. The judge noted the adverse findings
   made in the previous decision on his failure to  call  his  brothers  to
   support him, even though they were in this  country.  It  was  suggested
   that she was wrong to do so, as that decision had been set aside.

11. While there might have been something in that,  if  all  the  judge  was
   doing had been relying on the previous findings, it is quite clear  that
   this was a point on which she was entitled to, and did make her own.  It
   was an obvious point, and one which she did  not  need  to  put  to  the
   appellant himself. As she pointed out, he was represented before her, by
   no less a person than Mr Bazini, as it happened; but no explanation  was
   put forward, beyond the suggestion that his brothers had not  wanted  to
   come and give evidence  on  his  behalf.  To  put  it  as  neutrally  as
   possible, this begged a number of further questions. It follows  that  I
   reject all the manifold complaints made about the judge's decision.


Appeal


                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                                  10.11.2014


