
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08220/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 November 2013                            |16 January 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                   Ms A B
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss V Laughton, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In this determination, we refer to Ms A B as the appellant and  to  the
    Secretary of State  as  the  respondent.    Both  parties  appeal  with
    permission against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Tipping promulgated on 30  October  2012  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to remove her
    from the United Kingdom on the basis  that  she  was  not  entitled  to
    asylum but allowed the appeal on the grounds that to do so would be  in
    breach of Articles 3  and  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.   The
    appellant submits that her appeal should have been  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds; the respondent submits that the appeal should  not  have  been
    allowed on any basis.

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 June  2006  with  her
    husband and they were granted leave  to  enter  as  visitors  until  30
    September 2006.  They overstayed and on 23 August  2011  the  appellant
    claimed asylum, an application which was refused  on  6  October  2011.
    Her appeal against that decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malone  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  17  October  2011.
    Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  refused.   Further
    submissions were made by the appellant's representatives  and  although
    these  were  refused,  subsequently  permission  for  judicial   review
    decision was granted.  The respondent decided  to  accept  the  further
    submissions as  a  fresh  asylum  application.   That  application  was
    refused on 28 August 2012.

 3. The parties' cases are set out in considerable detail  in  the  witness
    statements, refusal letters and in the determination of Judge  Tipping,
    and there is no need to set them out here in detail.

 4. The appellant's case is that she  suffers  from  major  depression  and
    complex post-traumatic stress disorder as a  result  of  the  abuse  to
    which she has been subjected by her family in India.  It  is  her  case
    that she is at risk of  attack from them; in fact her  (elder)  brother
    and father have threatened to kill her should she return to India.

 5. The respondent's case is set out in two refusal letters dated 28 August
    2012 running to 43 pages and 20 pages.   Although  accepting  that  the
    appellant is suffering from  and  displaying  symptoms  of  depression,
    despair, distress, vulnerability and low mood, she did not  accept  the
    allegations of abuse to which the appellant had been subjected,  noting
    that Judge Malone had found the appellant not to be credible  and  that
    her claim for asylum had been fabricated.  She was not satisfied either
    that there are no effective mechanisms  to  protect  the  appellant  in
    India and considered it would not be a breach of the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations to remove her to India, it being reasonable to  expect  her
    to relocate within India.

 6. In summary, for the reasons set out in our  decision  of  26  September
    2013 we set aside the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Tipping
    dated 30 October 2012, with none of the findings being preserved except
    and so far as they relate to Dr Thomas's diagnosis of  the  appellant's
    condition.

 7. At the reconvened hearing on 5 November 2013 we heard evidence from the
    appellant's brother, Mr C, as well as Dr Thomas.

 8. We then heard submissions.  Mr Saunders relied on the  refusal  letters
    submitting that there was in this case no Convention reason, given that
    the appellant fears only her brother and wider  family.   He  submitted
    that although there might possibly be an Article 3 claim, or an Article
    8 claim, that was not  a  tenable  position  as  there  are  facilities
    available to the appellant on return to India.  He sought to rely  also
    on the manner of the disclosure of the abuse which  militates  strongly
    against the appellant's claim and whilst Dr Thomas's evidence was  that
    such abuse often remains hidden, that was a matter  for  the  panel  to
    assess.

 9. Mr Saunders referred us to the Operational  Guidance  Note,  submitting
    that the notes in this case from the GP indicated  a  passive  suicidal
    ideation and that there would behelp available  for  the  appellant  in
    India.  Turning to the evidence of Mr C, Mr  Saunders  said  that  this
    evidence should be treated with caution,

10. Miss Laughton relied on her  skeleton  argument,  submitting  that  the
    appellant's credibility and the addition of new material  can  only  be
    assessed in the light of the  medical  evidence  from  Dr  Thomas.  She
    submitted that Dr Thomas's evidence was reliable and that she was in  a
    position different  from  a  treating  doctor,  and  had  now  had  the
    advantage of observing the appellant on four separate occasions.

11. Ms Laughton submitted that viewed as a whole the discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's evidence were minor and that the expert reports explain any
    apparent inconsistency.  She  submitted  that  the  credibility  points
    raised by the respondent had been fully addressed by the appellant.

12. Ms Laughton submitted that the State would not offer protection to  the
    appellant because she is a woman and accordingly, on  that  basis,  she
    was a member of a social group.  She submitted that the appellant is at
    risk of violence from family, that violence  being  serious  enough  to
    constitute persecution; that there was in  reality  no  sufficiency  of
    protection for the appellant nor would  internal  flight  be  available
    here, given the appellant's particular circumstances.

13. We then reserved our determination.

Decision and Reasons

14. The starting point in this case must be the decision  of  Judge  Malone
    and we have approached that  decision  in  light  of  the  decision  in
    Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702.  We accept that Judge Malone  found  the  appellant  not  to  be
    credible, and that is a starting point. We accept that the  appellant's
    case is now substantially different from that put before  Judge  Malone
    but there  has,  however,  been  a  substantial  amount  of  subsequent
    evidence, and medical reports.  This evidence could have been  produced
    before, and we accordingly treat it with caution, but for  the  reasons
    set out below we are persuaded that the late  disclosure  is  explained
    both by the nature of the abuse suffered, which is more extensive  than
    that disclosed to Judge Malone,  and  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
    psychiatric illness.  We have also,  again  for  the  reasons  set  out
    below, come to a different view of the appellant's credibility.

15. Since Judge Malone's determination the appellant has  been  interviewed
    and observed by Dr Rachel Thomas on four separate occasions  which  has
    led to the production of four reports.  As  noted  above  the  accepted
    diagnosis of the appellant's condition is that she  has  complex  post-
    traumatic stress disorder with severe panic disorder, and suffers  from
    moderately  severe  major  depressive  disorder  now   with   psychotic
    features.

16.  We  are  satisfied  that  Dr  Thomas,  who  is  a  chartered  clinical
    psychologist and psychoanalytic therapist with extensive experience  in
    trauma cases and who works  at  the  Tavistock  Clinic,  is  an  expert
    witness on whom we may rely.  Dr Thomas has now given evidence and been
    subjected to cross-examination both before Judge Tipping and before  us
    and we consider, as did Judge Tipping, that her evidence and views have
    not been shaken by cross-examination.

17. Whilst we note the submission by the respondent in the  refusal  letter
    [36] that Dr  Thomas's  assessment  should  have  been  limited  to  an
    assessment of the appellant's medical or mental condition, we  consider
    that it was open to  the  doctor  to  consider  a  possibility  of  the
    appellant fabricating symptoms  and  consistency  with  claimed  events
    which is an area within her area of  expertise.   In  essence  what  Dr
    Thomas was being asked to do was to  make  an  assessment  of  how  the
    diagnosis would affect the appellant's ability to  recall  consistently
    what had happened to her and to identify the difficulties she may  have
    in giving an accurate retelling of  events  as  they  related  to  her.
    Given that both of these matters can flow from psychological conditions
    it was open to Dr Thomas, and indeed was incumbent on her, to give such
    an assessment.

18. We do not accept the assertion of the respondent  that  Dr  Thomas  has
    been partial. She has, we accept, taken a view that the appellant needs
    support and therapy, but that is not, we consider, anything  more  than
    the  professional  commitment  to  be  expected  from  an   experienced
    psychologist.  She  has,  in  her  reports,  shown  a  proper  clinical
    detachment which we find  has  not  been  affected  by  any  subjective
    concern for the appellant.

19. We accept Dr Thomas' evidence that she has  experience  of  people  who
    have tried to pretend psychological illness and that it would  be  very
    difficult, if not impossible, for a lay person to  feign  psychological
    illness given that they  would  have  to  feign  clusters  of  multiple
    symptoms. This would be difficult for a lay person who would  not  know
    the manner and patterns of symptoms in which the illness that they were
    attempting to portray would manifest themselves.  Further, there is  no
    indication  that  Dr  Thomas's  diagnosis  is  inconsistent  with   the
    observations of the  appellant's  GP  who  has  seen  her  on  numerous
    occasions.   We  note  also,  that  Dr  Thomas's  diagnosis  has   been
    consistent  throughout,  albeit  that  the  appellant's  symptoms  have
    worsened more recently.

20. We are satisfied from Dr Thomas's report that  the  appellant's  manner
    has been entirely consistent with someone who has suffered complex  and
    severe trauma; who  suffers  from  depression  secondary  to  extremely
    frightening,  cumulatively  damaging  life   events;   who   has   been
    recurrently traumatised and  hit;  has  suffered  excessive  repetitive
    trauma and abuse.  We note also from the  appellant's  medical  records
    maintained by  her  GP  in  the  United  Kingdom  support  Dr  Thomas's
    diagnosis, although, naturally, they are not as detailed as Dr  Thomas'
    reports.

21. We accept that, as Miss Laughton submitted,  the  relationship  between
    the appellant and her brother  is  somewhat  strained.   We  intend  no
    disrespect to either in concluding that their relationship is not  that
    close and is strained  due  to  the  appellant  being  traumatised  and
    seriously psychiatrically unwell.

22. In her second and subsequent reports Dr Thomas has set out a sufficient
    and adequate rebuttal of the points made against her by the respondent.



23. We have considered the evidence of Mr C and find that he is someone  on
    whose evidence we can rely.  We accept that he  has  provided  evidence
    that the appellant has only one elder brother and that he is a  younger
    brother.  He has confirmed the appellant's account  that  their  father
    was violent and would beat the appellant, as would their elder  brother
    A.  He also confirms the appellant's evidence that she  was  beaten  by
    her husband, in that he describes  the  appellant  having  bruises  and
    sometimes a black eye when she was living with  her  husband.   He  has
    also confirmed that the family believe that she has  brought  shame  on
    them by separating from her husband and has also confirmed the  threats
    made to her by their father and A.

24. We accept that the respondent has identified a  substantial  number  of
    apparent discrepancies in the appellant's account of what has  happened
    to her both in India and in the United Kingdom.  These are set  out  in
    considerable detail in  the  refusal  letters,  as  are  the  rebuttals
    provided in the statements from the appellant dated 26 January 2012 and
    10 October 2012.  We do not consider that  any  purpose  is  served  by
    setting them out here in extensive detail.

25. The appellant has explained satisfactorily the discrepancies insofar as
    the respondent alleges them in respect of the number  of  siblings  she
    has and in relation to the older brother A when viewed in the light  of
    the observation from Dr Thomas that  the  appellant's  psychiatric  ill
    health makes it difficult, if not impossible,  for  her  accurately  to
    recall details.  Bearing in mind the lower standard of proof and  given
    the extent to which her  account  is  in  its  core  confirmed  by  the
    evidence both of Dr Thomas and the appellant's younger brother,  we  do
    not consider that the apparent discrepancies are material and  we  find
    that we are satisfied that the appellant was physically abused  by  her
    father and later her husband; that she separated from her husband; and,
    that her father and brother, A, have made threats to kill her were  she
    to return to her home area.



Conclusions

26. On the basis of the facts that we have found, we are satisfied that the
    appellant is at risk on return to India in her  home  area.  We  accept
    that as she has suffered severe abuse at the hands of her  husband  she
    could not return to him or to his family and we accept that  she  could
    not return to her parental family given that she is  viewed  as  having
    brought shame on them. Given the actions of her father and brother A in
    the past, we consider that the appellant would be at  significant  risk
    of violence from either or both of them.  We find  that  there  are  no
    other relatives to whom she could turn for support, nor  friends.   She
    does, we accept, have two sons who are teenagers but we find that  they
    are being looked after by her family and  are  not  in  a  position  to
    assist her.

27. We conclude, therefore,  that  the  appellant  could  not  return  home
    without the risk of being attacked by her  family.  We  find  that  the
    severity of the likely attacks is serious  enough  to  constitute  both
    persecution and engage article 3 of the  Human  Rights  Convention.  We
    have therefore considered what other options would be open to her, that
    is, protection from the authorities and/or relocation.

28. The appellant is not at risk from the State, but there are  significant
    factors in her case which make it unlikely, if not impossible, for  her
    to access support, not least of which is her psychiatric illness  which
    makes it difficult for her to explain what  has  happened  to  her  and
    would inhibit significantly her ability to engage with  the  police  in
    India.

29. We accept from the OGN and also from  the  expert  report  (Appellant's
    bundle, 255ff) that domestic violence continues  to  be  a  problem  in
    India  and  that  whilst  domestic  violence,  cruelty   and   unlawful
    harassment is criminalised, it continues despite legislative efforts to
    combat it. There is significant evidence (see OGN at 3.13.18) that  the
    police are reluctant to register complaints of violence  against  women
    and there are reports that the police themselves  are  perpetrators  of
    sexual abuse.  We consider that this is consistent with the  report  of
    the expert which indicates that the police are frequently unwilling  to
    involve themselves in what they see is a private matter  and  sometimes
    refuse to register complaints.  The conclusion reached in the OGN is as
    follows:-

    3.13.9 Those experiencing or fearing domestic violence or  other  forms
    of gender based violence are able to seek protection  from  the  Indian
    authorities. However, given the lack  of  law  enforcement  safeguards,
    including  the  refusal  to  register  domestic  violence   complaints,
    discriminatory attitudes held by the  police,  failures  in  conducting
    effective investigations and corruption, each case should be considered
    on its individual merits to assess whether effective protection will be
    provided. Additionally, some women's ability to access  this  help  and
    assistance may be further limited by such factors  as  their  location,
    lack of literacy and lack of awareness of their rights in what  remains
    a patriarchal society

30. This is consistent with the evidence in  the  appellant's  bundle  that
    domestic violence is widespread (pages 260, 320 341); that  the  police
    are reluctant to register complaints of violence  against  women  (290-
    291); that battered women are usually returned to their  abused  family
    members of reconciliation (290, 364)

31. As a single woman without education and  with  significant  mental  ill
    health it would be unduly harsh to expect her to relocate,  given  that
    she would not be able to go to stay with extended family or friends and
    would not be able to access treatment for  her  continuing  psychiatric
    ill health without significant difficulty. We accept also  Dr  Thomas's
    conclusions that even if the  appellant  did  not  commit  suicide  her
    mental health would on return to India deteriorate to  such  an  extent
    that she would be unable to support herself as a lone  woman  and  that
    she would not have the psychological wherewithal to  make  use  of  the
    refuges                            in                             India





                                        as her psychiatric  state  will  be
    too acute to enable her to do so. Further, we note the evidence of  the
    expert, Ms Khan, which was not directly challenged by  the  respondent,
    that (AB, 271) that the help given by shelters is temporary in  nature,
    and neither shelters nor local NGOs would be able to  assist  with  her
    mental health needs, or with finding employment.

32. We find, bearing this in mind, that given this  appellant's  particular
    vulnerability, that she would not be able to rely on the protection  of
    the police, nor be able to pursue  legal  remedies.  We  consider  that
    given the considerable  vulnerability  of  the  appellant  due  to  her
    psychiatric illness, her functional illiteracy and lack  of  education,
    facts which we accept, she is unlikely to be able to  access  effective
    protection.

33. In assessing whether she faces ill-treatment for a  convention  reason,
    we bear in  mind  that  she  is  a  muslim  woman  from  a  traditional
    background. She has been ostracised by her family, and is seen by  them
    as a source of shame, given that her marriage has failed.

34. The House of Lords addressed the issue of particular  social  group  in
    Fornah & K v SSHD [2006] UKHL 46. Lord Bingham set out  the  provisions
    in the Qualification Directive and then commented [16]:


          Reasons for persecution
          I  Member States shall take the following elements into account
          when assessing the reasons for persecution ...
          (d)  a group shall be considered to form a particular social group
          where in particular:
          [(i)]  members of that group share an innate characteristic, or a
          common background that cannot be changed, or share a
          characteristic or belief that is so fundamental to identity or
          conscience that a person should not be forced to renounce it, and
          [(ii)]  that group has a distinct identity in the relevant
          country, because it is perceived as being different by the
          surrounding society;
          [(iii)]  depending on the circumstances in the country of origin,
          a particular social group might include a group based on a common
          characteristic of sexual orientation. Sexual orientation cannot be
          understood to include acts considered to be criminal in accordance
          with national law of the Member States: Gender related aspects
          might be considered, without by themselves alone creating a
          presumption for the applicability of this Article."
       Read literally, this provision is in no way inconsistent with the
       trend of international authority. When assessing a claim based on
       membership of a particular social group national authorities should
       certainly take the matters listed into account. I do not doubt that
       a group should be considered to form a particular social group
       where, in particular, the criteria in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii)
       are both satisfied. Sub-paragraph (iii) is not wholly clear to me,
       but appears in part to address a different aspect. If, however, this
       article were interpreted as meaning that a social group should only
       be recognised as a particular social group for purposes of the
       Convention if it satisfies the criteria in both of sub-paragraphs
       (i) and (ii), then in my opinion it propounds a test more stringent
       than is warranted by international authority. In its published
       Comments on this Directive (January 2005) the UNHCR adheres to its
       view that the criteria in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) should be
       treated as alternatives, providing for recognition of a particular
       social group where either criterion is met and not requiring that
       both be met.

35. We accept that having been subjected to domestic violence is capable of
    being an innate characteristic (see In re B   [2005] 1  WLR  1063,  per
    Baroness Hale at [37]) as would, for that matter, women  who  had  been
    separated from their husbands. That is not  something  which  could  be
    changed.  We accept also the submission  that,  on  the  basis  of  the
    expert evidence of Ms Khan that separated women in India  are  seen  as
    distinct and are stigmatised by the community  in  general.  We  accept
    that, and the shame she is felt to have brought are why she faces  ill-
    treatment, and also why  she  would  not  obtain  assistance  from  the
    authorities.

36. Further, while the factual matrix here is slightly different from  that
    identified in BK  India,  we  consider  that  women  from  her  society
    ostracised by family would be treated as different, and thus constitute
    a particular social group.  We  make  it  clear  that  it  is  not  the
    ostracism  which  constitutes  persecution,  but  it  is  the  lack  of
    assistance that the appellant is likely to receive from the Authorities
    which flows from that.

37. On either of these bases, the appellant faces ill-treatment on  account
    of her membership of a particular social  group.  Accordingly,  we  are
    satisfied that the appellant has a well-founded fear of persecution  in
    India and that returning her there would be in  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations pursuant to the Refugee Convention.   It  follows
    from this that her return to India would  also  be  in  breach  of  the
    United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Article 3 of the Human  Rights
    Convention.

38.  For  these  reasons,  this  appeal  falls  to  be  allowed.   In   the
    circumstances therefore it is unnecessary for us  to  consider  whether
    the appellant is at risk of suicide on return  to  India.  As  we  have
    found that she is entitled to refugee status, she is  not  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection.

Anonymity

39. We have decided to maintain the  anonymity  direction  in  this  matter
    given the likely serious, detrimental effect on the appellant were  her
    identity to become known already serious mental  ill-health.  For  that
    reason, we have referred to the witnesses of fact (as  opposed  to  the
    expert witnesses) by letters only.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law, and we set it aside.

    2. We remake the decision by allowing the appeal on Refugee  Convention
       grounds and under Article 3 ECHR.

    3. We formally dismiss the appeal on Humanitarian Protection Grounds.




Signed                                  Date: 14 January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


