
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09904/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th August  2013                             |On 13th  November 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY



                                   Between

                                guan jing lin
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Katani of Katani and Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Peoples Republic of  China,  born  on
    the 3rd June 1991.He entered the United Kingdom  on  28  February  2009
    using his own passport and a valid student Visa.  His  visa  was  valid
    until 28 February 2010. A subsequent application for an  extension  was
    refused. In February 2012,  he  was  found  working  and  arrested  for
    suspected deception on entry. He subsequently claimed asylum.

 2. The appellant claimed that  he  feared  persecution  from  the  Chinese
    authorities because of his involvement in Falun Gong. At the  start  of
    September 2008, a schoolfriend, Feng Zhou, had invited him to join four
    others who were practising Falun Gong.  Towards the end of September of
    the same year, Feng Zhou telephoned the appellant  to  say  that  those
    attending the meeting had been arrested. He advised the appellant to go
    abroad. The appellant stayed with various friends  over  the  next  few
    months. He was unable to contact his friend and believed  he  had  been
    arrested. On 27 February  2009,  he  flew  from  China  to  the  United
    Kingdom. Since coming to the United Kingdom,  he  has  been  practising
    Falun Gong and attends gatherings relating to it.

 3. His claim was refused on the 19th October 2012. The respondent did  not
    find  the  appellant  credible.  The  delay  in  claiming  asylum   was
    highlighted.  He had not mentioned any fear of the Chinese  authorities
    when encountered by immigration officers and he did  not  claim  asylum
    until after removal directions had been set. Although  detained  on  28
    February 2012, he did not mention any fear relating to his practice  of
    Falun Gong until his asylum claim was considered  on  2  October  2012.
    When tested, his knowledge of Falun Gong was limited. His responses had
    not indicated to the respondent that he was a practitioner and did  not
    accept he was of any interest to the Chinese authorities. It was  noted
    that he had been  able  to  leave  China  on  his  own  passport.   The
    respondent also relied upon section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004.

The First tier Tribunal

 4. The  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wallace.  Her
    determination was promulgated on 14th December 2012.  She did not  find
    the appellant credible. She found his account vague and  contradictory.
    She found he had never practised Falun Gong and whilst she acknowledged
    that the appellant had answered some questions correctly,  he  did  not
    have knowledge of Falun Gong consistent with his claim.  The judge also
    noted that the appellant had not been questioned by the authorities  in
    China and was able to leave on his own passport.

Permission to appeal

 5. Under the heading ` Assessment of  Evidence,  Decision  and  Reasons  '
    Judge Wallace  states:

         50. The Appellant has never practised Falun Gong in China.  He  has
         never been apprehended by the Chinese authorities and he has  never
         been  questioned  on  any  matter  by  the  Chinese  authorites.The
         appellant alleges that he attended a meeting before he left  China.
         He  maintained  that  members  who  attended  with  him  have  been
         arrested. The evidence is merely hearsay and it is  from  a  friend
         whom the Appellant acknowledges he has been unable to contact.

         51. The Appellant claims that he went to his  friend's  house,  but
         then in  oral  evidence  said  that  the  meeting  was  held  in  a
         basketball arena, or a  school.  Neither  of  the  latter  meets  a
         description of a house contradicting his earlier evidence.

         54. The Appellant was questioned regarding Falun Gong.  Although he
         correctly responded to certain questions,  he  was  not  conversant
         with Falun Gong with  a  level  commensurate  to  his  claim.   The
         appellant did not practice Falun Gong, although  he  maintained  he
         became interested in it after attending the meeting in  2008  until
         allegedly his application for an extension to his student visa  had
         been refused.

Upper Tribunal hearing and discussion

 6. At hearing, Mr Katani relied on the grounds upon which the  application
    for permission to appeal was made. In relation to paragraph 50 he  made
    the point that hearsay evidence is still evidence which  is  admissible
    and to which weight may be attached.  He said that the judge  had  been
    wrong in dismissing this evidence simply because  it  was  hearsay.  In
    response, Mr Mullen submitted that the  judge  had  not  excluded  this
    evidence but was indicating that, as hearsay, she did not  consider  it
    appropriate to attach much weight to it. In our view,  the  judge  took
    the correct approach to the evidence and there is no error  of  law  in
    her determination.  Her reference to hearsay is an  indication  of  the
    weight  she  intended  to  attach  to  the  evidence  and  not  to  its
    admissibility.

 7. The second challenge to the determination relates to paragraph 51.  The
    appellant submits  that  the  judge,  having  found  a  discrepancy  in
    relation to the venue of the meeting, did not clearly state her opinion
    of the explanation offered by the appellant.  We find that paragraph 51
    has to be  put  in  the  context  of  the  preceding  passages  of  the
    determination and the immigration judge's opening statement:

       47. I do not accept this Appellant as a credible witness.  I  cannot
           accept his account as being factually accurate.

       48.  The  Appellant's  account  is  vague,  contains  a  number   of
           inconsistencies, and is contradictory.

    Thereafter, she sets out various reasons. The judge is referring to the
    evidence in relation to the venue of the meeting as an example  of  the
    appellant's evidence being contradictory. It is true to  say  that  she
    did not deal specifically with the appellant's explanation and it would
    have been helpful if she had engaged with  it.  Nevertheless,  we  find
    that the determination read as a whole (i) indicates that the judge has
    considered all the evidence before her and that  she  has  not  ignored
    evidence of relevance and (ii) gives cogent and  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the credibility of the appellant's account.

 8. Regarding the third ground, Mr Katani referred to paragraph 54  of  the
    Determination. He submitted that the judge had referred to gaps in  the
    appellant's knowledge of Falun Gong as justification for  her  negative
    credibility findings. The appellant's evidence was that  he  had  never
    participated in Falun Gong whilst in China save for attending  the  one
    meeting. However, the Determination at  paragraph   15  refers  to  the
    appellant's witness statement in which the appellant claims that, since
    he came to Glasgow in January 2010, he has been practicing  Falun  Gong
    exercises at home and attending meetings with practitioners  every  two
    months; it would  not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to
    demonstrate some knowledge of  Falun  Gong  as  a  consequence  of  his
    practice of it in the United Kingdom. It follows that it  was  open  to
    the judge to regard the appellant's apparent ignorance  as  diminishing
    of his credibility.

 9. Mr Katani referred to the judge's reference to the appellant's  ability
    to leave China using his own  passport.   He  submitted  that  she  had
    failed to engage with the appellant's explanation that  he  had  bribed
    officials. Mr Mullen submitted that, if  the  Chinese  authorities  had
    been interested in arresting the appellant, they could have done so  at
    the airport and  this  was  a  legitimate  feature  for  the  judge  to
    highlight.  He  submitted  that  the  evidence,   taken   cumulatively,
    indicated the appellant was not at any real risk from  the  authorities
    in China.  Again,  the  judge  does  not  specifically  deal  with  the
    appellant's explanation but we are satisfied that she made her findings
    fully aware of that explanation and in the context of all the  evidence
    and that her finding that the appellant's account lacks credibility  is
    not tainted by legal error.

10. It is important to read the determination as a whole. The judge did not
    find the appellant  to  be  credible  and  gave  adequate  reasons.  At
    paragraph 53, she pointed out that the appellant did not  claim  asylum
    until 2012  when  he  was  apprehended  whilst  working  illegally.  He
    admitted he knew he was in the United Kingdom illegally  following  the
    expiry of his student visa. There was no reference to Falun Gong or the
    Chinese authorities having any interest in him until he made his asylum
    claim on 2 October 2012 despite being in detention and having  had  two
    separate legal advisers initiating claims on his behalf. Those were all
    aspects of the appeal to which the judge gave weight and which she  was
    fully  entitled  to   find   seriously   undermined   the   appellant's
    credibility.

Decision

11. This appeal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date

Immigration Judge F J Farrelly                  Sitting as  a  Deputy  Judge
of the Upper Tribunal.

