








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal NO: AA/09911/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|on 14 October 2015                   |on 20 November 2015                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                     GT
                          Anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms R Francis, counsel, instructed by JD Spicer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I continue the anonymity direction made. This direction is to remain in
    place unless and until this Tribunal or any  other  appropriate  court,
    directs otherwise. As  such,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the appellant  or  any  member  of  his
    family. Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  amount  to  a
    contempt of Court.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania, born on 12 February  2001.  His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 20 October 2014  to
    refuse to grant him asylum was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Colvin in a decision promulgated on 21 March 2015.

 3. The appellant submitted  two  written  statements  in  support  of  his
    appeal, which formed the basis of his claim.

 4. His evidence has been summarised by Judge Colvin.  The  appellant  made
    his journey to the UK when he was 13 years old.  He  claimed  that  his
    grandparents and father originated from Kukes in the north  of  Albania
    which practises strict Kanun law.  His  grandparents  moved  to  Arapaj
    about 20 years ago and purchased land on which they  built  the  family
    house. The appellant attended school until 2013 and his  father  worked
    as a farmer and his mother in a market stall.

 5. In 2008 his grandfather died. In December 2013 a private company wanted
    to build on their land, claiming to have  papers  from  the  L  family,
    their neighbours, showing that the land belonged to them.

 6. His father disputed this as they had the legal documents. He  spoke  to
    the head of the L family who claimed that the land had been sold to his
    grandfather using false documents. The  person  became  aggressive  and
    insisted that they leave the farm within 24 hours. A  fight  ensued  in
    front of the appellant where his father was beaten up and the appellant
    himself was kicked and punched by his son, I.  The  appellant's  father
    then struck I, rendering him unconscious.

 7. The father then returned home and took  the  appellant  to  a  friend's
    house. He was  afraid  that  the  L  family  might  take  revenge.  The
    following day the appellant's mother told his father that the L  family
    had sent intermediaries to the home, stating that they had  declared  a
    blood feud. They could not go to the police for protection as  they  do
    not get involved in blood feuds and are known to be corrupt.

 8. In the circumstances, his father arranged for an agent to take him to a
    safe country. He left on 15  April  2014  with  an  agent,  staying  in
    Macedonia for four days, after which he was put in a  lorry  bound  for
    the UK. The appellant's asylum claim was refused by the  respondent  on
    20 October 2014 but he was granted discretionary leave to remain  until
    20 April 2017 as an unaccompanied minor.

 9. Judge Colvin acknowledged that on account of the appellant's young  age
    extreme caution needs to be taken before drawing any adverse inferences
    from any omissions or discrepancies  in  his  evidence  [16].  She  had
    regard to the President's Practice  Statement  dated  30  October  2008
    regarding child  witness,  the  provisions  of  paragraph  351  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and  the  respondent's  own  guidance  on  assessing
    credibility of children which is reflected in  the  joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No. 2: Child, vulnerable adult  and  sensitive  appellant
    guidance [16]. The appellant did not give evidence at the hearing.

10. Judge Colvin considered the background  information  contained  in  the
    appellant's bundle including the COI report on Albania (2012) at  [20].
    She also had regard to the most recent information  on  the  extent  of
    blood feuds set out in the country information dated June 2014.

11. She found that in general the information in  the  background  evidence
    corroborates the findings of the Upper Tribunal in the country guidance
    case of EH (Albania) CG [2012] UKUT 00348, which  she  set  out  at  as
    follows: Whilst there remain a number of active blood feuds in Albania,
    particularly in the northern areas, they are  few  and  declining.  The
    Tribunal in EH required that an  appellant  must  produce  satisfactory
    individual evidence of the existence of the blood feud, his profile  as
    a potential target and whether he has been in self confinement [21].

12. Judge Colvin noted that the respondent rejected the appellant's account
    "... because he is not aware of anyone being  killed  as  part  of  the
    feud". She also noted the respondent's assertion that  the  appellant's
    family did not report the declaration of the blood feud to  the  police
    [21].

13. Judge Colvin considered the submissions of Ms Francis as set out in her
    skeleton argument, namely, that it is possible that there  has  been  a
    killing but that the appellant is not aware of this because his parents
    did not speak to him in detail about the feud because of his  age.  She
    also noted the contention in the relevant  country  evidence  that  law
    enforcement is poor in Albania [21].

14. Judge Colvin concluded that even applying the lower standard of  proof,
    the  appellant's  account  whilst  internally   consistent,   was   not
    externally consistent with the background information on  blood  feuds.
    First, the appellant did not live in the  northern  areas  where  blood
    feuds mainly occur. The claim made that his grandfather in the L family
    originated in the north many years ago was a mere assertion.  Secondly,
    there is  no  evidence  that  a  killing  occurred  and  it  is  merely
    speculation that it may have but the appellant was not told [22].

15. She noted that the background information refers to Kanun law  being  a
    system of  reciprocal  killings  -  that  is,  blood  for  blood  [22].
    Moreover, the FCO letter from the British  Embassy,  Tirana,  dated  12
    June 2014, referred to the fact that  the  police  consider  that  some
    families are involved in general fighting  which  cannot  be  genuinely
    classified as blood feuds. Whilst the background information refers  to
    shortcomings in the police  and  judiciary,  there  is  the  additional
    factor that the appellant's family did not attempt to report the matter
    [22].

16. In the event, Judge Colvin found that the appellant had not shown  that
    he is involved in  an  active  blood  feud  and  was  not  at  risk  of
    persecution as being a member of a social group [23].

17. On 22 June 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum in  granting  the  appellant
    permission to appeal referred to the  contentions  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal that the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  her  consideration  of  the
    background evidence relating to whether blood feuds can arise from land
    disputes in the absence of a  killing.  He  noted  that  the  appellant
    relied on  country  evidence  contained  in  counsel's  argument  which
    arguably indicated that a blood feud can arise in  such  circumstances.
    Moreover, the second ground relating to the Judge's conclusion that the
    appellant's family did not originate from  northern  Albania  was  also
    arguable.

18. Following the error of law hearing on 14 October 2015 the parties  were
    given permission to file further written submissions. Ms Francis  alone
    has produced further written submissions regarding two issues that were
    raised: Is the threat of a killing  capable  of  constituting  a  blood
    feud, or does there have to be a killing? Further,  does  adherence  to
    Kanun law depend upon the area in Albania in which a family  is  living
    or the traditions of that family? I have considered all of Ms Francis's
    submissions including those developed and set out in her recent written
    submission.

19. In relying on her  grounds  and  skeleton  argument  before  First-tier
    Tribunal, Ms Francis submitted that the Judge failed to give reasons or
    any  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  material  matters,  and   in
    particular that there is no evidence that a killing occurred  and  that
    it is mere  speculation  that  it  may  have  occurred,  but  that  the
    appellant had  not  been  told.  That  led  to  the  finding  that  the
    plausibility of the appellant's account was undermined by the  lack  of
    an account of killing.

20. Ms Francis submitted that in so doing the Judge erred in law in failing
    to consider the country evidence as set out  at  paragraph  28  of  her
    skeleton before the First-tier tribunal, namely, that blood  feuds  are
    commonly caused by land disputes rather than killings. I shall refer to
    this submission in my assessment.

21. In the alternative, she submitted at paragraph 5 of the  grounds,  that
    the Judge erred in failing to give adequate reasons for attaching 'such
    weight' to the absence in the appellant's account of  a  killing  given
    the relevant country evidence.

22. She also contended that the Judge failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    her findings relating to the  assertion  that  the  appellant's  family
    originates from the north of Albania. In that respect she also erred in
    requiring corroborative evidence and applied the wrong  legal  test  to
    the assessment of the appellant's evidence.

23. In the course of her submissions, Ms. Francis referred to paragraph  28
    of her skeleton before the First-tier tribunal and paragraph 10 of  the
    grounds of appeal, noting that the respondent rejected the  appellant's
    account of the blood feud as she was not aware of  anyone  having  been
    killed as part of the feud. She repeated  her  contention  that  it  is
    possible that there has been a killing but that the  appellant  is  not
    aware of this because his parents did not speak to him in detail  about
    the feud because of his age.

24. She further submitted with reference to paragraph 28  of  her  skeleton
    before the First-tier Tribunal that it is in any event clear  from  the
    country evidence that land disputes are common in Albania and can cause
    blood feuds. She referred to the  Home  Office's  'latest'  Country  of
    Origin Information and Guidance  titled  'Albania:  Blood  Feuds'  from
    pages 126 in the appellant's bundle.

25. Ms Francis noted that current country guidance case, EH, was  expressly
    referred to in the Country of Origin information report, in Annex D  at
    page 160[1].

26. She submitted that the requirement  by  the  Judge  that  there  be  "a
    killing" was an error of law. In any event there was the possibility of
    such killing having regard to the finding that the appellant  had  been
    internally consistent in his evidence. It is entirely credible that the
    appellant would not have been told about the feud in detail, given  his
    young age - he was aged 13  at  the  time.  He  had  been  subsequently
    informed by his mother that the L  family  had  mounted  a  blood  feud
    against his family which could not be reconciled.

27. In her recent written submissions Ms Francis identified and  relied  on
    the following paragraphs in EH:

    "5.

         ... (v) Gjakmarrja ('Blood-taking'). A  vendetta,  or  blood  feud,
         which may have lasted for decades, or may be recent in  origin.  It
         is closely linked to collectivist notions of      family,  or  clan
         solidarity and reliability. A blood debt carries a related loss  of
         honour, which can only be restored by the taking of blood from  the
         other family. It is generally borne by the  males  of  the  nuclear
         family, parents, grandparents, children and grandchildren.

         Typically, a feud begins with a killing or offence by an individual
         from Clan A, which must be revenged by a senior  male  figure  from
         Clan B. When revenge has been carried out by  Clan  B,  Clan  A  is
         required to retaliate by killing  a  Clan  B  member,  and  so  on,
         potentially to the extinction of all male members  of  both  clans.
         Children under 15 and women are not usually required either to kill
         or be killed, except perhaps where a woman  is  the  cause  of  the
         feud, or the last surviving member of the target clan.

    ...

    42.  Professor Philip Alston's report on blood feuds in Albania for the
         UNHCR noted the 'deep discrepancies' in statistics regarding  blood
         feuds, ranging between the government view  that  there  were  less
         than sixty killings a year, of which 29-45 were  in  Shkodra,  with
         about 130 families in self-confinement  nationally,  and  the  view
         propounded by the CNR  and  other  non-governmental  organisations,
         that there were hundreds of deaths and thousands  of  self-confined
         children. The  problem  was  partly  one  of  language,  with  some
         analyses using a broader definition including any  revenge  killing
         between families and others a narrower, traditional  definition  of
         premeditated 'taking of blood' by the victim family at  the  other.
         Non- governmental organisations had an incentive to  overstate  the
         figures   for   funding   purposes;   rural   Albanians    probably
         underreported instances of crime in their area; and the records  of
         government programmes might be incomplete. Overall,  he  tended  to
         think that the lower government figures  were  likely  to  be  more
         accurate and that blood feuds were a small and diminishing  problem
         for the Albanian authorities.

    ...

    57.  In the light of the  problems  with  corruption  in  the  Albanian
         press, and the influence and involvement which Mr Marku has in  all
         of the international press  reports  before  us,  we  also  do  not
         consider that a press  report  concerning  a  death  or  feud  will
         normally add much weight to an appellant's account of a blood feud.
         In some cases, however, consistent local or national press  reports
         published promptly after the events relied upon may add  weight  to
         an oral account provided that they are factual. The involvement  of
         Mr Marku or the CNR in a national  or  international  press  report
         will affect its weight because of the intensely problematic  nature
         of his evidence. Albanian press reports will carry limited, if any,
         weight because the evidence is that stories can be freely  inserted
         in both the national and local press, whether or not there  is  any
         substance to them.

    58.  We accept that there remain a number  of  active  blood  feuds  in
         Albania, but we prefer the evidence of Professor Alston  that  they
         are few and declining. The reliable evidence before us  supports  a
         finding that there are a small number of  deaths  annually  arising
         from ongoing feuds and that a small number of adults  and  children
         are in self-confinement for protection. The Albanian government has
         residential programmes to educate self- confined children, but very
         few children are involved in them and those who are do  not  always
         take up the option of living away from home  in  residential  units
         for this purpose. A vendetta, or blood feud, which may have  lasted
         for decades, or may be recent in origin. It is  closely  linked  to
         collectivist notions of family, or clan solidarity and reliability.
         A blood debt carries a related loss of honour, which  can  only  be
         restored by the taking of  blood  from  the  other  family.  It  is
         generally borne by  the  males  of  the  nuclear  family,  parents,
         grandparents, children and grandchildren."

28. Ms Francis also referred to Appendix C - Country expert evidence.

    "15.  Where  a  potential  victim,  including  a  pre-emptive   victim,
         submitted to the other family by self-confinement that action could
         suspend revenge-taking, perhaps for  generations.   Fleeing  abroad
         might have the same effect, but the aggressor would continue to  be
         concerned that on return, the senior male from  the  attacked  clan
         might revive the feud or seek criminal prosecution of  the  killer.
         The patrilineal line was at the core of blood feud practice."

29. She referred to paragraphs 20,21,22 and 39, Appendix C of EH, regarding
    evidence on adherence to Kanun law based on family tradition.

30. Ms Francis submitted that it is clear from EH that blood feuds commonly
    but not exclusively begin with a killing: References to blood feuds and
    killings are frequently expressed in the alternative: "a  press  report
    concerning a death or feud" EH at [57]. The Tribunal also noted at [42]
    that  there   are   particular   linguistic   difficulties   with   the
    classification of blood feuds and/or killings creating a  variation  as
    to what constitutes a blood feud.

31. At paragraph 10 of her recent written submission Ms Francis  relied  on
    the UN Human Rights Council report to which I have referred in  support
    of the appellant's claim that blood  feuds  commonly  arise  from  land
    disputes and that no killing is required for a blood feud to begin. She
    submitted that this document was not before the Upper  Tribunal  in  EH
    and was "plainly" not considered by  the  Tribunal  when  reaching  its
    country guidance on blood feuds.

32. Accordingly, she submitted that a  threat  of  killing  is  capable  of
    constituting a blood feud and such feud exists between the  appellant's
    family and the L family. There must be a first  killing  in  any  blood
    feud. He would be the primary target of  the  blood  feud  if  he  were
    returned to Albania.

33. She finally submitted that adherence to Kanun law is a way of  thinking
    and living. Such adherence is not confined to the area of Albania where
    a family is living - Appendix C [20] in EH.

34. Mr Kandola submitted that despite the assertions by Ms Francis  in  her
    written argument, the Judge has properly addressed the issues. However,
    the dispute still needs to escalate. It is moreover wholly  speculative
    to say that there will be a killing. Nor is it clear that the appellant
    is the primary target. Kanun rules restrict killing of children in  any
    event.

35. Moreover there was nothing in EH to support the argument that a killing
    need not have occurred.

    Assessment

36. Judge Colvin had regard to  some  of  the  'findings'  in  the  country
    guidance case of EH, which she set out out  [21]  as  follows:  "Whilst
    there remain a number of active blood feuds in Albania particularly  in
    the northern area, they are few  and  declining.   The  appellant  must
    produce satisfactory individual evidence of the existence of the  blood
    feud, his profile as a potential target and whether he has been in self-
    confinement."

37. The Tribunal in EH set out in the headnote, the matters that the  fact-
    finding Tribunal should consider in determining whether an active blood
    feud exists:

         "6.  In determining whether an active blood feud exists, the  fact-
         finding Tribunal should consider:

             (i)  the history of the alleged feud, including the  notoriety
             of the original killings, the numbers killed, and  the  degree
             of commitment by the aggressor clan toward the prosecution  of
             the feud;

             (ii)  the  length  of  time  since  the  last  death  and  the
             relationship of the last person killed to the appellant;

             (iii)     the ability of members of  the  aggressor  clan   to
             locate the appellant if returned  to another part of  Albania;
             and

             (iv) the past and likely future attitude  of  the  police  and
             other authorities towards the feud and the protection  of  the
             family of the person claiming to be  at  risk,  including  any
             past attempts to seek prosecution of members of the  aggressor
             clan, or to seek protection from the Albanian authorities.

         7.   In order to establish that  there  is  an  active  blood  feud
         affecting him personally, an appellant  must  produce  satisfactory
         individual evidence  of  its  existence  in  relation  to  him.  In
         particular, the appellant must establish:

             (i)  his profile as a potential target of the feud  identified
             and which family carried out the most recent killing; and

             (ii) whether the appellant has been, or other members  of  his
             family have been, or are currently, in self-confinement within
             Albania.

38. As already noted, Ms Francis sought to rely on paragraph 2.1.1  of  the
    Country of Information and Guidance citing a UN  Human  Rights  report:
    Albania: Blood Feuds, at page 134 of the bundle.

39. Paragraph 2.1 of this report is headed "Overview". At  paragraph  2.1.1
    there is reference to a UN Human Rights Council report, Report  of  the
    Special Rapporteur on Extra Judicial, summary or arbitrary  executions,
    Addendum: Preliminary Note on the  Mission  to  Albania  in  a  section
    headed "What is a Blood Feud?" dated 20 May 2010, which stated that

         "A blood feud generally begins with an  argument,  usually  between
         two men whose families are neighbours or friends. The argument  may
         have any  cause:  an  accident,  a  perceived  insult,  a  property
         ownership disagreement, a  conflict  over  access  to  electricity,
         water or fuel, and so on. The argument escalates  into  a  physical
         fight and one man kills the other. The victim's family  then  feels
         that it is 'owed blood' by the killer's family. This debt  and  the
         related loss of honour can only be satisfied by taking the life  of
         a member of the killer's family."

40. At paragraph 28 (a) of her  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the full contents of paragraph 2.1.1 were not set out but only
    the first part of paragraph 2.1.1, as follows:

         "... A blood  feud  generally  begins  with  an  argument,  usually
         between two men whose  families  are  neighbours  or  friends.  The
         argument may have any cause: an accident,  a  perceived  insult,  a
         property  ownership  disagreement,  a  conflict  over   access   to
         electricity water or fuel, and so on."

41. At paragraph 28 of her skeleton Ms Francis also referred  to  paragraph
    22 of the latest report of the UN Special Rapporteur on  extrajudicial,
    summary or arbitrary Executions (dated 23  April  2013).   The  Special
    Rapporteur referred to  the  need  to  collect  data  and  analyse  the
    correlation between property disputers and blood  feuds.   The  Special
    Rapporteur reiterated the need to research this aspect:  "... Given the
    potential link between the situation of property rights and blood  feud
    killings, the Special Rapporteur encourages the government  to continue
    with firm steps to reform this area" (emphasis added).

42. It is evident from these passages that the context  in  which  a  blood
    feud arises can thus include an initial argument over property; but the
    argument then escalates into a physical  fight  resulting  in  one  man
    killing another. A resulting killing is a necessary  component  of  the
    blood feud.

43. I do not consider that the passages referred to in EH, which have  been
    relied on in Ms Francis's written submissions, show that  a  threat  of
    killing in itself is capable of constituting a blood  feud.  The  facts
    arising in EH involved an earlier killing. In EH the appellant's father
    had been shot and killed by a local police officer,  a  cousin  of  the
    person who had warned his father to desist from politics:  at  [6]  and
    [7].

44. The evidence before Judge Colvin was  that  following  the  fight,  the
    appellant was taken by his father to  a  friend's  house,  fearing  for
    revenge against them. The following day his mother told his father that
    the L family had sent intermediaries to the home stating that they  had
    declared a blood feud [6]. He and his father went into hiding at Diber.
    His father did not approach the courts as the judiciary are corrupt. He
    has been unable to have any contact with his family in Albania  as  the
    telephone number is not working [7].

45. Judge Colvin found at [22] that there was no evidence  that  a  killing
    occurred and it is mere speculation that it  might  have  occurred  but
    that the appellant had not been told. It is contended by Ms Francis  in
    paragraph 10 of her grounds of appeal seeking permission that the Judge
    erred in law in failing to consider the country evidence, as set out at
    paragraph 28 of her skeleton, that blood feuds are commonly  caused  by
    land disputes rather than killings.

46. I have however rejected that contention for the reasons set out  above.
    Accordingly, the Judge's finding that it was mere speculation that  the
    killing may have occurred and that the appellant might  not  have  been
    told, is sustainable.

47. Judge Colvin had proper regard  to  the  background  information  where
    Kanun law constituted a system of reciprocal killings - that is,  blood
    for blood [22]. The FCO letter referred to by her noted that the police
    consider that some families are  involved  in  general  fighting  which
    cannot be genuinely classified as blood feuds. She noted that while the
    background  information  refers  to  shortcomings  in  the  police  and
    judiciary, there is the additional factor that the  appellant's  family
    did not even attempt to report the matter.

48. In the circumstances the Judge's conclusion on the evidence before  her
    that the appellant had not shown to the lower standard of proof that he
    is involved in an active blood feud so as to be at risk of  persecution
    as a member of a social group under the Convention, is sustainable.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error on a point of law. It shall accordingly stand.

    Anonymity direction made.




    Signed   Date 16 November 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
-----------------------

[1]   In fact the decision was referred to and considered in some detail  as
part of the report at paragraph 1.3.


