
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09926/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House                      | Decision & Reasons           |
|On 29 July 2015                              |Promulgated                   |
|                                             |On 28 September 2015          |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                                     KD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr TD Hodson, Solicitor, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant  is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 28  October  2014  refusing  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain and to remove him to Iran.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in  1994.  He  claims  that  he
    lived in Tehran and worked for a number of years as  a  sound  engineer
    for a company called "Frontiers of Stage Sound". The  company  provided
    the sound equipment for a venue used  by  the  Iranian  government  for
    meetings and  conferences.  The  appellant  came  into  regular,  close
    contact with government officials and members  of  the  Iranian  regime
    including security officials and the  highest  levels  of  the  supreme
    leadership up to and including the Supreme Leader  and  the  President.
    That part of the appellant's case was accepted by the respondent.

 4. The appellant further claims that in June 2014 he was asked to work  on
    the sound recording equipment for an official meeting attended  by  the
    President and other high ranking officials. He was instructed  to  turn
    off the recording equipment during the meeting but  curiosity  got  the
    better of him and he listened for a short time,  hearing  talk  of  the
    raping of young girls and people changing religion and how those things
    must be kept from the public. A man called D  was  also  mentioned.  He
    left the building and told a work colleague who told him that he was in
    danger. He went home and started to research  the  writings  of  D  and
    printed off material relating to D, sharing it with his friends.

 5. The appellant claims that he was stopped and searched a few days  later
    by Sepah and found to be in  possession  of  a  walkie-talkie.  He  was
    detained and heard reference  to  him  being  a  "subject  matter".  He
    managed to escape by jumping out of a window and caught  a  taxi  to  a
    friend's house. He was told by his uncle that his home had been  raided
    and that his mother and belongings had been taken. He  flew  to  Turkey
    that night using his own passport and  stayed  there  for  three  weeks
    before flying to Malta and on to the UK. He destroyed his documents  by
    flushing them down a toilet at  Gatwick  airport.  He  faces  death  if
    returned to Iran. He suspects  that  it  was  the  work  colleague  who
    informed the authorities.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Birmingham on 22 December 2014. The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant was working at the high level meeting but did not switch  the
    sound recording equipment on. He would not have been left  alone  in  a
    booth whilst it was so easy to press  record.  There  was  no  credible
    reason for the security guard to leave. There was  no  credible  reason
    why the appellant would tell the work colleague  (who  worked  for  the
    President's office) what he had overheard. He would not have  disclosed
    any information until he had  researched  D.  The  escape  account  was
    incredible because he would not have been placed in a locked room where
    he exit through an easily opened window.  The  appellant's  account  is
    that he was already being sought at that time. He would not  have  been
    left with his mobile phone. It was not credible that he  left  Iran  on
    his own passport with no issues and he was not at risk upon return. The
    fact that he would be questioned on return was not sufficient to  allow
    the claim.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 22 January 2015. The judge
    ought to have exercised caution and restraint in basing  findings  upon
    implausibility - the reasoning overall was unsound. The judge failed to
    consider the evidence that it was only an assumption on the appellant's
    part that he had been arrested because of the work colleague. The judge
    should have considered the possibility that the appellant was  in  fact
    mistaken - he was actually stopped at a roadblock and detained after  a
    walkie-talkie was found in his car. The judge accepted that could  lead
    to problems. The  judge  did  not  consider  that  the  nature  of  the
    appellant's work and his claim of political asylum in the UK  would  in
    itself raise suspicions  and  concerns  on  the  part  of  the  Iranian
    security forces. The risk of intensive questioning is quite independent
    of the truth of the contested parts of the appellant's claim.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman on 6 May 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge
    failed to adequately deal  with  risk  on  return  due  to  his  former
    employment and by virtue of being a failed asylum seeker.  The  parties
    agreed before me that the effect of the grant was that all grounds were
    arguable.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated  2015, the respondent sought to uphold  the
    judge's decision on the basis that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  make
    adverse credibility findings as set out  at  paragraphs  23-31  of  the
    decision.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

11. Mr Hodson submitted that the judge did not find that it was not  likely
    that the appellant would have been left in the technician's booth  with
    the sound turned off. The finding that he  would  not  have  been  left
    alone is speculative and the appellant  did  not  "press  record".  The
    appellant was trained and trusted  and  there  was  nothing  incredible
    about  the  security  guard  leaving.  The  findings  are  based   upon
    assumptions and do not engage with the appellant's trusted position.

12. The appellant only claimed to have heard that he was  "the  subject  in
    question" after he was detained. The appellant put two and two together
    but that was no more than an inference and not a  watertight  reference
    by any means. He was stopped at a roadblock and not  his  workplace  or
    residence. The reason for arrest was possession of the  walkie  talkie.
    The judge accepted that arbitrary arrests do take place  in  Iran.  The
    judge should have assessed the case on the alternative basis i.e.  that
    the arrest was unrelated to the listening incident.

13. Mr Hodson further submitted that even if none of the contested claim is
    accepted, arrest and  interrogation  on  return  would  be  enough  for
    persecution. There is no need for the appellant's life to be in danger.
    The  objective  evidence  is  that  the  appellant  is  likely  to   be
    interviewed on return to Iran for  2-3  hours.  His  identity  will  be
    verified and he may be detained for 1-2 days. He has a  public  profile
    with the government. Return from the UK is an additional risk factor.

14. Mr Richards submitted that there is no material error of law. This is a
    fair and balanced  decision.  Adequate  reasons  have  been  given  for
    findings properly open to  the  judge.  There  is  a  raft  of  adverse
    findings relating to implausibility and  coincidence.  The  appellant's
    case was that the arrest was a consequence  of  what  happened  at  the
    meeting. He was told that his home  had  been  raided,  computer  taken
    away, etc. It is not likely that would have happened if  the  appellant
    had just been arrested for a minor misdemeanour. No error of law arises
    from the credibility findings.

15. Mr Richards further submitted that  enforced  return  to  Iran  is  not
    sufficient for an asylum claim. There is no evidence that the appellant
    is anyone other  than  a  man  who  held  the  claimed  employment  and
    committed no transgressions. He left his employment without a stain  on
    his character. He was allowed to freely leave Iran. There is no  reason
    why return would create a risk of persecutory treatment.

16. Mr Hodson submitted in reply that some of  the  arguments  made  by  Mr
    Richards were not mentioned by the judge; for example the raid  on  the
    appellant's home took place some time after the escape.  The  appellant
    only made an assumption about the reason for the arrest.

17. I am persuaded that the judge has failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    his finding that the appellant was not at risk on return, even  if  the
    contested parts of his claim are not true. The judge simply  states  at
    paragraph 43 of the decision that, "I fully understand the point  being
    raised but I do not accept his account as detailed  above.  This  point
    alone is not sufficient in my finding  to  be  a  basis  to  allow  his
    claim". The judge did not refer to the relevant country guidance or the
    objective evidence. In effect, there are no reasons as to why a  person
    with the appellant's accepted profile who is a failed asylum seeker  in
    the UK is not reasonably likely to be at risk of treatment amounting to
    persecution if he is forcibly returned to  Iran.  That  is  a  material
    error of law.

18. I also accept that the judge did not consider the possibility that  the
    appellant was detained as a result of a routine stop because he was  in
    possession of a walkie talkie. I find that the failure to consider that
    version of events was a failure to take into account a conflict of fact
    on a material matter  -  the  judge  effectively  only  considered  the
    appellant's case on the basis that  he  was  the  subject  of  targeted
    detention because of the listening incident. No reasons are  given  for
    discounting  the  alternative  reason   for   detention   despite   the
    submissions made by Mr Hodson in the First-tier. The  failure  to  take
    into account a conflict of fact on  a  material  matter  is  a  further
    material error of law.

19. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand. Considering the credibility  findings  as  a  whole,  I  am  not
    persuaded that any findings of fact should be preserved.

Decision

20. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

21. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.






Signed   [pic]                      Date 26 September 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


