

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
AA/09419/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21st April 2016                       | On 26th April 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     A A
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, instructed by Sutovic and Hartigan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  original
   Appellant/parties in this determination identified as AA. This  direction
   applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this
   direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings



   1. AA, an Afghan citizen, claims to have been born on 28th June 1995. The
      SSHD did not accept that date of birth; after having been assessed  by
      Slough Social Services he has a recorded age of 28 June 1994.  He  has
      not challenged that assessed age through any other proceedings.

   2. The applicant claims to have arrived in the UK on 3rd May 2011. He was
      encountered on 4th May 2011 and said he wished  to  claim  asylum.  He
      claimed asylum on 13th May 2011, that application being refused on 1st
      August 2011. He was  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  as  an
      unaccompanied minor until  27th  December  2011.  An  application  for
      judicial review against the refusal of asylum was made on 24th January
      2012. An application for further leave to  remain  was  made  on  23rd
      December 2011, that application being refused for reasons set  out  in
      an Annex to a decision dated 17th June 2015.  The  appellant  appealed
      that decision, his appeal being dismissed by FtT Judge  V  Mays  in  a
      decision promulgated on 12th January 2016.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Canavan on 2nd March  2016  on
      the grounds that it was arguable that the FtT  judge  failed  to  make
      clear findings relating to risk in the appellant's home area of  Logar
      and it was arguably incumbent upon her that even if she did not accept
      the credibility of the appellant's account  of  past  events,  it  was
      nevertheless incumbent upon her to assess whether  there  was  a  real
      risk of serious harm and forced recruitment in his home area. She also
      granted permission on the grounds that it was arguable that the  judge
      may have conflated  the  test  of  whether  it  was  unduly  harsh  or
      unreasonable for the appellant to internally relocate  to  Kabul  with
      whether there was a real risk of indiscriminate violence.

   4. Although not specifically granted  permission  on  the  other  grounds
      pleaded, they were relied upon by Ms Loughlan although not as  primary
      submissions. The other grounds relied upon, and expanded to a  limited
      extent before me, were

             (i)  The FtT judge had inaccurately recorded  the  reason  for
             the adjournment request. The request had been made because the
             appellant had sought to rely upon an expert  report  going  to
             the issues of risk  in  Logar  and  internal  relocation;  the
             report had not been  commissioned  by  the  date  the  hearing
             originally scheduled for March had  been  brought  forward  to
             December. Notification of the amended hearing  date  had  been
             sent in October. The appellant had  submitted  that  a  report
             commissioned in October  would  not  have  been  ready  for  a
             hearing in December, one had not been commissioned because  it
             was not permissible to commission a report that would  not  be
             ready and a report was necessary for  accurate  assessment  of
             the appellant's claim.
             (ii)   The findings  by  the  judge  as  to  credibility  were
             unsustainable both in terms  of  the  lack  of  reasoning  and
             because of a failure to take into account the appellant's  age
             when statements were given. Although the judge refers  to  the
             appellant being young and states that he  has  had  regard  to
             that, it was evident  that,  particularly,  in  terms  of  the
             assessment of the late disclosure of the cause of death of his
             sister and his failure to claim asylum in the countries he had
             passed through before arriving in the UK, there  had  been  no
             consideration of his age.
             (iii)   The finding that the appellant's account  of  risk  to
             him personally in Logar lacked credibility failed to take into
             account the background material that supported his claim;  the
             reasons given by the judge amounted to minor discrepancies and
             were insufficient to found an adverse credibility finding.
               iv) There had been a total failure on the part of  the  judge
                   to assess the issue of internal relocation.


   5. Mr Tarlow submitted that at its crux, the appellant's grounds amounted
      to no more than a disagreement with the credibility  findings  of  the
      judge. Given that  there  was  no  sustainable  basis  upon  which  to
      challenge  those  findings,  the  appeal   could   not   succeed.   He
      acknowledged that there had been no specific findings on the  risk  to
      the appellant in his home area in Logar and although it was recognised
      that Logar to Kabul was a "Taliban Highway" the consideration  by  the
      judge of the appellant's possible circumstances in Kabul were  plainly
      open to him. He submitted that  the  consideration  by  the  judge  of
      Article 15(c) risk in Kabul implicitly contained an assessment of  the
      reasonableness and/or undue harshness of internal relocation to Kabul.
      He submitted that when  read  as  a  whole,  the  decision  adequately
      considered and reached reasoned and sustainable findings that it would
      not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for the appellant to  relocate  to
      Kabul, irrespective of the lack of specific finding on the risk to the
      appellant in Logar.

   6. Mr Tarlow accepted the  judge  had  used  the  word  "stringent"  when
      considering whether there was an Article  15(c)  risk  in  Kabul  (and
      Logar) but that this did not mean the judge had  applied  too  high  a
      test. He submitted it was plain when considering the determination  as
      a whole, and in particular paragraph 87[1] of the  decision  that  the
      judge had in mind the correct test.

   7. Ms Loughlan referred to the  preceding  reasoning  from  [68]  onwards
      which  specifically  address  the  risk  of  serious   harm   due   to
      indiscriminate violence and the country guidance;  although  referring
      to the reports that had been referred to in the  country  guidance  as
      showing an increase of violence against the  civilian  population  and
      setting out in detail the material referred  to,  in  [86]  the  judge
      finds that the evidence does not satisfy the "stringent" Article 15(c)
      test.


          Error of law


   8. The judge has not made a finding as to the risk to  the  appellant  in
      his home area of Logar. She has made findings as  to  claims  of  past
      risk but not, taking account of the  information  before  her,  as  to
      potential future risk.

   9. The lack of findings in this regard will not be material if the  judge
      has made  sustainable,  reasoned  findings  with  regard  to  internal
      relocation and/or Article 15(c) risk.

  10. It is notable that in [86] the judge refers to  the  evidence,  taking
      account of the low standard of proof applicable not showing  that  the
      situation in Afghanistan and in particular Kabul has  deteriorated  to
      such an extent that she would  be  justified  in  departing  from  the
      country guidance of AK (Article 15(c)) (Afghanistan)  CG  [2012]  UKUT
      00163 (IAC). It is difficult to understand the reasoning  behind  this
      finding given the judge finds it is clear from the background evidence
      that there are rising levels of violence ([84]),  increasing  civilian
      casualties ([84]), that it cannot be said that Kabul is a  safe  place
      ([84]), the level of civilian casualties is  deplorable  ([86]),  that
      the use of IEDs against civilians  had  risen  and  remained  a  major
      threat to civilians ([73]), that civilian  deaths  and  injuries  from
      ground engagements increased  by  54%  ([72]),  that  virtually  every
      indicator showed that violence is on the rise ([71]). It may  be  that
      there was other evidence before her that enabled that  finding  to  be
      made but the explanation given in [[84] does not adequately reason her
      findings. Although in [86] the judge appears to consider the level  of
      violence, the problem is that she appears confused as to the  standard
      to be applied. It seems the use of the word "stringent" has meant that
      although referring to the low standard, she has in any event  imported
      a greater level of proof in reaching her decision.

  11. [57] to [63] were not  specifically  drawn  to  my  attention  in  the
      consideration of internal  relocation  but  I  have  considered  these
      paragraphs and the extent to which they  overcome  the  ground  relied
      upon by Ms Loughlan that the judge failed to make a finding as regards
      risk in Logar. Judge Mays states in [87] that it would not  be  unduly
      harsh for the appellant to  relocate  to  Kabul;  it  seems  that  her
      finding on that is based on findings made by her in [57] to  [63].  In
      that consideration she looks at AK which of course is  concerned  with
      Article 15(c) and not whether it is unduly harsh or unreasonable for a
      refugee in his home area to relocate. The judge  makes  findings  that
      the appellant has family in Afghanistan and that there was nothing  to
      suggest that he would not have  their  support  should  he  return  to
      Kabul. The difficulty is that  the  judge,  although  considering  the
      matter of family support and IDPs, assesses this through the  lens  of
      AK and without appearing to take note of his youth, albeit  he  is  an
      adult now. The combination of the  level  of  indiscriminate  violence
      together with the existence of family support  are  matters  that  are
      required to be taken into account in considering the reasonableness or
      otherwise of internal relocation but the judge has not undertaken this
      consideration. She appears to have determined whether it  is  possible
      to depart from AK (as to which see above) but  because  there  was  no
      such departure then the internal relocation objections failed  despite
      the evidence of increased violence.  If  the  findings  of  the  judge
      regarding departure from AK were to be upheld, the background  factors
      that are taken into account would still need to  be  assessed  in  the
      context of relocation. This has not been done.

  12. The other grounds relied upon by Ms Loughlan  are  not  in  themselves
      substantial but the lack of a finding as to risk in his home area, the
      confusion as to the standard of proof in an Article  15(c)  claim  and
      the lack of proper reasoned findings  as  to  internal  relocation  to
      Kabul all amount to material errors of law such that the  decision  of
      the FtT is set aside to be remade.

  13. The combination of the errors, when the seeming lack of  consideration
      of the appellant's youth, the reliance on  discrepancies  in  evidence
      despite the evidence of the area from which  he  comes  are  included,
      mean that none of the findings can stand. The Upper  Tribunal  is  not
      the forum for primary fact finding. This appeal is therefore  remitted
      to the FtT for redetermination, no findings preserved.





     Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision and remit the hearing to  the  FtT  for  fresh
hearing.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
Date 22nd April 2016
-----------------------
[1] "For the reasons stated above I do not find that the Appellant would be
at risk of serious harm as a result of indiscriminate violence arising from
armed conflict if he returned to Kabul and I do not find that it would be
unduly harsh for him to relocate there. The appeal is dismissed on asylum
and humanitarian grounds."

