
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/09780/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th August 2015                   |On 20th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     A R
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Kadio (Legal Representative, A. de Ruano)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania. Having arrived  in  the  UK  she
    claimed asylum but the application was refused. The Appellant's  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Braybrook at Taylor House on the
    4th of February 2015 and dismissed in a  decision  promulgated  on  the
    10th of February 2015. By grounds of application of the  3rd  of  March
    2015 the Appellant sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Deans on the 13th of March 2015.

 2. The Appellant's case is that she entered an arranged marriage  and  had
    lived briefly with her mother-in-law. Before her  application  to  join
    her husband in the UK had been decided she left  him  for  another  man
    called G, as a result of that she claimed her father threatened to kill
    her.  G made her work as a prostitute, following a suicide attempt  she
    was left alone but still detained for a month before being  brought  to
    the UK. On her first journey in the UK she fled from the  car  she  had
    been in, fearing further exploitation and located a cousin in  the  UK.
    If returned to Albania she feared her father and further trafficking.

 3. The basic facts were accepted by the Secretary of State in the  Refusal
    Letter, this included the fact of her escape from  the  car  after  her
    arrival in the UK.  The  issue  arose  with  regard  to  the  issue  of
    sufficiency of protection on return to Albania. Clearly the view of the
    Secretary of State was that the  Appellant  could  properly  return  to
    Albania and that formed the basis of  the  Appellant's  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The Judge found that the Appellant had not caused a loss to G as he had
    not paid for her and had stopped sexually exploiting her in Albania and
    in interview she had accepted he was unlikely  to  look  for  her.  His
    having said his family were in Greece reduced the risk to her  and  she
    would not be misled as before. In paragraph  12  the  Judge  noted  the
    circumstances of the Appellant's escape  and  that  she  had  not  been
    traced within the UK by G or anyone else. In  paragraph  13  the  Judge
    considered that there was sufficient protection in  the  circumstances.
    With regard to her father and the  risk  he  might  present  the  Judge
    discussed the likelihood of contact with her family, or lack of it, the
    support she had had from D and from her paternal cousins in the UK.

 5. Upper Tribunal Judge Deans considered that it  was  arguable  that  the
    Judge had erred  in  relation  to  the  finding  that  the  traffickers
    business was not harmed by her running away, her response  at  question
    186 of her interview may have been misconstrued, the fact she  had  not
    been located in the UK did not mean she would not be at risk in Albania
    and it was arguable that inadequate reasons had been given for  finding
    she would not be entirely without family support if returned.

 6. At the hearing the Appellant relied on the grounds of  application  and
    observed that in her Screening Interview the  Appellant  had  indicated
    that she feared G if returned and that she would be found. She had  run
    away as she feared what would happen in the UK. Findings  in  paragraph
    15 had been misconstrued as she had lived with mother-in-law after  the
    marriage and there was  no  evidence  of  independent  living.  It  was
    submitted that the Judge had gone beyond the concessions  made  by  the
    Secretary of State. That  her  father  had  not  located  her  did  not
    undermine the case as she had been held in a secret house.

 7. For the Secretary of State it was submitted that the finding  that  she
    had not been exploited for the last month was  relevant  and  decreased
    the risk she might face on return. At question 186 she  had  said  with
    regard to G locating her "I am not saying that he is  going  to  search
    for me but Albania is not that big and he can find me."  The  fact  she
    had not been located in the UK went to the ability of  the  traffickers
    to locate her, reasons had been given in paragraphs 11 and 13  why  she
    would not be at risk. Even if the Judge had erred with  regard  to  the
    assistance from D it was still  permissible  to  find  that  she  could
    relocate within Albania.

 8. The basis of the Appellant's account is not in issue but  the  findings
    that can properly be made from them are disputed. It is  accepted  that
    the Appellant was being trafficked into the UK, not by G, and that  the
    Appellant  ran  away  without  being  stopped  or  located.  While  the
    observation that G's business may not have been affected by her  escape
    may be questioned it does not appear  to  me  to  be  material  to  the
    decision that was made. The Judge did not address what contacts  G  may
    have had with those to whom the Appellant  had  been  passed  and  what
    interest could remain in her if she were to be returned by  those  from
    whom she had run away.

 9. The purpose of the Appellant's transfer to the UK would be relevant  to
    this. Presumably she had not been brought to  the  UK  to  give  her  a
    better start in life and to make amends  for  her  past  ill-treatment.
    There  was  no  consideration  of  the  contacts  that  the   different
    traffickers may have had and the potential danger in Albania  in  these
    circumstances and  the  ability  of  the  state  to  provide  her  with
    protection in these circumstances also needed assessment. The focus  on
    the Appellant's danger from G had the effect of distracting  the  Judge
    from the dangers that the Appellant  may  have  faced  from  the  other
    traffickers.

10. For the reasons given I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is marred  by  material  errors  that  fundamentally  the
    conclusions  reached  by  the  Judge.  In  the  circumstances   it   is
    appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  re-
    heard by a different tribunal. Apart from the findings  agreed  by  the
    Secretary of State  no  findings  are  preserved  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and the matter is to be re-heard on  all  outstanding
    issues.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing not  before
Judge Braybrook.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

At this stage I make no fee award, this is an issue to be considered by  the
First-tier Tribunal dependent on the decision made at the conclusion of  the
re-hearing.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 17th August 2015

