
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09388/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 14 June 2016                      |on 13 July 2016                      |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      X
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Francis, counsel (instructed by JD Spicer ZEB
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    appellant/parties  in  this  determination,  identified  as   X.   This
    direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and  to  the
    respondent as "the claimant."

 2. The claimant is a national of Afghanistan, born on [ ] 1998. His appeal
    against the decision of the secretary of state dated  10  October  2015
    refusing his claim for protection in  the  UK  on  asylum  grounds  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian in a decision promulgated
    on 4 April 2016.

 3. The secretary of state appeals with permission by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Rintoul dated 10 May 2016. In granting permission he stated that it  is
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing to set out
    what facts he found and why and that the Judge arguably did not explain
    why he (presumably) accepted the core of the account.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the claimant came  to  the  UK
    when he was a minor aged 15. He attended an asylum screening unit. When
    he made his application he  was  16.  Although  his  asylum  claim  was
    refused he was given leave to remain until he reached 17 and a half.

 5. His counsel informed the First-tier Tribunal that  since  the  claimant
    was a minor, he would  not  be  giving  evidence.  She  relied  on  the
    documentation before the  Tribunal  including  his  witness  statement,
    stating that his brother, MS, would give evidence. The latter  has  had
    refugee status since 2010, having won his asylum appeal.

 6. The Judge noted that this created difficulty and that although  counsel
    is not to be blamed it was her instructing solicitors who had given the
    instructions to counsel not to  call  the  claimant  to  give  evidence
    because of his age. The Judge thought this was an unwise  decision  and
    did not assist this tribunal "whatsoever" as the  claimant  could  have
    attended with a  responsible  adult  and  given  evidence.  There  were
    matters requiring clarification. The claimant did not "shy  away"  from
    giving instructions from the back of the hearing room  and  talking  to
    counsel [5].

 7. The Judge noted that the claimant's older brother's asylum  appeal  was
    allowed on 14 September 2010. His  brother  gave  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal. At [5] the Judge stated that "... whilst I told counsel  that
    another Judge may have taken a different view as to credibility  as  to
    the appellant not giving evidence in these circumstances, I would  view
    the case nevertheless based on the evidence  the  appellant  had  given
    whilst a minor and would not take issue with the fact that he  had  not
    given oral evidence."

 8. At [7] the Judge stated that the claimant's  current  protection  claim
    was based substantially on the same  material  facts  as  that  of  his
    brother's appeal, namely their father's involvement in the Taliban, his
    death, the involvement of SG, a cousin of theirs, and the targeting  of
    the claimant's family by the Taliban of which the cousin was a  member.
    The Judge found that there is therefore a significant  overlap  arising
    out of the same factual matrix [7].

 9. The Judge had regard to the guidance from Devaseelan. The fact that the
    claimant's brother was found to be  credible  and  to  be  in  need  of
    international protection by a Judge was a very strong ground in support
    of the claimant's own credibility and the genuineness of his  own  need
    for protection. They are both  from  the  same  family  and  were  both
    unaccompanied minors. (It appears  from  the  decision  of  Immigration
    Judge Callender Smith,  promulgated  on  14  September  2010  that  the
    claimant's brother was born in March 1996 and that he arrived in the UK
    on 6 May 2010 after an eight month journey).

10. The facts were that the claimant left Afghanistan three months prior to
    arriving in the UK on 4 December 2014, hidden in a lorry. The  claimant
    accordingly left Afghanistan more than four  years  after  his  brother
    left.

11. In relying on Devaseelan, the Judge noted that  the  claimant  and  his
    brother are from the same family and were  both  unaccompanied  minors.
    The claimant would be a lone minor and it would not  be  reasonable  to
    relocate him to Kabul in those  circumstances.  He  is  uneducated.  He
    started going to English classes in  the  UK  when  he  came  here  and
    started to educate himself. His brother claimed that he  did  not  know
    where his parents were and does not  know  where  any  members  of  his
    family are. There is evidence of contact with the  Red  Cross  to  find
    where his parents were [8]

12. The Judge noted at [9] that the presenting officer  accepted  that  the
    claimant was Afghan. He and his brothers are from the same  tribe.  The
    claimant fears recruitment by the Taliban. His  father  used  to  be  a
    fighter for them before  he  was  killed.  The  Judge  noted  that  the
    claimant claimed in his witness statement that he was forcibly taken to
    a madrassa by  members  of  the  Taliban  on  two  occasions  and  they
    attempted to enlist him as a jihadist and suicide bomber.  He  did  not
    want to fight for the Taliban or become a bomber.

13. The stated at [10] that the claimant had to establish  that  there  was
    '... a real risk to him of being forced to be recruited, or be of other
    adverse interest from the Taliban in his home area on the basis that he
    has already been  targeted  by  them'.  He  was  at  risk  through  his
    relationship to a specific individual, namely his cousin, SG. The Judge
    "deduced nothing" to suggest that the risk would have abated should the
    claimant be returned to his home area. He had been  the  victim  of  an
    attempted coercive recruitment in the sense that he  was  forcibly  and
    physically taken to a madrassa and placed under pressure  to  join  the
    Taliban and as a suicide bomber. The current situation  in  Afghanistan
    is one of worsening conflict characterised by an  increasing  breakdown
    of such limited law and order [10].

14. The Judge found that the information relied  on  by  the  secretary  of
    state dates from 2013 and does not reflect  the  current  situation  or
    demonstrate anything meaningful on the  availability  or  otherwise  of
    state protection in Afghanistan [11]. As to internal  relocation,  this
    would not provide the claimant with  adequate  protection  against  the
    risk of being tracked down and harmed by the  Taliban.  His  cousin,  a
    member of the Taliban, may well on the lower standard be influential in
    his arrest were he to return [11].

15. The Judge noted that the claimant currently lives with his brother. His
    written evidence was "corroborated" by his brother  who  gave  evidence
    that he obtained the claimant's telephone number from a member  of  his
    village who was in Pakistan whilst the claimant himself was there.  His
    brother had been to Pakistan and had met with that "member" in 2014.

16. The Judge noted that the claimant stated in his written  evidence  "and
    corroborated by his brother when giving evidence" that the last time he
    contacted his mother and sister was before he left Afghanistan  and  he
    has no way of contacting them as they have no telephone  communication.
    His grandparents are deceased. His father had no siblings.  His  mother
    has one sister whom he cannot recall  when  he  last  saw.  He  has  no
    details of anyone else [13].

17. The Judge noted that the claimant's evidence was that after his brother
    fled, he, his mother, sister and grandfather moved to live  with  their
    uncle in the same village. After his brother fled, the claimant  stated
    in his written evidence that he remembered the Taliban  coming  to  his
    home twice. On the second occasion,  when  the  Taliban  came  for  his
    brother, they took the claimant with them to a madrassa. That was about
    an hour away from their home. He stayed there one night and escaped and
    returned home the following day. The same day, his uncle came and  they
    all went to stay with the uncle [14].

18. The Judge then stated at [15]:

         "As advised earlier, the evidence I am looking at is  the  evidence
         of a child and not an adult and so long as I believe  the  core  of
         the evidence to be true that suffices. See, for example the case of
         Chiver."

19. The Judge then referred to the  country  background  information  which
    showed that forced or coercive recruitment is a technique used  by  the
    anti-government groups such as the Taliban [16]. Further, a past threat
    will, "in my view" found a real risk of future harm - paragraph 339K of
    the Immigration Rules [17].

20.  The  Judge  stated  at  [18]  that  there  is  also  insufficiency  of
    protection. The European Asylum Support Office's  Afghanistan  Security
    Situation described the current situation confirming  that  the  Afghan
    authorities  are  in  general  unable  to  provide  protection  against
    violence.

21. The Judge stated at [19]  that  "furthermore,  the  (claimant's)  blood
    relationship with SG, a Taliban figure and a cousin, would make it even
    more likely that he could be discovered."

22. The Judge did not "believe" that  relocation  to  Kabul  was  a  viable
    alternative as he does not know anyone there and he will be at risk  as
    a lone minor returning "and indeed  there  is  still  insufficiency  of
    protection there as well against the violence." [20]

23. Mr Walker on behalf of the secretary of state submitted that the  Judge
    failed to make material findings of fact on core  issues.  He  has  not
    made a "definitive" finding that he accepts the core of the  claimant's
    claim despite his self direction at [15] and reference to  the  country
    information at [16]. The Judge simply  went  on  to  consider  internal
    relocation and sufficiency of state protection.

24.  Moreover,  the  finding  at  [19]  is  "totally  speculative"  and  is
    unsupported by any evidence, amounting to a bare assertion.

25. With regard to reliance on  Devaseelan  and  the  claimant's  brother's
    determination, the surrounding circumstances relating to his  departure
    from Afghanistan in 2009 cannot in the circumstances form the basis  of
    the appellant's claim. In particular, he submitted that there was a gap
    of almost four years prior to the claimant's arrival  in  the  UK.  The
    Judge has not made any findings about this "gap".

26. The claimant asserted that he was visited by the cousin some two  weeks
    prior to his leaving.  In  his  screening  statement  he  claimed  that
    approximately two weeks before leaving Afghanistan,  the  Taliban  came
    for him. His cousin was with them. He was slapped and taken to the same
    madrassa again.

27. He had earlier stated that after his brother fled, his mother,  sister,
    grandfather and he moved to live with his uncle in  the  same  village.
    After his brother fled the Taliban came for him twice at  their  house.
    On the second occasion  they  came  for  his  brother,  they  took  the
    claimant with them. He stayed there for a night and  then  escaped  and
    returned home. On the same day his uncle came and  they  went  to  live
    with him.

28. Mr Walker submitted that there was "a total lack  of  any  findings  in
    this determination regarding the evidence."

29. With regard to the determination in the  claimant's  brother's  appeal,
    the secretary of state was not represented at that hearing. Nor did the
    Judge make any findings or reference to the claimant at all.

30. He thus contended that  the  determination  in  the  claimant's  appeal
    failed to show what the Judge accepted or did not  accept.  It  is  not
    appropriate that attempts should be made in retrospect  "to  tease  out
    findings which are not clear but are only hinted at."

31. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Francis relied on the  Rule  24  response
    that had been prepared by Ms Sanders,  dated  26  May  2016.  She  also
    relied on an additional submission by Miss Sanders dated 27  May  2016.
    She submitted that the secretary of state's grounds amounted to nothing
    more than a disagreement with the findings made by the Judge  and  that
    no legitimate grounds of appeal had been identified.

32. With regard to the secretary  of  state's  contention  that  the  Judge
    should have drawn an adverse inference against  the  claimant  for  not
    giving oral evidence as  he  had  no  acute  vulnerability  or  medical
    condition that would preclude him from giving evidence,  and  that  the
    Judge placed too much weight on his brother's successful asylum  appeal
    and dealt  with  issues  of  internal  relocation  and  sufficiency  of
    protection inadequately, she submitted that no presumptions arise  from
    a lack of oral evidence. An appellant's decision whether to  give  oral
    evidence has no evidential significance of its own. She referred to the
    authorities in that respect set out at  paragraph  7  of  the  Rule  24
    response.  Whether  or  not  to  draw  an  adverse  inference  in   the
    circumstances was a matter that was entirely  within  Judge  Andonian's
    own discretion (paragraph 12).

33. She submitted that the claimant was aged 18 at  the  date  of  hearing.
    Although not barred from giving evidence, as a child, he  fell  into  a
    special category of appellants who are only required to  give  evidence
    where special criteria are met. She referred to the Senior  President's
    Practice Direction of 30 October 2008 which defines a child  as  anyone
    who has not attained the age of 18. It is stated at paragraph 2 that  a
    child, vulnerable adult or sensitive witness will only be  required  to
    attend as a witness and give evidence at a hearing where  the  Tribunal
    determines that the evidence is necessary to enable the fair hearing of
    the case and their welfare would not be prejudiced by doing so.

34. The secretary of state accordingly wrongly  argued  that  the  claimant
    should have demonstrated an acute vulnerability or  medical  condition.
    As a child, he already fell into a special category. The sole  question
    for the Judge was whether he could be satisfied with  the  child's  non
    oral evidence in all the circumstances  of  the  case.  This  had  been
    referred to in counsel's skeleton argument placed before the Judge.

35. Nor did the secretary  of  state  show  that  oral  evidence  from  the
    claimant was necessary to enable the fair hearing of the case; nor  did
    the Judge make any such finding.

36. Moreover, the claimant had dealt with the few credibility issues raised
    by the secretary of state in his statements.

37. With regard to the contention  that  undue  weight  was  given  to  the
    claimant's brother's case, she submitted that this amounted to no  more
    than a simple quarrel with the Judge. The Judge made a clear finding at
    [7]  that  the  claimant's  case  and  his  brother's  case  are  based
    substantially on the same material facts. He reminded himself that  his
    brother's case did not contain any findings  concerning  the  claimant.
    However, there was a  significant  overlap  arising  out  of  the  same
    factual matrix. Applying the wording and the principle set  out  in  AA
    (Somalia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1040 at [69],  the  Judge  found  that
    this is a very strong ground in support of the claimant.

38. She referred to the  additional  submissions  and  submitted  that  the
    Judge's finding  at  [19]  regarding  the  risk  of  discovery  by  the
    claimant's cousin was  in  fact  not  speculative.  In  the  additional
    submission it  is  contended  that  the  Judge  "clearly  accepted  the
    claimant's evidence that he  had  been  persecuted  by  SG,  a  Taliban
    figure." Accordingly, a past threat indicates future  risk.  The  Judge
    also accepted the submission relating to the  claimant's  vulnerability
    as  a  lone  minor  or  very  young  adult  without   family   support.
    Accordingly, even if there had been an error, it was not material.

39. The claimant's claim related to his father and cousin, Taliban members,
    who had applied coercive efforts to force  the  claimant  to  become  a
    member of the Taliban. There was therefore  an  overlap  of  the  facts
    found in the claimant's brother's appeal.

    Assessment

40. As noted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    presumably accepted the core of the claimant's account, albeit that  he
    did not expressly make such a finding at [15].

41. However, the Judge did not set out what facts  he  found,  nor  why  he
    accepted them. It  had  been  contended  that  the  findings  by  Judge
    Callender Smith regarding the claimant's  brother,  and  in  particular
    that he was found to be credible, is a strong ground in support of  the
    claimant's  own  credibility  and  the  genuineness  of  his  need  for
    protection.

42. Judge Andonian stated that  the  claimant  feared  recruitment  by  the
    Taliban. His father used to be a fighter before he was killed.  In  his
    witness statement he contended that he was forcibly taken to a madrassa
    by members of the Taliban on two occasions, and that they attempted  to
    enlist him as a jihadist and a suicide bomber.

43. However, as noted by Mr Walker, the claimant's evidence was set out  in
    his SEF statement dated 28 January 2015. At paragraph 10 he stated that
    that after  his  brother  fled,  they  moved  in  with  his  uncle.  He
    remembered that the Taliban came for his brother twice at the house. On
    the second occasion (which is not dated) when the Taliban came for  his
    brother they took the claimant with them to a madrassa. That was  about
    an hour away from their house. He stayed there  for  a  night  and  the
    following day he "escaped" and returned home.

44. About three weeks before he left Afghanistan,  he  contended  that  the
    Taliban came for him. His cousin, SG, was with them. On that  occasion,
    he was slapped and taken to the same madrassa. They began preaching  to
    him about jihad and becoming a suicide bomber. A week later he  managed
    again to escape from them.  In his statement dated 1  March  2016,  the
    claimant responded to some of the reasons for refusal in the  secretary
    of state's decision dated 10 June 2015. There he said that  SG  entered
    the house on his own, when he came with a group of men.

45. I have also had regard to  the  witness  statement  of  the  claimant's
    brother, dated 1 March 2016. He stated that he has had no contact  with
    his family since leaving Afghanistan. He had  given  his  number  to  a
    person who lived in their village in Pakistan. He gave him  the  number
    when he visited in 2014. He had gone to see a friend  there.  When  the
    claimant rang him, he collected him. He stated that he  cannot  comment
    on what happened to the claimant in Afghanistan as he only  knows  what
    he has told him.

46. It is accepted that the claimant's brother came to the UK in  or  about
    May 2010. The claimant however arrived in the UK on  4  December  2014,
    about four and a half years later.

47. During that  substantial  gap  the  claimant  had  stated  in  his  SEF
    statement that after his brother fled, the Taliban came for  him  twice
    at the house. As already noted, no detail was given  as  to  when  they
    came for him. On the second occasion, when they came for  his  brother,
    they took him to a madrassa. However, the claimant remained  there  for
    one night and the following day he escaped and returned  home.  On  the
    same day, his uncle came and they went to live with him.

48. He also asserted that three weeks before leaving Afghanistan his cousin
    entered the premises. He was with some members of the Taliban.  He  was
    then slapped and taken to the same madrassa. They preached to him about
    jihad and about becoming a suicide bomber. He again managed  to  escape
    and went to stay at his old house and hid there.

49. The finding by the Judge that there was a significant  overlap  arising
    out of the same factual matrix presented in his brother's  appeal  does
    not however factor in or deal with the substantial gap  of  four  years
    following the claimant's brother's departure from  Afghanistan.  During
    that period the Taliban came for his brother twice at their  house.  On
    the second occasion, when they came for him they took the claimant to a
    madrassa. He then escaped and returned home. His uncle  then  came  and
    they went to live with him.

50. There was no further reference to any attempts to remove  the  claimant
    from his house until about three weeks before he  left.  There  was  no
    evidence of any further attempts by the Taliban to recruit him after he
    "escaped" and returned home.

51. From the foregoing the  Judge  has  not  adequately  explained  why  he
    (presumably) accepted the core of the claimant's account. Not only  has
    he not set out the facts that he found but  did  not  set  out  why  he
    accepted them. He did not grapple at all with the paucity  of  evidence
    relating to the extensive gap between the departure of  the  claimant's
    brother from Afghanistan and the claimant's own departure some four and
    a half years later.

52. I accept Mr Walker's submission that a party is entitled  to  know  the
    basis upon which she failed without  having  to  "tease  out  findings"
    which may only be hinted at but which are not clear.

53. I accordingly find that there were inadequate reasons for accepting the
    core of the claimant's claim.  The  finding  at  [19]  that  his  blood
    relationship with his cousin would make it even  more  likely  that  he
    could be discovered is not explained. There was no  evidence  that  his
    cousin had made further attempts to find the claimant since his  escape
    from the madrassa on the second occasion,  three  weeks  prior  to  his
    leaving the country.

54. I accordingly set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    parties agreed that in the event that I came to such  a  decision  this
    was an appropriate case for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh consideration.

55. I  have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
    regarding the issue of remitting an appeal for  a  fresh  decision.  In
    giving effect to that approach  I  am  satisfied  that  the  extent  of
    judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the  decision  to
    be re-made is extensive. There will be a complete  re-hearing.  I  have
    also had regard to the overriding objective and find that  it  will  be
    just and fair to remit the case.

56. In the circumstances I direct that the appeal be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a fresh decision to be made.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and the decision is set aside and is remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Taylor House) for a fresh decision to be made before  another
    Judge.

    An anonymity direction has been made.




    Signed   Date 11 July 2016
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer
