
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09745/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2014                             |On 4 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                               Gazmend Kurpali
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, Counsel instructed by Nova Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Kosova  and  his  date  of  birth  is  26
    August 1976.

2.   The appellant entered  the  UK  illegally  on  12  September  1998  and
    claimed asylum. This application was, according  to  the  Secretary  of
    State, refused in a decision of 18 July  2000  and  the  appellant  was
    invited by the Secretary of State  to  an  interview  relating  to  his
    asylum claim and he failed to attend.

3.   The appellant made further submissions to the Secretary of State  dated
    10 May 2010 enclosing  a  legacy  questionnaire.   He  made  additional
    submissions on 30 May 2013.  The conclusion of the Secretary  of  State
    was that the submissions did not amount to a fresh claim in a letter of
    15 October 2013.  The respondent went on  in  the  decision  letter  to
    refuse  the  appellant's  application  for  asylum   and   humanitarian
    protection for the reasons which it gave in the original refusal letter
    of 18 July 2000 (which according to the respondent was  served  on  the
    appellant by post on 7 May 2001).  The Secretary  of  State  considered
    the appellant's private life in the context of Appendix  FM  (paragraph
    276ADE).  The application was refused under paragraph  276ADE(iii)  and
    (vi).    The Secretary of State also considered the application in  the
    context of family life in accordance with Appendix  FM.   The  decision
    maker also considered whether there were exceptional  circumstances  to
    grant leave outside the Rules and concluded that there were not.

8.   The decision maker also considered paragraph 353B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and decided that although the appellant did not have any criminal
    convictions he had failed to attend an asylum interview on 11 July 2000
    and he absconded.  Attempts to locate him  were  unsuccessful  and  the
    appellant only came to light when his representatives  responded  to  a
    letter from the Home Office on 26 July 2010.  It was  not  accepted  by
    the decision maker that the appellant had only  received  the  original
    asylum decision of 18 July 2000 on 17 May 2013 as put  forward  by  the
    appellant.

9.   The decision maker took into account the appellant had been in  the  UK
    for over fourteen years however it was concluded  that  for  twelve  of
    those years he decided to abscond from immigration control and that  he
    had  only  been  complying  with  the  immigration  law  since  he  re-
    established contact in July 2010.

10.  The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Callow
    in a decision dated 9 May 2014 following a hearing on 6 March 2014.

11.  The appellant made an application for permission to  appeal  which  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Brunnen in a decision of  5
    June 2014.  Thus the matter came before me on  8  August  2014  when  I
    adjourned  the  matter  until  9  October  2014   and   directed   both
    representatives to prepare written skeleton arguments.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

12.  Judge Callow recorded that the appeal had been listed previously on  25
    November 2013 by Judge Talbot who issued directions to  the  respondent
    to produce evidence in relation to the service of the refusal letter of
    18 July 2000.  In addition the  appellant  was  directed  to  serve  an
    additional witness statement setting  out  details  of  his  places  of
    residence between his arrival in  the  UK  and  2010.   The  respondent
    failed to comply with the direction.

13.  At the hearing before Judge Callow the appellant's  grounds  of  appeal
    were amended to include long residence pursuant to  Rule  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

14.  The Judge made the following findings:-

         "13. While it was  claimed  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the
             appellant  was  persisting  with  his  claim  for  asylum,  no
             evidence whatsoever was adduced in this regard.  Equally  when
             the appellant wrote to the respondent in 2010 he simply raised
             the question of  being  granted  leave  to  remain  under  the
             respondent's Legacy Programme.  He did not restate  his  claim
             for asylum.  He sought leave to remain under the  respondent's
             Legacy Programme and Article 8 of the  ECHR.   Furthermore  no
             submissions were made by Mr Hawkin in support of  this  ground
             of appeal.


         15.  In assessing the credibility of the appellant's evidence I  am
             minded that he has told the truth about some matters, but  not
             all.  Nonetheless it is accepted that he was  unaware  of  the
             respondent's refusal of 18 July 2000 until 17  May  2013  when
             his current representatives obtained a copy of the refusal.


         25.  In the present appeal the appellant has been resident  in  the
             UK for over fifteen years.  The tension in this appeal centres
             on the length of the appellant's residence in the UK  and  the
             adverse finding of the respondent that the delay in  his  case
             was due to his own evasion of immigration control and not  due
             to delays on the part of the respondent.  He was an  absconder
             between 1998 and 2010.


         26.  The respondent's refusal letter  under  appeal  mentioned  the
             appellant's long residence of fourteen  years  and  which  was
             considered  as  one  of  the  factors  under  paragraph  353B.
             Lengthy residence is undoubtedly a weighty factor, but  it  is
             not in itself a decisive consideration.  In the present appeal
             there was no  delay  by  the  respondent.   The  delay  was  a
             consequence  occasioned  by  the  appellant's   own   conduct.
             Between 1998 and 2010, a period of twelve years, the appellant
             put himself beyond the reach of the respondent by  failing  to
             follow up on his asylum  claim  and  to  keep  the  respondent
             informed as to his whereabouts.  He held no leave to remain in
             the UK.  He now seeks to profit from this twelve year  period.




         29.  A reading of the decision shows that the respondent  exercised
             her discretion in arriving  at  her  conclusion  refusing  the
             appellant leave to remain.  On the face of it the decision  is
             lawful.  However, the issue  in  this  appeal  is  whether  it
             should have been exercised differently.


         30.  An overall view of the essential facts, in the round, is  that
             the appellant elected to abscond for a period of twelve years.
              By his own conduct he put himself beyond  the  reach  of  the
             respondent.  He cannot now seek to  profit  from  the  lengthy
             twelve year period.  Had this period arisen due to  delays  by
             the respondent, then the situation would  be  very  different.
             Furthermore, with no leave to remain  he  has  worked  without
             permission.  The fact that Mr  Aroun,  in  Geraldo,  (with  an
             immigration history comparable with that of the appellant,  if
             not worse) was granted discretionary leave by  the  respondent
             is in no way, as with the length of the appellant's residence,
             singularly conclusive.  In all the circumstances  it  has  not
             been shown that the respondent's discretion should  have  been
             exercised  differently.   In  all  the  circumstances,   after
             inordinate lengthy consideration, the respondent's decision is
             in accordance  with  the  law.   Accordingly  the  appellant's
             appeal fails."

15.  The Judge went on to consider Article 8 of the ECHR in accordance  with
    R v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.  The Judge went on to make the following findings:

         "34. While the appellant lives with his  cousin  it  has  not  been
             established that there exists any family  life  beyond  normal
             emotional  ties.   The  appellant  works  and  is  financially
             independent.  Undoubtedly he has friends  living  in  the  UK.
             Nonetheless the appellant has been living in the UK  for  over
             fifteen years and in respect of which it is acknowledged  that
             this is a significant factor of weight.  However his  parents,
             with whom he is in contact, live in Kosova.  As does, so it is
             said, his wife and his 15 year old daughter.


         35.  Simply founded on the length  of  his  residence  in  the  UK,
             despite  it  being  without  leave  and  a  low  threshold  of
             engagement, it will be assumed that  the  appellant's  removal
             would 'have consequences of gravity' (Lord Bingham's  question
             2) engaging the operation of Article 8.


         36.  There is no dispute that the  interference  is  in  accordance
             with the  law  (question  3)  and  pursues  a  legitimate  aim
             (question 4).


         37.  The issue that  arises  is  one  of  proportionality,  as  was
             explained in Huang and Anor v Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department [2007] UKHL 11.  This shows the necessity  to  give
             full and  appropriate  weight  to  the  interests  of  society
             generally in adherence to clear and  fixed  Immigration  Rules
             and consistent enforcement of the same in  the  deterrence  of
             breaches of the same  and  of  other  potential  harm  to  the
             community, and to prevent any particular harm that may present
             itself in any particular case.  The upholding  of  the  public
             interest must, however, be balanced against the rights of  the
             individual not only  to  the  extent  that  interference  with
             rights should be avoided but also in that a  person's  natural
             affinity to and reliance upon  family  and  immediate  society
             ought to be respected.  The protection afforded by  Article  8
             requires  that  acts  lawfully  taken  in  order  to   enforce
             immigration control, and which interference  with  private  or
             family life  to  an  extent  sufficiently  serious  to  engage
             Article 8, must  do  so  only  to  the  extent  to  which  the
             interference complained of is proportionate to the  legitimate
             end to be achieved.  The question for the decision maker where
             removal of a person (who is  not  entitled  under  immigration
             laws to remain in the UK, and  who  could  not  reasonably  be
             expected to enjoy a family and private life  elsewhere)  would
             affect the private and family life of that person is,  whether
             the removal would prejudice the private and family life of the
             person affected in a manner sufficiently serious to amount  to
             a breach of the fundamental right protected by Article 8.   It
             is not necessary that a separate question be asked whether the
             case meets a test of exceptionality,  although  it  is  to  be
             expected  that  only  a  minority  of  cases  would   disclose
             disproportionality such as engages the protection in question.




         38.  Adverse to the appellant is the  general  public  interest  in
             maintaining a consistent and effective policy  of  immigration
             control.  The immigration history of the appellant  shows  him
             to have unlawfully remained in the UK and during which  period
             he chose to be an absconder.  Furthermore  he  worked  without
             permission.  While  his  lifestyle  and  network  of  friends,
             including family, will be different,  his  private  life  will
             continue in respect of all its essential elements.  Beyond his
             lengthy residence no reasons  were  advanced  as  to  why  the
             appellant could not return to Kosova.  It has not  been  shown
             to be unfair to attach weight to the length of the appellant's
             residence; even more  so  when  most  of  this  residence  was
             unlawful.  A consideration of all the factors  does  not  make
             the  decision   under   appeal   one   which   constitutes   a
             disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  right  to
             respect for his private life in the UK.  The appellant's  life
             in the UK does not entitle him to remain  by  reference  to  a
             Convention which, in the words of Lord Bingham in Razgar,  'is
             directed to the protection of fundamental  human  rights,  not
             the conferment of individual advantages or benefits'."

16.  The Judge went on to address the issue of long residence and  he  found
    that the appellant would not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE.  He went on to make the following finding:-

         "41. By 9 July 2012 the appellant had not made an  application  for
             indefinite leave to remain  under  paragraph  276B(b)  of  the
             Rules.  In any event he could not have done so as  by  9  July
             2012, mindful of his arrival on 12  September  1998,  fourteen
             years had yet to run.  The correct Rule  which  the  appellant
             would have to satisfy would be 276ADE.   There  is  no  extant
             claim for long residence  under  the  old  paragraph  276B(b).
             However should I be in error no evidence has been produced  to
             show that the appellant meets the requirements of subparagraph
             (iv) -  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  English  language  and
             sufficient knowledge about life in the United Kingdom."

The Grounds Seeking Permission to Appeal and Oral Submissions

17.  There are two separate documents entitled grounds of appeal.  There  is
    little between them, but Mr Hawkin's relied on the grounds that he  had
    drafted. They can be summarised.  The Judge  found  (at  paragraph  30)
    that the appellant by his own conduct put himself beyond the  reach  of
    the respondent and therefore he cannot now  seek  to  profit  from  the
    lengthy twelve year period. Ground 1 argues that it is not  clear  from
    this finding whether the Judge is simply adopting the position  of  the
    Secretary of State or making his own findings.  In any event the  Judge
    has failed to provide reasons for his finding. The Secretary  of  State
    failed to comply with directions of the FtT in relation to evidence  of
    the service of the decision letter of  18  July  2000  or  produce  any
    evidence of non-compliance. The Judge accepted that the  appellant  had
    not received the decision until 17 May 2013.

18.     Ground  2  argues  that  the  Judge  should  have   considered   the
    appellant's appeal under the pre 9 July  2012  Immigration  Rules.  The
    Judge  erred  in  finding  that  as  the  appellant  had  not  made  an
    application for ILR by 9 July 2012 paragraph 276B did not apply to him.
     In support of the argument the appellant relied  on  Edgehill  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 402.   In any event the appellant's further submissions
    and legacy questionnaire in 2010 constitute an application for leave to
    remain.  It is not in dispute that  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    decide the application until the appellant had  lived  continuously  in
    the UK for over fifteen years and therefore  fulfilled  paragraph  276B
    (i)(b).

19.  The only reason given by the Judge for not allowing  the  appeal  under
    paragraph 276B is that the appellant had not produced evidence that  he
    had satisfied the requirement in subparagraph (iv) (he  had  sufficient
    knowledge of the English language and life in the UK).   In  any  event
    this was not raised by Counsel  for  the  Secretary  of  State  at  the
    hearing.

20.  Ground 3 argues that the Secretary of State's  decision  not  to  grant
    the appellant leave under the Legacy Policy was fundamentally flawed as
    no proper reasons were given why it was concluded that there  had  been
    non-compliance and the appellant had absconded.  The  Judge  failed  to
    resolve the disparity between the treatment of the appellant's case and
    those of many Kosovan applicants who arrived in  the  UK  in  the  same
    period as him and who have been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    under the Legacy Policy.  Evidence of this was before the Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it was  not  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

21.  Ground 4 argues that the Judge's consideration of Article 8  is  flawed
    for the reasons stated  above.  The  Judge  failed  to  factor  in  the
    evidence that the appellant was estranged from his wife and daughter in
    Kosova as a result of his very lengthy period of residence in the UK.

22.  At the hearing  before  me  on  8  August  2014  Mr  Hawkin  raised  an
    additional ground of appeal. He  argued  that  the  Judge  should  have
    considered paragraph 276A1 and 276A2 of the Immigration  Rules.   These
    contain the requirements for an extension of stay on the ground of long
    residence in the UK.  276A1 and A2 read as follows:-

         "276A1. The requirement to be met by a person seeking an  extension
         of stay on the ground of long residence in the  United  Kingdom  is
         that the applicant meets each  of  the  requirements  in  paragraph
         276B(i)-(ii) and [and (v).]."


             "276A2. An extension of stay on the ground of  long  residence
         in the United Kingdom may be granted for a period not  exceeding  2
         years provided that the Secretary of State is  satisfied  that  the
         requirement in paragraph 276A1 is met [and a person granted such an
         extension of stay following an application made before 9 July  2012
         will remain subject to the rules in force on 8 July 2012.]]."

23.  Mr Wilding responded to the grounds of appeal in  the  context  of  his
    skeleton argument.  It was open  to  Judge  Callow  to  find  that  the
    appellant elected to abscond for a period of twelve years.  Even if  it
    is accepted that the appellant did  not  receive  the  refusal  of  his
    asylum claim he has shown no evidence at all that he sought  to  pursue
    the respondent for a  decision.   He  acquiesced  to  the  delay.   The
    skeleton refers to the case of RU (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    753 and asserts that in the present case the facts  are  similar.    In
    any event Judge Callow was wrong to conclude that the appellant did not
    receive the July 2000 decision. The position of the respondent is  that
    the decision was posted to the appellant and his representative by  way
    of recorded delivery in 2001.

24.  It was argued by Mr Wilding that the  transitional  provisions  do  not
    apply to the appellant because they were in place for applications  for
    leave to remain made under  the  Immigration  Rules  before  the  Rules
    changed and that none of the  representations  made  by  the  appellant
    before the respondent  made  her  decision  could  be  said  to  be  an
    application for leave under  the  Rules.   He  made  reference  to  the
    letters from the appellant to the  respondent  between  2010  and  2013
    which refer to specific compassionate and compelling circumstances  and
    private and family life.  This was not and is not  an  application  for
    leave under the Immigration Rules.

25.  The transitional provisions are found within the Immigration  Rules  at
    A277 which states as follows:

         "From 9 July Appendix FM will apply to all  applications  to  which
         Part 8 of these rules applied on or before 8 July 2012 except where
         the provisions of Part 8 are preserved and continue  to  apply,  as
         set out in paragraph A280."


26.  The application in  this  case  was  not  made  under  Part  8  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The  appellant  relies  specifically  on  the  long
    residency provisions of paragraph 276B which is Part 7  of  the  Rules.
    It is asserted by Mr Wilding that where Article  8  is  relied  on  the
    Rules do play a part and he relied on Haleemudeen v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 558. In any event the appellant was served with a decision refusing
    his asylum claim in  2001  which  included  an  IS151B  or  section  10
    decision and the clock had  stopped  preventing  any  reliance  on  the
    provisions of 276B.

27.  If Judge Callow was wrong in relation to this point he went on to  find
    that the appellant would not be able to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B because he would not meet subparagraph (iv).  Paragraphs
    276A1 and 276A2 relating to an extension of leave do not apply  to  the
    appellant who made no reference to wanting to stay  in  the  UK  for  a
    limited period of time.  Reliance is placed upon  the  judgment  in  MU
    (Bangladesh) ("statement of additional  grounds"  -  long  residence  -
    discretion) Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442."


28.  Judge Callow did not need to go on to consider other "public  interest"
    requirements of the Rules because he had decided that the appellant did
    not meet them.  In any event,  having  found  that  the  appellant  had
    absconded for a lengthy period of twelve years and that  he  failed  to
    attend an asylum interview it is highly likely that the appellant would
    not be deemed as desirable for the purposes of 276B.

29.  There is no merit in the ground relating  to  the  legacy  issue.   The
    Upper Tribunal in AZ (Asylum - legacy cases)  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT
    270 makes it clear that the Tribunal  does  not  have  jurisdiction  to
    consider this point.

30.  The Judge did not make an error of law  in  relation  to  the  decision
    under Article 8 of the ECHR in respect of  the  delay,  this  does  not
    strengthen the  appellant's  case  as  any  delay  simply  led  to  him
    strengthening his claim under Article 8.  In any  event  the  appellant
    did not seek to discover the progress of his asylum application between
    2000 and 2010 and even then it was the  Secretary  of  State  who  made
    contact with the appellant first and not the other way round.

Conclusions

31.  At the hearing before me both parties  served  further  evidence.   The
    appellant  served  a  further  witness  statement  of  8  October  2014
    responding to the further evidence relied on by the Secretary of  State
    namely a document of 7  May  2001,  indicating  that  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter of was sent by  first  class  recorded  delivery  to  an
    address where the appellant was living and there is a recorded delivery
    number shown on the document.  In addition a copy was sent to Chetty  &
    Company Solicitors. I did not admit this evidence. It  was  not  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

32.  Both parties provided me with a considerable  amount  of  case  law  as
    follows.  EB  Kosovo  (FC)  (Appellant)  v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  41,  ZH
    (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 8, Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558,
    Fatima Farhana Mohammed v SSHD [2012] EWHC  3091  (Admin),  AZ  (Asylum
    -'legacy' cases) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 270 (IAC), RU  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 53, Regina (Anufrijeva) v SSHD [2003] UKHL 36,  MU
    ('statement of additional  grounds'  -  long  residence  -  discretion)
    Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442 (IAC) and Edgehill and Bhoyroo v SSHD [2014]
    EWCA Civ 402.

33.   The Judge accepted that the appellant had not  received  the  decision
    letter of 18 July 2000 until 17 May 2013 (paragraph 15), but he went on
    to find that he was an absconder. This was a  conclusion  open  to  the
    Judge on the basis that the appellant had effectively  failed  to  make
    any contact with the respondent  for  a  considerable  period  of  time
    despite having made an application for asylum. It was clearly an  issue
    which the Judge considered for himself whether or not  he  adopted  the
    wording of the decision maker. This is clear  having  when  considering
    paragraphs 13 and 26 of the determination. The  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant had not received the  decision  letter  until  17  May  2013.
    However, the finding of the Judge that the appellant was  an  absconder
    is not inconsistent with this.  It is not irrational or perverse.

34.      The judgements in Edgehill and Haleemudeen are not consistent,  but
    in my view I am bound by the latter. The per incuriam doctrine  has  no
    application where a lower court is faced with a decision  of  a  higher
    court binding upon it (see Cassell & Co Ltd v Broome  [1972]  AC  1027;
    [1972] 1 ALL ER 801). In my view I am constrained to  follow  the  more
    recent decision of the Court of Appeal. In these circumstances  whether
    or not the legacy questionnaire was an 'application' is  not  material.
    In any event, whether the Judge should have applied the  rules  pre  or
    post 9 July 2012 is not material in my view because the appellant could
    not satisfy the requirements 276B (iv) and therefore would not  qualify
    for long residence. The appellant claims that 276B  (iv)  which  is  an
    English language requirement was not raised by the  respondent  at  the
    hearing. The appellant had not  made  an  application  under  276B  and
    therefore the decision maker did not consider it. It was a  matter  for
    the appellant to establish that he met the  requirement  of  the  Rules
    including 276B (iv) and he failed to do so.

35.      I do not accept  Mr  Hawkin's  submissions  relating  to  paragraph
    276A1. The first obvious point is that the  success  of  this  argument
    relies on the premise that the Judge applied the wrong rules and in  my
    view he did not.  In any event, the issue was  not  raised  before  the
    FtT. Paragraph 267A1 requires the appellant to meet the requirements of
    2767B (ii) which is a discretion within the rules which  has  not  been
    exercised in this case because in the view of the  Secretary  of  State
    the appellant's case should have been determined  under  the  new  276B
    post July 2012 and the Judge found that this was the case. If the Judge
    was wrong about that it would then still fall to the Secretary of State
    to consider whether the appellant would  satisfy  the  public  interest
    criteria in 276B (ii) and it is far from obvious that he would. In  any
    event, in the absence of such a decision (that the appellant  satisfies
    the public interest criteria), 276A1 and A2 cannot apply.  This was not
    considered by the decision maker as  the  appellant  did  not  make  an
    application for an extension of leave under paragraph 276A1 and it  was
    not an issue raised before the FtT.

 36.   In relation to ground 3, I accept Mr Wilding's submissions  that  the
    UT jurisdiction is limited on this issue. In  any  event,  the  grounds
    seeking leave to appeal do not disclose that the Judge erred in finding
    that the decision was in accordance with the law. The Judge dealt  with
    this very thoroughly at paragraphs 26, 29 and 30 cited in full above.

37.      Ground 4 relates to Article 8. The challenge to the  assessment  is
    that the Judge did  not  take  into  account  that  the  appellant  was
    estranged from his wife and child.  I do not accept this. At  paragraph
    34 the Judge found that the appellant had not established  family  life
    here in contrast to in Kosovo where  his  parents,  with  whom  he  has
    contact, reside.  The Judge mentioned as a fact  that  the  appellant's
    wife and 15 year old daughter live in Kosovo and there is no suggestion
    that the Judge was under the impression that he had contact with  them.
    Obviously the Judge was aware that the appellant  had  not  lived  with
    them for a considerable period of time. In my view the Judge was merely
    comparing the lack of family life here in the UK with his  family  life
    in Kosovo.  In  relation  to  proportionality  and  the  assessment  at
    paragraphs 37-39, there is no reason to believe that the Judge factored
    the  appellant's  wife  or  child  into  the  balancing  exercise.  The
    appellant's appeal rested on private life here in the UK and whether or
    not that should outweigh the public interest and  the  Judge  found  in
    favour of the Secretary of State.

38.   For all of the above reasons I conclude that the Judge  did  not  make
    an error of law and the decision to dismiss the appeal is maintained.




Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 2 November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

