
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09076/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |    Decision & Reasons         |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 9 April 2015                            |    On 20 April 2015           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                            Jaswant Kaur Malhotra
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr  S  Ell,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Middlesex  Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, an Afghan  Sikh  widow,  was  refused  asylum,  and  her
    appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 2  January  2015.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Cox, on 5 February  2015.   In
    granting permission Judge Cox said the following.

         "The grounds put forward five contentions, all  of  which  I  would
         regard as arguable.  The central problem, however, in my estimation
         is that the judge appears completely to have missed the point  that
         A's claim was founded  upon  the  acknowledged  fact  of  her  Sikh
         religion and consequently made no finding on  the  highly  material
         issue of whether she would be at risk on  return  as  a  lone  Sikh
         woman.  All grounds may be argued."

2.   At the error of law hearing Mr  Walker,  for  the  respondent,  made  a
    sensible, and some would say inevitable, concession to the effect  that
    there was a material error of law in the judge's decision, and that the
    matter required remittal to the First-tier for  a  fresh  hearing.   In
    view of this sensible agreed position I will  only  set  out  in  brief
    terms the basis for this agreement.

3.   The judge dealt  with  credibility  at  paragraphs  9  and  10  of  the
    decision.  The  difficulty  with  paragraph  9  is  that  there  is  no
    consideration of the relevance of the central fact, that the  appellant
    was of the Sikh religion, in  an  environment  where  this  was  highly
    problematic, particularly in view of  the  hostile  attitude  to  Sikhs
    expressed by the Taliban.  The judge's reasoning at paragraph 9 rejects
    the credibility of the appellant's account as being improbable  on  the
    basis that there was no explanation for the persecution suffered by her
    and her family, but this assessment was  conducted  on  the  artificial
    basis that the obvious religious cause was excluded.

4.   Similarly in the judge's consideration of risk on return  in  paragraph
    11  the  judge  approaches   the   appellant's   circumstances   giving
    consideration only to her health and medical condition, the  extent  of
    her family connections in Afghanistan, but not giving consideration  to
    the central aspect of the claim - her religion.

5.   In view of the agreed position reached at the  brief  hearing,  and  in
    the light of the central problem correctly and succinctly identified by
    the judge who granted permission to appeal, I have therefore decided to
    set aside the judge's decision dismissing the appeal, on the basis that
    there was a  material  error  of  law  relevant  to  both  the  adverse
    credibility and the risk on return findings.

6.   The representatives were both agreed that a remittal to the  First-tier
    was required.  Within the terms of the practice statement the extent of
    the fact-finding necessary made it an unsuitable case for a remaking in
    the Upper Tribunal.

7.   It was not suggested that there was any  need  for  anonymity  in  this
    appeal, and I make no such direction.  No issue of any fee award arose,
    because the appeal was fee exempt.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law,  and  the  decision  dismissing  the
appeal is set aside.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed, and the appeal is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing, with no findings preserved.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

