

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number:  AA/09789/2015
                                                               AA/10987/2015
                                                               AA/10986/2015
                                                               AA/10988/2015
                                                               AA/10989/2015
                                                               AA/10990/2015
                                                               AA/10991/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields              |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 29 April 2016                    |On 10 May 2016              |
|Prepared on 2 May 2016              |                            |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                              N. Z. & 6 Others
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Johnson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellants are a husband and wife and their  five  children,
           who, as citizens of Eritrea, claimed asylum on 30 December  2014
           following legitimate entry to the UK. The  Appellants  travelled
           to the UK upon valid  Eritrean  passports  endorsed  with  valid
           grants of entry clearance as  visitors.  They  had  applied  for
           their visas in Saudi Arabia, and in their applications they  had
           declared that they had lived in Saudi Arabia for many years, and
           that they held residence permits allowing them  to  do  so.  The
           First Appellant declared an employment  in  Saudi  Arabia  by  a
           subsidiary of Unilever since February  1994.  They  declared  an
           intention to visit the UK for a short period for the purpose  of
           tourism.
        2. Having entered the UK the First Appellant claimed to  have  lost
           his employment in Saudi Arabia, and thus claimed that the family
           had lost their residence permits. He claimed to  have  destroyed
           the  family's  Eritrean  passports  after  entry  and  prior  to
           claiming asylum. The Appellants denied having ever  been  issued
           with passports by Saudi Arabia.
        3. The First Appellant claims to have been granted  refugee  status
           from Ethiopia by Sudan in 1981, and to have travelled from Sudan
           to Saudi Arabia in 1989. Once Eritrea gained  independence  from
           Ethiopia in the 1990s he says that  he  was  required  by  Saudi
           Arabia to hold  his  own  Eritrean  passport  -  which  he  duly
           acquired in recognition of his Eritrean nationality, paying  the
           diaspora tax due as an expatriate, as required.
        4. The Respondent accepted that the  Appellants  were  citizens  of
           Eritrea, but nonetheless  their  applications  for  asylum  were
           refused on 26 June 2015, when decisions to refuse to vary  their
           leave were made, together with decisions to remove them from the
           UK.
        5. The Appellants duly appealed against those immigration decisions
           and their appeals were linked  for  hearing  as  raising  common
           issues of fact, and in due course they were  heard  together  by
           First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher.  The  appeals  were   each
           dismissed in a decision promulgated on 4 January 2016.
        6. Pausing there, it is accepted by Ms Soltani that the Judge had a
           proper evidential basis for (and gave adequate reasons for)  his
           decision that he was not satisfied that either of the adults who
           had given evidence to him were reliable witnesses. As the  Judge
           identified they had clearly both lied to him in  the  course  of
           their oral evidence about their history of travel outside  Saudi
           Arabia [29].
        7. The Appellants lodged applications with the First Tier  Tribunal
           for permission to appeal. The applications were refused by First
           Tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 27 January 2016. He was  satisfied
           that the grounds amounted to no more than  a  disagreement  with
           the conclusions reached, because even if the Judge had erred  in
           his analysis of their position should they return to Eritrea, he
           was entitled to find that the Appellants had not shown that they
           were unable to return to Saudi Arabia and live there in safety.
        8. The Appellants renewed  their  applications  for  permission  to
           appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  apparently  relying  upon  the
           original grounds to those advanced to the First  Tier  Tribunal,
           and in addition asserting that the First Appellant was of an age
           at which he remained  liable  to  conscription,  and  thus  upon
           return to Eritrea would be perceived as a draft evader and  ill-
           treated. Their applications were granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
           Smith on 4 March  2016  on  the  limited  basis  the  Judge  had
           arguably erred in relation to his  assessment  of  the  risk  of
           conscription in Eritrea in the light of the  age  of  the  First
           Appellant, and had arguably failed to provide  adequate  reasons
           for his finding that the First Appellant  would  not  face  such
           conscription. Before me Ms Soltani accepted that  this  was  the
           extent of the limited grant of permission.
        9. The Respondent filed a brief Rule 24 response on 20  April  2016
           to say that the Judge had  directed  himself  appropriately  and
           made no error.
       10. Belatedly the Appellants made an application on  21  April  2016
           pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
           requesting the Tribunal to "revisit" the Judge's conclusion that
           the Appellants could return to Saudi Arabia to live.  No  formal
           draft  amendment  to  the  grounds   was   provided   then,   or
           subsequently - although I treated the letter of 21 April 2016 as
           such for the purpose of Ms Soltani's argument.
       11. Thus the matter came before me.

      The original grounds of appeal


       12. The original  grounds  were  not  well  drafted.  Although  they
           purport to have  been  drafted  by  the  First  Appellant  as  a
           litigant in person, they would appear to me to have been drafted
           with legal assistance. Whoever was their author, in my judgement
           they display all of the traps identified by the  Upper  Tribunal
           in VV (grounds of appeal) Lithuania [2016] UKUT  53,  and  Nixon
           (permission to appeal; grounds) [2014] UKUT 368. Thus, at  best,
           the original  grounds  amount  to  no  more  than  a  series  of
           disagreements with  the  decision,  and  fail  to  identify  any
           arguable error of law. To be fair to her,  Ms  Soltani  did  not
           seek to rely upon them.
      The renewed grounds


       13. The renewed grounds, which do not bear  the  author's  name  but
           again  give  the  appearance  of  having  been  drafted  on  the
           Appellant's behalf rather than by him,  assert  that  the  judge
           "completely misunderstood the claim of the Appellants". That  is
           a rather bold assertion, and in my judgement it is one for which
           the author had no proper foundation.
       14. The renewed grounds go on to point out that the First  Appellant
           was aged 51 at the date of the hearing, and assert that since he
           was below the age of 54, he was still of  an  age  at  which  he
           remained liable to  conscription.  He  was  said  to  have  left
           Eritrea illegally (although  when  this  had  occurred  was  not
           identified). Thus it was argued that even if  his  evidence  was
           not credible in some respects, the Judge had failed to apply the
           applicable country guidance to be found in MO [2011]  UKUT  190.
           If the Judge had done so, it was argued that he  ought  to  have
           gone on to conclude  that  upon  return  to  Eritrea  the  First
           Appellant would be perceived as a draft evader  and  ill-treated
           by the authorities.
       15. As such the renewed grounds are in  my  judgement  disingenuous;
           they fail to properly engage with either the evidence  that  was
           placed before the Judge, or the full extent of the guidance that
           is to be found in MO.
       16. Ms Soltani accepted before me that the  Second  Appellant  as  a
           married woman was exempt from national  service,  and  that  the
           children were all far too young to be at risk of being perceived
           as draft evaders. She also confirmed that no argument  had  been
           advanced to the Judge, or was now advanced, to  claim  that  the
           mere requirement of performance of national service  in  Eritrea
           gave rise to a risk of harm. The First Appellant had not claimed
           to object to the performance of national service on religious or
           moral grounds, or to any of the specific duties that he would be
           required to perform.
       17. Ms Soltani confirmed that in relation to  the  renewed  grounds,
           and the existing limited grant of  permission,  the  Appellants'
           case was that upon return to Eritrea the First  Appellant  would
           be identified as one whose age  meant  that  he  was  liable  to
           perform  national  service,  and   that   enquiries   into   his
           circumstances  upon  his  returning  to  Eritrea  for  permanent
           settlement would be different to any  enquiries  that  had  been
           made of him upon his family visiting in 2011.  She  argued  that
           those more fulsome enquiries would disclose  that  he  had  left
           Eritrea illegally in the past, that he had been involved in  the
           ELF, and that he  had  claimed  refugee  status  in  Sudan.  The
           combination of one or more of these factors with the  perception
           of him as a draft evader, meant that he  was  at  real  risk  of
           being detained and ill treated  whilst  further  enquiries  were
           made of him, and whilst he was being detained and  punished  for
           draft evasion. She pointed out that the Respondent had  conceded
           before the Judge both the First Appellant's claim  to  past  ELF
           activity, and the claim to refugee status in Sudan, although she
           accepted that the Respondent had not conceded that he  had  ever
           illegally exited from Eritrea.
       18. As Ms Soltani frankly acknowledged, the difficulty with the case
           being advanced in this way is that it ignores the willingness of
           the Appellants to apply to  the  Eritrean  authorities  for  the
           issue of Eritrean passports in 1994 [28], and more  recently  in
           both 2008 and 2013 [VAF], and moreover, the willingness  of  the
           Eritrean authorities  to  issue  passports  to  them.  The  only
           sensible inference to be drawn is that the First  Appellant  has
           always been prepared to pay, and has paid, the diaspora tax  due
           from time to time upon his earnings outside Eritrea,  as  indeed
           he admitted to Judge Fisher he had done in his oral evidence.
       19. Moreover, in  1981,  the  First  Appellant  would  have  claimed
           refugee status in Sudan from Ethiopia, not Eritrea, because that
           country did not yet exist. If he had left a country illegally to
           enter Sudan, then it was Ethiopia that  he  had  left,  and  not
           Eritrea. On his case, the only time he had left Eritrea  was  in
           2011.
       20. Finally the presentation of the case  in  this  way  would  also
           ignore the willingness of the Appellants to travel as  a  family
           to Eritrea in 2011 using their Eritrean passports to do so,  the
           failure of the Eritrean authorities to act in any way  adversely
           to the First Appellant whilst he was in  the  country,  and  the
           lawful  departure  of  the  family  from  Eritrea  using   those
           passports at the end of their visit, whenever the true  date  of
           their departure actually was.
       21. It is self evident, and the Judge was perfectly entitled to draw
           this conclusion, and gave perfectly adequate reasons  for  doing
           so, that the First Appellant can have foreseen no risk  of  harm
           to himself,  or  to  his  family  in  2011,  from  the  Eritrean
           authorities. He would not otherwise have taken them  from  Saudi
           Arabia to Eritrea [28].
       22. The Judge also noted that the Appellants had failed to  disclose
           their visit to Eritrea in the course of their visa  applications
           to the UK. He rejected the assertion  that  this  was  a  simple
           mistake, or, somehow the fault of the agent employed  to  obtain
           the visas. Again he was perfectly entitled  to  do  so  for  the
           reasons that he gave.
       23. Ms Soltani accepted that if the Appellants had in 2011 travelled
           upon their own lawfully issued Eritrean passports (and  they  do
           not admit to holding any other passports) then it followed  from
           the expert evidence presented to the Upper Tribunal in  2011  in
           the course of MO by Professor Kibreab that they must  also  have
           held lawfully issued exit visas, which would have been  endorsed
           upon those passports. According to Professor Kibreab's  evidence
           in MO the First Appellant would not in 2011 have  been  able  to
           get such an exit visa as a male  then  aged  47  unless  he  was
           either, i) a person declared unfit on medical grounds to perform
           any military or national service by an official committee, ii) a
           highly trusted government official and family, or, iii) a member
           of ministerial staff recommended by  the  department  to  attend
           studies abroad.
       24. In the light of Professor Kibreab's evidence the Upper  Tribunal
           considered  that  the  categories  of   individuals   who   were
           reasonably likely to be regarded  with  serious  hostility  upon
           return were those previously identified in the guidance given in
           MA, with the  exception  of  those  persons  whom  the  regime's
           military and political leadership perceived as having given them
           valuable service either within Eritrea  itself  or  abroad,  and
           possibly, individuals (and their children born  afterwards)  who
           had fled what later became the territory of Eritrea  during  the
           war of independence [MO #133 (iv)].
       25. The First Appellant does not appear to have  engaged  with  this
           guidance before Judge Fisher, and thus  he  has  never  properly
           explained the basis upon which an exit visa was granted to  him,
           or even accepted that he held one (although it occurs to me that
           recognition of the difficulties that the existence  of  an  exit
           visa might cause his asylum application may be why he has failed
           to produce the family's passports, and why  he  has  claimed  to
           have destroyed them). Since he has never claimed to  be  in  any
           way medically unfit to serve, or to have submitted himself to an
           official committee for assessment of his  fitness  for  service,
           or, to have been engaged in long term  study  on  behalf  of  an
           Eritrean Ministry, the  only  alternatives  left  (according  to
           Professor Kibreab) are for him to be a member of the family of a
           highly trusted government official, or, for him to be one who is
           himself regarded by  the  regime  as  having  provided  valuable
           service to it.
       26.  Accordingly,  unless  the  Appellants  were  lying  about   the
           passports that  they  held  in  2011,  and  they  had  in  truth
           travelled to Eritrea upon alternative passports issued  to  them
           by another country; then they must  have  left  Eritrea  legally
           upon Eritrean passports endorsed with exit visas in 2011.  Their
           ability to do so is quite simply  inconsistent  with  the  claim
           that the First Appellant is  now  at  any  real  risk  of  being
           perceived as a draft evader,  or,  one  who  last  left  Eritrea
           illegally. Even if the First Appellant has told the truth  about
           his destruction of the family's Eritrean passports, the Eritrean
           authorities  must  hold  records  of  both  the  issue  of   the
           passports, and the exit visas, and there is no reason to suppose
           that the Appellants cannot give  sufficient  details  for  those
           records to be identified and accessed should they need to so.


      The Rule 15(2A) application


       27. Ms Soltani argued that the Judge had erred in law because  there
           had been a failure to consider adequately all  of  the  evidence
           available on the  issue  of  the  Appellants'  nationality.  She
           argued that the evidence did not point simply to  a  finding  of
           fact that any member of  the  family  was  a  citizen  of  Saudi
           Arabia. She argued that the state of the  evidence  should  have
           prompted an enquiry into the existence and content of  any  copy
           passports and residence permits held by the ECO, and which  must
           have been inspected by the ECO in the course of  processing  the
           entry clearance  applications  by  the  family  -  although  she
           accepted quite frankly that no such enquiry was ever pursued  by
           those who acted on the Appellants' behalf previously.
       28. These arguments  find  their  foundation  in  the  contradictory
           information provided in the visa application  forms  [VAFs].  In
           his own VAF the First Appellant had declared himself  to  be  an
           Eritrean citizen [Q6], living in Saudi Arabia with  the  benefit
           of a residence permit (the serial number of which  he  provided)
           [Q14]. However he had also  identified  his  passport  as  Saudi
           Arabian [Q15], which  as  Ms  Soltani  correctly  identifies  is
           inconsistent with the claim he also made  in  that  document  to
           hold a residence permit as an Eritrean national. He had declared
           travel to the UAE and to Sudan in 2009, but  he  had  failed  to
           declare travel to Eritrea in  2011  [Q31].  Answering  questions
           about his wife, he had  declared  her  to  be  a  Saudi  Arabian
           citizen [Q40], although that was not the  claim  that  she  made
           about herself. In relation to his own employment he said that he
           had been employed in Saudi Arabia by a  subsidiary  of  Unilever
           since February 1994.
       29. In their own VAFs the other Appellants had all stated that  they
           were Eritrean citizens living in Saudi Arabia with  the  benefit
           of residence permits, and each had given the  serial  number  of
           the residence permit issued to them [Q14].
       30. The Respondent had conceded that the whole family were  citizens
           of Eritrea, and there is nothing  in  the  Judge's  decision  to
           suggest that he went  behind  that  concession.  There  is  also
           nothing in the Judge's  decision  to  suggest  that  he  made  a
           positive finding to the effect that any of  the  Appellants  was
           also in truth a citizen of  Saudi  Arabia.  I  reject  any  such
           argument.
       31. The Judge's finding was that the Appellants had not been  candid
           about their past and current status in Saudi  Arabia,  and  that
           the asylum claims had only been lodged once the First  Appellant
           was satisfied that he was no longer  employed  in  Saudi  Arabia
           [35]. As Ms Soltani accepted, these were conclusions  that  were
           well open to him on the evidence, and were adequately reasoned.
       32. I also note that Ms Soltani accepts that no evidence was  placed
           before the Tribunal on the Appellants' behalf  from  either  the
           Saudi  Arabian  Embassy,  or,  from  Unilever   as   the   First
           Appellant's former employer to corroborate the account that  the
           First Appellant had given of how  he  had  lost  his  employment
           whilst he was on holiday in the UK, and of the family  therefore
           losing their residency in Saudi Arabia.  The  only  evidence  in
           this respect was a letter  from  his  former  employer  dated  1
           December 2014 stating simply that his employment contract as NPI
           Logistics Co-ordinator had expired on  30  November  2014.  That
           failed to offer any explanation as to why an employment that had
           been held since February 1994 had  ceased,  and  left  open  the
           possibilities that he had simply resigned, or retired  from  his
           position.
       33. It follows that there is nothing  in  the  complaint  about  the
           Judge's decision that the Appellants now seek  to  advance.  The
           finding that the Appellants had not established that  they  were
           unable to return to Saudi Arabia was well open to the  Judge  on
           the evidence before him, it was adequately reasoned, and perhaps
           most importantly the appeal did not turn  upon  it.  The  appeal
           turned,  as  the  Judge  recognised,  upon  whether  the   First
           Appellant was at real risk of harm in the event that he were  to
           return to Eritrea, and as set out above that issue was  properly
           determined.


      Conclusions


       34. This was very far from being a careless decision. Having had the
           benefit of hearing Ms Soltani's submissions, I am satisfied that
           notwithstanding  even  the  limited  terms  of  the   grant   of
           permission, there is no merit in either  the  original  grounds,
           the renewed grounds, or the attack now made. I note that none of
           the complaints concern the decision upon the Article  8  appeal,
           all focus upon the finding that the family are able to return to
           Eritrea in safety.
       35. I am not satisfied that the  Appellants  have  established  that
           there is any material error of law in  the  Tribunal's  decision
           promulgated on 4 January 2016 that requires the decision  to  be
           set aside and remade, and the decision to dismiss the appeals is
           therefore confirmed.


 DECISION


 The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  4
 January 2016 did not involve the making of an error of law in the decision
 to dismiss the appeals that requires that decision to  be  set  aside  and
 remade. The decision to dismiss the appeals is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

      Unless and until the Tribunal directs  otherwise  the  Appellants  are
 granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
 indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to the Appellants and
 to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to
 proceedings being brought for contempt of court.







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 2 May 2016
