
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09487/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 March 2015                       |On 9 June 2015                      |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     EM
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant was born on 6 July  1986.   Her  nationality  is  disputed.
   She claims to be a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) but
   according to the respondent she is a national of Cameroon.

Background

2) An appeal by her was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Mark-
   Bell on asylum and human rights grounds.  In a decision dated 3  December
   2014 I set aside the decision of Judge  Mark-Bell  because  it  contained
   errors of law.  As this decision has been issued to the parties  already,
   I will not repeat its contents at length here.  I decided that the  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal had not give adequate reasons for his findings
   in respect of both the disputed question of nationality and  the  medical
   evidence submitted.  The judge did not engage with much of the  reasoning
   in an expert report on nationality provided by Professor Seddon  and  did
   not take full account of evidence provided from Cameroon by  Reverend  N.
   Despite a considerable amount of new medical evidence  being  before  the
   judge, the judge decided that the medical evidence was in  substance  the
   same as medical evidence lodged in relation to an earlier appeal in 2008.
    This was notwithstanding that  there  was  significant  new  information
   which was not in the earlier reports.

3) Having set aside the decision of the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
   the hearing was adjourned for a further hearing before the Upper Tribunal
   for the purpose of re-making the decision.  Accordingly the  appeal  came
   before me on 10 March 2015 for evidence to be heard and the decision  re-
   made.

4) The appellant's immigration history is as follows.  She  arrived  in  the
   UK in 2007 and claimed asylum shortly thereafter.  Her claim was  refused
   and an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed in  January  2008.
   Reconsideration was ordered on the basis that the judge had  not  made  a
   finding as to the appellant's  nationality.   The  judge  had  found  the
   appellant's  evidence  lacking  in  credibility  and  this  finding   was
   preserved.

5) There was a further  appeal  hearing  in  November  2008,  at  which  the
   appellant appeared but was not represented.  At this further hearing  the
   appellant was found not to be  a  national  of  DRC  but  a  national  of
   Cameroon.  Her appeal was dismissed.

6) Subsequently the appellant sought on  several  occasions  to  make  fresh
   representations.  When these were rejected in August 2011  the  appellant
   sought  judicial  review.   The  respondent  then  treated  the   further
   representations as a fresh claim but this was refused on 3 October  2012.
   It is this refusal which gave rise to the present appeal.

7) Accordingly to the appellant's account  she  was  born  in  Cameroon  and
   lived all her life there until travelling once to the DRC at the  age  of
   around 20.  The appellant's case is that her parents  were  nationals  of
   DRC  who  were  living  in  Cameroon.   The   appellant   described   her
   circumstances in Cameroon as those of a  settled  and  untroubled  family
   life.  She attended school and then went to work  for  her  mother  as  a
   street trader.  Her father was a school teacher.   Although  her  parents
   were not nationals of Cameroon there is no evidence of any discrimination
   against them on this account.

8) From around 2003 her father started to say that the family  would  return
   to DRC.  In 2006 the appellant's father, mother and brother went to  DRC.
    Her father had given up his  job  and  decided  to  become  involved  in
   politics in DRC in support of the MLC.  The appellant remained behind  in
   Cameroon for a while to wait for some documents which she was to take  to
   her father and to obtain money owed to her mother for her shop, which had
   been sold.    In April 2007 the appellant travelled with the documents to
   Kinshasa, where she was detained at the airport.  She was held for  about
   four months, during which time she  was  sexually  assaulted,  raped  and
   mistreated.  She escaped and fled to the UK via Nairobi.

Oral evidence

9) The appellant gave oral evidence at the hearing  before  me,  relying  on
   witness statements dated 18 December 2007 and 15 November 2012.   She was
   asked first in examination-in-chief why she did not feel able  to  go  to
   either the Embassy of DRC or the Embassy of Cameroon to enquire about her
   nationality.  She replied that she would not go to the Embassy of DRC  as
   she was tortured by people in Kinshasa and would not apply to  anyone  in
   authority.  She felt the same about the Cameroon Embassy.

10) In cross-examination the appellant was asked if her  father  had  taught
   French at a high school in Cameroon.  The appellant replied that she  was
   not exactly sure as she was a child at the time.  Her father  had  taught
   until 2000.  He gave up his job because he became active in politics.

11) The appellant was asked if she knew why her parents  had  left  Cameron.
   She replied that they were going back home.  She was asked why they chose
   to go home at that time.  She said she could not answer.  Her father made
   the decision to go back and the family had to go back with him.  She knew
   her  parents  had  discussed  this  but  she  was  not  involved  in  any
   discussions about it.

12) The appellant was asked why her  father  became  involved  in  politics.
   She replied that he hated the government of DRC and  hated  Kabila  being
   President.  He wanted to stop Kabila being in power.   Kabila  had  taken
   power by force.

13) The appellant was asked why she was left behind when her  family  return
   to DRC in September 2006.  The  appellant  replied  that  she  could  not
   answer but she did what her father told her to do.  She did not know  why
   he decided to leave her there.  It was put to the appellant that it would
   have been logical for her mother to stay behind with her and her brother.
    The appellant replied that this might seem  logical  to  the  Presenting
   Officer but in her family they had to do what her father  said  and  they
   could not say that it was not logical.

14) The appellant was asked if she had ever left  Cameroon  before  9  April
   2007 or used a passport to leave Cameroon.  The  appellant  replied  that
   she had not. She did not know when her passport was issued  or  where  it
   was issued.  She was  not  involved  in  making  the  application  for  a
   passport.

15) The appellant confirmed that she spoke to her parents between  the  time
   that they left Cameroon and the time that she left.  Her father  used  to
   call her every week until just before she  left.   He  told  her  that  a
   person would bring her documents and help her.  This was a  Mr  T.   When
   her parents left she was told to pick up money and wait for documents  to
   be brought to her.  They would be brought by a man who  would  also  help
   her.  The appellant was asked when she last spoke to her father  and  she
   said this was around early March.  She confirmed that she  had  travelled
   to DRC on 9 April 2007.  It was put to her that at this point she had not
   spoken to her parents for about a month.  She said she could not say  how
   many weeks it was since she had last spoken to her father.  The appellant
   was asked if she was aware of disturbances in Kinshasa on 23  March  2007
   and the appellant replied that she was not.  She was  asked  if  she  had
   been questioned about this event and she replied that she was.

16) The appellant was asked why someone would have put their  reputation  at
   risk by helping her to escape.  The appellant said she could not  answer.
   DRC was not Europe.  People there did what they wanted  to  people.   The
   appellant was asked about her paternal cousin, V, to whom she referred at
   Q116 of her  asylum  interview  and  who  had  helped  her  escape.   The
   appellant confirmed that he was her cousin and that he was  a  member  of
   MLC.  She confirmed she had spent time with V's mother-in-law  after  her
   escape.  She was asked why she had not attempted to contact V in order to
   help trace her  parents  or  establish  her  background.   The  appellant
   replied that V had saved her life.  She further explained that she had no
   telephone number for him.  The appellant was asked about  the  woman  who
   had accompanied her when she left DRC.  The appellant said this woman was
   the only person who had contact with V.  The appellant was  asked  why  V
   had gone to all this trouble when she had not told him even that she  had
   arrived safely.  The appellant replied that V had given her what he could
   and that  he  had  done  this  through  the  woman  who  accompanied  the
   appellant.  After the appellant's journey to the UK  she  never  saw  the
   woman again.

17) The appellant was asked how she made contact  with  the  Reverend  N  in
   Cameroon.  She explained that this was by  telephone  in  December  2007.
   The appellant explained  that  at  this  time  she  had  a  solicitor  in
   Middlesbrough.  She was living in shared accommodation with other people,
   one of whom was a girl from DRC.  She had a boyfriend  who  went  through
   the churches in Cameroon to find the number  of  the  pastor.   When  she
   spoke to the Reverend N she asked if he remembered her and told  him  she
   had had problems.

18) The appellant was asked why having spoken to the  Rev  N  she  had  also
   contacted the Red Cross.  The appellant replied this was because the  Red
   Cross was in charge of finding people and she was advised to contact  the
   Red Cross to find her family. The appellant was asked  why  she  had  not
   spoken to anyone else in Cameroon, such as members of  the  Reverend  N's
   congregation.  The appellant said she went only to school and church  and
   could not speak to anyone.  She  was  asked  if  her  father's  place  of
   employment had been contacted.  She replied that they were  contacted  by
   Mr Alan Brice who had tried to contact the school.

19) It was put to the appellant that she had acknowledged  that  her  father
   used to beat her and the appellant was asked if her father had abused her
   in any other way.  The appellant replied that her father was  strict  and
   you would remember it when he punished you.   He would  punish  you  even
   when you had forgotten what you did.  This  was  bad  treatment  but  the
   appellant did not think she was abused by her father.

20) The appellant was asked why  she  would  not  return  to  Cameroon.  The
   appellant replied that  her  father  was  an  activist  in  Cameroon  and
   Cameroon had the same rules as in DRC.  If the  authorities  thought  you
   caused trouble for the government you would not be safe.   The  appellant
   was asked why the authorities would be interested in her after  8  years.
   The appellant  replied  that  this  was  because  she  was  her  father's
   daughter.  It was pointed out to the appellant that she did not know what
   her father had done in politics.  The appellant replied that she did  not
   know what she was accused of in Kinshasa.  In  Cameroon  her  father  was
   also involved in politics and the authorities did not forget about you.

21) The appellant was asked what languages her parents spoke.  She said  her
   father spoke Lingala and her  mother  spoke  another  Congolese  language
   which was a mixture of Swahili and Lingala.  The appellant  spoke  mainly
   French and she understood Lingala but could not speak it.  Her father had
   wanted her to be educated in French.

22) In re-examination the appellant was asked about  her  contact  with  the
   Red Cross.  She said she gave them the names of  her  parents.   She  was
   asked if she knew anyone in Cameroon and she gave the details of Reverend
   N.  The appellant  was  asked  if  she  had  ever  made  enquiries  about
   nationality with the Cameroon authorities.  She replied that she had not.
     She said the passport that she used to travel to DRC  was  a  Congolese
   passport.  The appellant spoke of the depression from which  she  suffers
   and the voluntary work she does.

Submissions

23) In her submission  for  the  respondent  Mrs  Rackstraw  relied  on  the
   respondent's reasons for  refusal  letter.   She  referred  to  the  long
   history of this appeal and the adverse  credibility  findings  which  had
   previously been made against  the  appellant.   She  submitted  that  the
   appellant had not told the truth in the  evidence  she  gave  before  me.
   Before giving her evidence today the appellant had claimed  not  to  know
   why her father had become involved in politics.  She gave the explanation
   for the first time today that this was because he  disliked  Kabila.   It
   was unlikely if she attended her father's meetings she would not know his
   views.  When the appellant was asked about specific elements of her claim
   her answers lacked candour.  She gave an account of having received  help
   from her paternal cousin, V, and said she had  spent  6  weeks  with  V's
   mother-in-law.  V went to considerable expense to assist  the  appellant.
   He was not just a political acquaintance of her father but  a  member  of
   her family.  The appellant claimed that she left DRC with  his  help  but
   she was without direct contact with him.

24) Mrs Rackstraw submitted that it was not reasonably likely the  appellant
   was left behind in Cameroon to await the sale proceeds  of  her  mother's
   business and some political documents for her father.  It was more likely
   that her mother would have waited behind with her.   It  was  not  likely
   that the appellant's father would have left her behind without  providing
   a support network for her.  The appellant said her  father  kept  himself
   aloof in Cameroon but he worked as a  high  school  teacher  for  several
   years.  There was no evidence he was not  integrated  into  the  country.
   The scene the appellant set out did not ring true.  V was the appellant's
   link with her family but all the information about  how  to  contact  him
   was, according to the appellant, with the agent.  When she  lost  contact
   with the agent she also lost contact with V.

25) Mrs Rackstraw continued that the appellant had not given a  satisfactory
   explanation for not  speaking  Lingala.   She  was  reluctant  to  answer
   questions.  She suggested that Alan Brice had attempted  to  contact  her
   father's school but she never mentioned this before  the  hearing  before
   me.  This was not part of  Alan  Brice's  evidence.   Although  Professor
   Seddon was in touch with the Reverend N, it was  the  appellant  who  had
   first contacted the Reverend N.  The Reverend N had been  primed  by  the
   appellant.  According to Professor Seddon the documents produced  by  the
   Reverend N were in standard format but no  documents  were  produced  for
   comparison.  Professor Seddon had no forensic qualifications.  There were
   errors in the English in the documents.  According  to  Professor  Seddon
   the pastor said that he knew the family fairly well but  the  pastor  did
   not say this in his letter of 19 November 2008.  The pastor used the word
   "mass" in his letter though may have  changed  in  translation.   Greater
   scrutiny was required of the documents and Professor Seddon's  assertions
   in respect of them were too sweeping.  His  report  was  partial  to  the
   appellant.   In it he criticised previous determinations.   Although  the
   appellant claimed to have PTSD she gave evidence clearly at the  hearing.
   She was studying successfully and  doing  voluntary  work.   She  attends
   church and lives by herself.

26) Ms Brakaj addressed me on behalf  of  the  appellant  and  relied  on  a
   skeleton argument.  She said that most of the  evidence  in  relation  to
   nationality was from the appellant herself.  Cameroon was  the  place  of
   her birth and upbringing but  her  parents  were  citizens  of  DRC.   In
   addition there was now evidence from Professor Seddon which had not  been
   before Judge Gillance, who  heard  the  first  appeal  originally.    The
   appellant had also  put  forward  evidence  from  the  Reverend  N.   The
   appellant had been making best efforts to locate her family and prove her
   nationality.  The appellant's evidence was supported by medical  reports,
   which were not  all  before  the  previous  judges.  The  recent  medical
   evidence attributed the appellant's problems to  her  detention,  torture
   and sexual violence perpetrated upon her.  The appellant feared return to
   either DRC or Cameroon.  She had no motivation to claim to be a  national
   of DRC if she feared return to both countries.

27) Ms Brakaj acknowledged that there was case law on approaching  embassies
   in cases of disputed nationality.  The appellant did  not  feel  able  to
   make these approaches.  This was dealt with by Professor Seddon and  also
   addressed in the evidence today.  The appellant suffered from PTSD  as  a
   result of extreme suffering.  She  socialises  but  avoids  contact  with
   people of  her  own  background.   The  appellant  had  had  hundreds  of
   appointments with her psychologist and it would be difficult to  maintain
   a deception through hundreds of appointments.  The alternative causes  of
   her distress had been looked into.  The appellant's safety was a  concern
   and return to either country would cause a collapse in her mental health.




Discussion

28) As Mrs Brakaj pointed out at the previous hearing before  me,  in  terms
   of Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1 findings made previously may be  overturned
   by compelling new evidence.  In this appeal there is such evidence.  This
   is in the form not only of detailed additional medical evidence but  also
   an expert report from Dr Seddon and further evidence from Reverend N.

29) In the new evidence before me there was a letter from the Reverend N  to
   the appellant and a reply from him to a Red  Cross  inquiry.   Both  were
   handwritten in French and typewritten translations  were  provided.   The
   letter is dated 10 August 2010.  It states that  the  appellant  was  the
   daughter of M, who was Congolese.  His wife was  a  market  seller.   The
   appellant was baptised on 11 April 1996.  The Reverend N  refers  to  the
   appellant's parents having left around 2006. He recalls having  seen  the
   appellant some months later  before  she  disappeared  herself.   He  had
   forgotten about the family until one day around 2007 when he  received  a
   telephone call from a girl in England.

30) The response to the Red Cross inquiry was dated  19  November  2008  and
   was handwritten. It states that the Reverend N had  great  difficulty  in
   locating the appellant's family but he knew  them  as  refugees  who  did
   "come to mass from time to time".

31) Mrs Rackstraw questioned the use of the word "mass" in  a  communication
   from a Presbyterian pastor.  She acknowledged, however, that the  letters
   had been translated.  I had no evidence before me as to  the  meaning  of
   the original French word which has been translated as "mass".  I draw  no
   adverse inference from the use of this word, which may well be the result
   of an imprecise translation.

32) The respondent's reasons for refusal letter of 3 October 2012  questions
   why there was no further contact with the Reverend N during  an  interval
   of two years.  It is also said that no original copy of  his  letter  was
   produced and that the content of the letter could have been  supplied  by
   the appellant.

33) Several points have been made on behalf of the appellant in relation  to
   this.  It has been pointed out that the letter sent  by  Reverend  N  was
   sent by fax so there was no original letter produced.  It was pointed out
   that the appellant had difficulty in obtaining evidence from the Reverend
   N and he himself refers to his lack of resources.  It is also pointed out
   that the Reverend N supplied a letter not only for the appellant but also
   for the Red Cross.  I note that the signatures on the two letters seem to
   match.

34) It is recorded in Professor Seddon's report, at paragraph 5.5,  that  in
   December 2007 the Reverend N sent the appellant a certified copy  of  her
   birth certificate, a copy of her baptism certificate and a  statement  by
   the Cameroonian  League  for  Personal  Rights  (LCDP),  referred  to  by
   Professor Seddon at paragraphs 4.10 and 5.5 of his report.   The  baptism
   certificate gave the appellant's date of birth  as  6  July  1986,  which
   corresponded with the birth certificate. She was  baptised  on  11  April
   1996.

35) According to Professor Seddon  the  birth  certificate  is  in  standard
   format but there are errors in the printed English language sections, and
   also mistakes in the French words used.  Professor Seddon  comments  that
   such mistakes do exist even  in  official  documents  in  Cameroon  which
   although formally bilingual, is in effect largely Franco-phone.  This did
   not explain the mistakes in French.  Once printed,  however,  accordingly
   to Professor Seddon, standard documents were rarely checked  through  and
   corrected by officials.  The printed templates were often put together by
   ill-educated and careless minor officials.  Professor Seddon was inclined
   to accept the birth certificate as a genuine copy of the original.

36) It is of significance that the  birth  certificate  indicates  that  the
   appellant's father was  born  in  Equateur  Province,  Zaire,  which,  as
   Professor Seddon points out, is the former name of DRC.  The  appellant's
   mother was born in Orientale Province, also in  Zaire.   This  suggested,
   according to Professor Seddon at paragraph 5.4, that the appellant  would
   be of Congolese parentage and therefore of Congolese nationality, despite
   having been born in and lived in Cameroon all of her life.

37) Professor Seddon points out at  paragraph  4.7  that  at  her  screening
   interview  the  appellant  acknowledged  having  had  her  own   national
   passport.  However, this had been given to her by her father so  she  had
   not made an application for it herself.  The police in DRC had taken  it.
   Dr Seddon points out at paragraph 4.4 that normally having  both  parents
   of DRC nationality would entitle the appellant to Congolese  nationality.
   Double nationality was prohibited in DRC.   At  paragraph  4.5  Professor
   Seddon points out that the appellant was clearly a resident  in  Cameroon
   but apparently did not have an official ID card, although  she  had  been
   able to produce a copy of her birth certificate and of a  certificate  of
   baptism.  In Cameroon, ex-patriots of other nationalities are not allowed
   to hold ID cards if they have documents showing them  to  be  of  another
   nationality.  At paragraph 4.6 Professor Seddon  points  out  that  birth
   within  the  territory  of  Cameron   does   not   automatically   confer
   citizenship, except where  a  child  is  born  of  unknown  or  stateless
   parents, or is born in Cameroon of foreign parents, at least one of  whom
   was also born in Cameroon.  The appellant could not  meet  any  of  these
   conditions.  Cameroonian  citizenship  might  be  acquired  upon  certain
   conditions but dual citizenship was not recognised.  It was  unlikely  in
   Professor Seddon's opinion that the Cameroonian authorities would  accept
   any application for Cameroonian nationality from the appellant now unless
   she wished to renounce her  Congolese  nationality  and  rely  solely  on
   Cameroon nationality.

38) Turning to the appellant's ability to  speak  French,  Professor  Seddon
   points out at paragraph 4.8 that French is spoken both  in  Cameroon  and
   the DRC.   The  appellant  found  it  difficult  to  understand  Lingala,
   although this was the language in which  her  father  and  his  political
   colleagues spoke.  Her  lack  of  knowledge  of  Lingala  was  adequately
   explained by the fact that she had never lived in  DRC  and  it  did  not
   follow from this that she was a Cameroonian national.

39) Mrs Rackstraw referred me  to  Tribunal  decisions  in  which  Professor
   Seddon's  reports  were  criticised.   The  first  of  these  is  Djebari
   (01TH02624) and the second was FM [2003] UKIAT 00178.  I note  that  both
   of these determinations originate from a  considerable  time  ago.   They
   were concerned with Algeria and not with either Cameroon or DRC.  In view
   of the time that has elapsed since these decisions were  made  I  do  not
   consider that the criticisms have  any  significance  to  the  report  by
   Professor Seddon in the appeal before me.

40) A further issue raised in  relation  to  nationality  was  the  apparent
   failure by the appellant to apply  for  nationality  at  either  the  DRC
   Embassy or the Cameroonian Embassy with a view to demonstrating that  she
   either was or was not a national of either country.   Assuming  that  the
   appellant's ill-treatment and suffering at the hands of  the  authorities
   in DRC was true, however, and that she has a genuine  fear  of  returning
   there, this would be an adequate explanation for why she had not  applied
   to the Embassy of DRC.  Her explanation for not applying to the  Cameroon
   Embassy was in part a distrust of all officials from  sub-Saharan  Africa
   and in part a fear that because when interrogated in DRC  she  had  given
   the names of political activists in Cameroon she would be  at  risk  were
   she to return to Cameroon.  This explanation was referred to at paragraph
   4.15 of Professor Seddon's report.  The further view he expresses is that
   as she has no close family  left  in  Cameroon  the  appellant  would  be
   returning as a single young woman alone in a country for which she is not
   a national and she would face a risk of  economic,  physical  and  sexual
   exploitation.

41) I am inclined not to attach any  great  weight  to  the  absence  of  an
   application by the appellant to the Embassy of Cameroon in an attempt  to
   establish her nationality  or  lack  of  it.   In  my  experience  if  an
   appellant is seeking to show that he or she is  not  a  national  of  the
   country to which an application for proof of nationality is made, then it
   is not particularly difficult to  obtain  a  negative  answer  either  by
   providing misleading information or  insufficient  information.   If  the
   appellant had been seeking to  show  that  she  was  not  a  national  of
   Cameroon, she might have made some such half-hearted application  to  the
   Embassy of Cameroon  with  the  almost  inevitable  result  that  it  was
   rejected.  I do not consider the absence of  such  an  application  is  a
   matter of any great significance in the circumstances of this appeal,  in
   which there is evidence from other sources relating to nationality.

42) Considerable reliance was placed on  behalf  of  the  appellant  on  the
   medical evidence.  In my decision of 3 December 2014 I pointed  out  that
   the medical evidence  before  the  Tribunal  in  2012  was  significantly
   different from the medical evidence before the Tribunal in 2008.  One  of
   the errors of law made by  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
   stating that the medical evidence essentially told the same story as  the
   evidence in the earlier appeal.  This was not  adequate  to  address  the
   issues arising from the  medical  evidence.   The  new  medical  evidence
   included a report by Dr Woodward from the Medical Foundation and a letter
   dated 13 September 2010 from Mr Brice from Freedom from Torture  (as  the
   Medical Foundation became.)  The evidence from  Mr  Brice  was  based  on
   regular therapy sessions with the  appellant  from  November  2009.   The
   evidence of Dr Woodward in a report of  2009  found  that  there  were  a
   number of factors  that  were  highly  suggestive  that  the  appellant's
   traumatic symptoms were caused  by  detention  and  torture  as  she  had
   reported.

43) I had before me a further report dated 19 May  2014  from  Freedom  from
   Torture and written by Wynne Fitzsimmons.  He records that he has had  37
   sessions with the appellant between January 2013 and March 2014  and  has
   been monitoring the appellant since March 2008.  He refers  at  paragraph
   26 to the suggestion made to the appellant by her legal representative to
   visit the  DRC  Embassy  to  obtain  evidence  of  her  nationality.   Mr
   Fitzsimmons reports that this request "elicited  from  [EM]  some  severe
   reactions that expressed her terror from her torture experiences  in  the
   DRC, especially  people  from  there  in  positions  of  authority."   Mr
   Fitzsimmons then expands on this in further detail.

44) Mr Fitzsimmons concludes at paragraph 35  that  the  appellant  presents
   with a diverse range of PTSD like symptoms, which he fully  details.   He
   refers to  the  appellant  as  having  developed  coping  mechanisms  and
   strategies which allow her to present a "fragile public persona".  She is
   able to use her intelligence and  intellectual  powers  in  her  studies.
   That social involvement is limited to safe but older people  on  a  needs
   basis.  Her coping strategies include  avoidance  and  isolation  coupled
   with the regimes of fasting and prayer.  Her public  persona  camouflages
   her inner chaos based on  anxiety,  fear  and  terror.   Mr  Fitzsimmsons
   accepts that the appellant's fear arises from the rape  and  torture  she
   experienced in DRC.  At paragraph 28  of  his  report  it  describes  the
   appellant as living with a continuous fear  of  being  identified  or  of
   being found by authorities especially from the African countries she  has
   lived in previously, Cameroon and DRC.  She disclosed under  torture  the
   names of political associates and friends of  her  parents  in  Cameroon.
   Her fear of what may have happened to those persons  in  Cameroon,  whose
   identity she disclosed, together with her personal experience of torture,
   feeds a greater fear of reprisals should she return there.

45) Also before me was a letter dated 24 April  2014  from  Dr  R  Williams,
   Consultant Psychiatrist in Gateshead.   Dr  Williams  refers  to  a  2008
   diagnosis of PTSD, since which time  the  appellant  has  been  seeing  a
   psychologist and a counsellor on a weekly basis.  Her mental  health  has
   worsened since September 2013.  She is described  as  wishing  she  could
   kill herself but her strong religious  beliefs  prevent  her  from  doing
   this.  She has intrusive regular  flashbacks  of  rape  and  torture  and
   regular nightmares.  Her PTSD is described as moderately severe.  She has
   been able to resolve and work through this trauma due to the  uncertainty
   of her future and the constant fear of removal.  Her fear  has  persisted
   for so long that some of her coping strategies have become entrenched and
   may be difficult to change.

46) One of the  features  of  this  appeal  at  various  hearings  has  been
   consideration of the possibility that the  mental  scars  the  appellants
   bears, as well as the physical scars described in an earlier report by Dr
   Lord, could have been caused in some way other than the account given  by
   the appellant.  Even at the hearing before me, Mrs  Rackstraw  hinted  at
   the possibility of the appellant being a victim of  child  sexual  abuse,
   which the appellant denied.  It seems to me that in the face of  powerful
   medical evidence based on numerous counselling  sessions,  it  is  not  a
   particularly fruitful exercise to search outwith the medical evidence for
   other possible causes  of  the  appellant's  problems.   The  appellant's
   experiences are attested not only by her own account but  by  substantial
   medical evidence and supported by the documents from the Reverend  N  and
   the report  by  Dr  Seddon.   Of  course,  not  all  of  these  documents
   substantiate every  part  of  the  appellant's  claim.   Taken  together,
   however, they build up a comprehensive and coherent  picture.   There  is
   really no significant reason why this picture should not be  accepted  as
   establishing to the lower standard that the appellant has a genuine  fear
   of persecution in her country of nationality, which is DRC.  Based on her
   experiences there and on the country information before me this  fear  is
   well-founded.

47) The appellant has not addressed every issue relating to her  nationality
   but there is sufficient evidence before me for me to be satisfied for the
   purpose of this appeal that she is  a  national  of  DRC.   As  Professor
   Seddon pointed out in his report, neither DRC nor Cameroon  accepts  dual
   nationality.  The appellant's parents were from  DRC  and,  according  to
   Professor Seddon, the appellant herself would not qualify for Cameroonian
   nationality without  satisfying  a  number  of  further  conditions.   On
   arrival in DRC  the  appellant  was  found  in  possession  of  documents
   seemingly relating to opposition political activity, which her father had
   asked her to bring to him.  As a consequence of disturbances in  Kinshasa
   around that time the appellant was detained without having an opportunity
   to contact her parents.  She was regarded as an opponent  of  the  Kabila
   regime and detained and mistreated on this  account.   In  addition,  the
   police commander responsible for her arrest  selected  her  for  his  own
   gratification as, in the words of Professor Seddon, a sex-slave.

48)  The  appellant's  account  of  her  escape  has  been   criticised   as
   implausible.  Professor Seddon points out at paragraph 5.12 that when she
   was recognised by the hotel manager, V, as a relative it was not  at  all
   implausible, given the kind of  support  relatives  give  each  other  in
   African societies, that he would have helped her in the way that he  did.
   It has been suggested that the fact that the appellant found herself in a
   hotel where her cousin was the manager was "a remarkable coincidence" but
   I do not  assume  from  this  that  it  could  not  have  occurred.   The
   subsequent loss of contact  with  this  cousin  who  helped  her  is  not
   adequately explained but there is a possibility that having assisted  the
   appellant to travel to the UK he did not wish further contact  with  her.
   Alternatively,  it  may  be  possible  given  her  difficult  mental  and
   emotional state that the appellant inadvertently failed to retain details
   of how to contact her cousin.  Whatever uncertainties there may still  be
   in the appellant's account, particularly in relation to how she was  able
   to escape from detention and leave DRC, there is enough in her account to
   show to the required standard that she is  a  national  of  DRC  and  was
   persecuted there on account of the political opinion imputed to  her  and
   would continue to be at risk were she to return.   For  this  reason  her
   appeal will succeed.

Conclusions

49) As set out in my decision of 3 December 2014, the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error on a point of law and it
   has been set aside.

50) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on  asylum  grounds.



Anonymity

51) The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.   In  view  of  the
   details of the appellant's physical and mental  health  I  continue  that
   order (pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
   Rules 2008.)


Fee Award        Note: this is not part of the determination

No fee is payable and therefore no fee award is made.




Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


