
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09670/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 May 2013                                |On 1 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                     SV

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Rebecca Pickering, Counsel, instructed by David
                    Grey Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr John Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Belarus born on 24th April 1973.

2.   He arrived in the United Kingdom on 16th August 2012 seeking  to  claim
    asylum on the basis of his membership of the Belarus Social  Democratic
    Party.  It is his case that he had been arrested and detained  on  five
    separate occasions and that he was at risk were he to be returned.

3.   His application was refused by the respondent.  Thereafter the  hearing
    of the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hands  on  11th
    December 2012.  She also rejected his claim on the basis that he lacked
    credibility altogether.

4.   Detailed grounds of  appeal  have  been  submitted  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted.  Thus the matter comes before me  in  pursuance  of
    that leave.

5.    There  is  a  considerable  volume  of  material  both  in  terms   of
    statements, documents and background evidence.  My attention was  drawn
    in particular to the skeleton argument as presented by Ms Pickering.

6.   Ms Pickering spoke at length, inviting  me  to  find  that  there  were
    material errors of law.  Mr Kingham on the other  hand  invited  me  to
    find that the determination was sustainable.

7.   To summarise his submissions he invites me to find that in relation  to
    the fifth and final arrest, the approach taken by the judge to that  in
    paragraphs 30 and 31 of the determination was entirely correct.  It  is
    unlikely that the KGB would have released the appellant from  detention
    only then to seek to re-arrest him.  If the plan was to raid  his  home
    it is unlikely that they would have alerted the lawyer to that fact.  A
    search of the home was more  likely  than  not  to  have  revealed  the
    documents now claimed to be genuine documents in his case.

8.   If the detention and release and arrest  did  not  happen  in  the  way
    described, that of itself throws into sharp relief the  credibility  of
    the appellant's evidence that he was ever arrested at all.

9.   Although it was accepted that he had certain duties in relation to  the
    party, if he had not been arrested in the past it is unlikely therefore
    that he would be of any interest in the future.  He thus invites me  to
    find that the reasoning of the judge was  entirely  understandable  and
    was within the reasonable parameters of judicial decision making.

10.  It seems to me, however, that although superficially attractive  as  an
    argument it fails to deal with the two main planks  of  the  complaint.
    The first  being  an  inadequate  consideration  of  the  documentation
    presented in the case, and secondly failing to consider the  background
    evidence in the light of the acceptance made  that  the  appellant  did
    indeed carry out certain activities for the party.

11.  Key documents in the case relate to the court documents issued on  26th
    March 2009, 27th September 2011 and 20th February 2012.   The  evidence
    from Mr Chenciner was to the effect set out in  paragraph  3.2  of  his
    report that the documents appeared to be genuine  with  regard  to  the
    originals and that he could find no reason to suspect  that  they  were
    false.  The contention seems to receive short shrift from the judge, as
    in paragraph 25 of the determination it was noted that these items were
    authenticated with reference to they being  similar  to  items  on  the
    Google image of such rulings.  Thus the judge concluded:

         "This could mean the  appellant  has  been  able  to  have  such  a
         document prepared copying the Google image just  as  easily  as  it
         could be said such a similarity makes the documents  appear  to  be
         genuine".

12.  At no stage, however, does the judge make  any  clear  findings  as  to
    whether those documents are or are not genuine.  It is to be noted that
    the expert, in considering each of those documents, did so  at  length,
    having regard not only to the form but to the substance  of  what  they
    had to say.  The judge does not seem to have acknowledged that fact nor
    dealt with it in the detail  which  perhaps  such  important  documents
    merit.

13.  Some criticism has been offered in the grounds  of  appeal  that  there
    was no reason at all why the KGB, had they searched  the  house,  would
    have found the documents if indeed those documents had been hidden.  It
    was pure speculation on the part of the judge to conclude that a search
    of the house must necessarily have  revealed  such  documents  if  they
    existed.

14.  Perhaps of significance is  the  letter  written  from  the  Belarusian
    Social  Democratic  Party  dated  18th  July  2012.   The   judge,   in
    considering that document, finds that it adds  nothing  to  the  claim.
    That is to ignore the last paragraph of the letter which  contains  the
    information, rightly or wrongly, that a criminal case has  been  opened
    against the appellant under the criminal code.   Potentially  therefore
    that letter does add something.

15.  So far as the injuries to the appellant are concerned arising from  his
    activities, he produces a medical document which the judge  finds  does
    not amount to  independent  evidence  as  to  how  he  came  about  the
    injuries.  That may be so, but the fact that he has the nature  of  the
    injuries described is a relevant factor to be placed in the balance  in
    considering the matter overall.

16.  Thus it seems to  me  that  there  is  considerable  substance  in  the
    concern expressed that the judge  has  not  made  a  full  and  careful
    consideration of the documentation in this case.

17.  It seems to be accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a  member  of  that
    particular  party  and  that  his  political  activities  amounted   to
    distributing leaflets, informing people about  the  elections,  writing
    posters and graffiti,  participating  in  pickets  for  the  party  and
    participating in a demonstration in December 2010 in Minsk.

18.  Ms Pickering submits that although it  is  right  that  the  judge  has
    summarised certain of the background material relating to the  attitude
    of the authorities to the party, there has been no full  acknowledgment
    as to the extent of that interference.  Ms Pickering in her submissions
    highlights for example pages 145, 146, 149, 150, 154, 176, 182 and  190
    of her background material bundle as illustrating precisely the  nature
    of the response by the authorities to those who oppose their ideas.

19.  She submits that, given the  acceptance  that  the  appellant  performs
    certain activities, the issue arises  as  to  the  application  of  the
    decision in HJ (Iran).  There is little consideration by the  judge  of
    the intentions of the appellant were he  to  return  and  whether  such
    would bring him to the attention of the authorities.

20.  In fairness to the judge it is clear that the judge has  in  mind  that
    issue,  as  it  is  a  question  as  posed  in  paragraph  23  of   the
    determination, that is if he returns to Belarus and continues with  his
    political activity what risk of persecution would he face.   The  judge
    at paragraph 33 concludes that she does not  have  the  information  to
    support the appellant's claim that any political activist no matter how
    lowly would be placed in a position whereby they face a  real  risk  of
    persecution by the government or the KGB.  It  seems  to  me,  however,
    that in the light of the documentation relied upon by Ms Pickering that
    perhaps cannot be quite so clearly stated in those terms.

21.  I should add for the sake of completeness  that  I  was  also  provided
    with a skeleton argument on behalf of the respondent which I read.  The
    respondent also highlights in the course of that skeleton argument that
    the expert has been  the  subject  of  critical  comment  in  a  recent
    decision before the Upper Tribunal in which he was found not to  be  an
    entirely dispassionate expert in the case.

22.  I am alive to the issue but it is not for me  in  considering  material
    error of law, to evaluate the respective merits  of  the  appeal.    It
    does seem to me that the judge's approach to the  documentary  evidence
    and to the background material was  such  that  the  matter  should  be
    reheard.  I have in mind paragraph 7 of the Senior President's Practice
    Directions on remittals.  Given that credibility lies at the  heart  of
    this case, both as regards the documents and also the events described,
    I consider that the appropriate form is the First-tier Tribunal as  the
    primary fact-finder.

23.  It will be a matter for the appellant's representatives to conduct  any
    further investigation either as to the allegations as made in the party
    letter  or  to  clarify  the  nature  and  reliability  of  the  course
    documents.

Directions

(1)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands shall be set aside.

(2)  There  will  be  a  rehearing  on  all  issues  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

(3)  An  interpreter  in  the  Russian  language  with  Belarus  dialect  is
    required.

(4)  Any further documentation or expert report is to  be  served  no  later
    than five days before the hearing.

(5)  Any further directions that will be necessary will  be  issued  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

