
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09889/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2015                              |On 30 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     TD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Malik, Thompson & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, TD, is a citizen of Vietnam.  I shall  hereafter  refer
    to the respondent as the appellant and the appellant as the  respondent
    (as they appeared respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  4
    November 2014 refusing her application for asylum and making directions
    for her removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turnock) which,
    in a determination promulgated on 15 January 2015, allowed the  appeal.
    The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. The appellant claims that she would be persecuted in Vietnam on account
    of her political opinion.  The appellant had claimed to  have  attended
    demonstrations in the United Kingdom and also in Vietnam and  had  been
    actively involved in opposition  politics  from  2012.   The  appellant
    claimed that  she  had  been  arrested  whilst  distributing  political
    leaflets in May 2014.  She claims to have been  ill-treated  whilst  in
    detention.  However, she claims to have  escaped  from  detention.   In
    December  2014,  having  entered  the  United  Kingdom,  the  appellant
    demonstrated outside the Vietnamese Embassy in London.

 4. The grounds of appeal may be summarised briefly as  follows.   At  [79]
    the judge made the following findings:

         It will be evident from the findings of fact made previously that I
         found certain elements of the appellant's claim to be not credible.
          I do not accept her claims  regarding  the  manner  in  which  she
         claimed to have distributed the leaflets nor  her  account  of  her
         detention and escape.  However she has produced a summons which  is
         not clearly identified as a counterfeit document.  Its authenticity
         was challenged on the  basis that it made no mention of  an  escape
         from custody.  However if she had been observed delivering leaflets
         or was reported as having  delivered  them,  then  the  summons  is
         consistent with the  authorities  now  wishing  to  interview  her.
         Whilst I found that her description of the way that  she  delivered
         the leaflets is not credible that does not mean she did not deliver
         leaflets nor does it mean that the summons is not genuine.  If  the
         summons were 'created' by or on behalf of  the  appellant  for  the
         purpose of supporting a false  claim  then  it  surely  would  have
         reflected the appellant's claim to having been detained and  having
         escaped.

 5. The judge concluded that the summons

         is a document upon which reliance  can  be  placed;  that  she  was
         politically  active  in  Japan  as  evidenced  by  her  answers  to
         questions about the  Viet  Tan  Party  (although  she  has  greatly
         exaggerated her activity); that she did come to  the  attention  of
         the authorities; that she attended a demonstration in  the  UK  and
         has taken an active  part;  has  posted  material  on  Facebook  in
         respect of which there is a real risk the authorities  will  become
         aware of; and accordingly she is at real risk  of  persecution  for
         her political opinions  in  the  event  that  she  is  returned  to
         Vietnam.

 6. The grounds challenge the reliance placed by the judge on  the  summons
    given that the judge had found "certain elements"  of  the  appellant's
    claim to have been fabricated.  The respondent asserts that  the  judge
    failed properly to apply the authority of Tanveer  Ahmed  (2002)  UKIAT
    00439*.

 7. It is unfortunate that [79] is not drafted as clearly as it might  have
    been.  However, I am not satisfied that the judge has erred in law such
    that his determination should  be  set  aside.   I  say  that  for  the
    following reasons.

 8. This is not a case where an appellant has been found wholly  incredible
    and where the judge has then placed reliance  on  documentary  evidence
    adduced by  that  appellant.   Rather,  the  judge  has  clearly  found
    (although it would have helped if he had stated this  expressly)  that,
    whilst parts of  the  appellant's  account  have  been  exaggerated  or
    embellished, the core of her account was true and accurate.  Indeed, at
    [21] the judge reminded himself that "in dealing with the issue of  the
    appellant's credibility I have taken into account  and  borne  in  mind
    that asylum seekers may seek to exaggerate and embellish their case but
    nevertheless the core of their account may be truthful".  It  is  clear
    that the judge had that principle in mind when  he  made  his  detailed
    findings of fact and drafted [79].  It is significant  that  the  judge
    only  found  "certain  elements"  of  the  appellant's  claim   to   be
    incredible; he did not reject it out of hand.  He addressed the summons
    on  the  basis  that  its  authenticity  had  been  challenged  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing, namely that it contained "no mention
    of an escape from custody".  It was because the judge was dealing  with
    that submission that he made the somewhat curious  observation  that  a
    false summons would "surely have reflected  the  appellant's  claim  to
    have been detained and having escaped".  It is not entirely clear to me
    why that should be the case but, following the judge's logic,  had  the
    summons referred to  an  escape  from  custody,  which  the  judge  had
    explicitly rejected, then he would clearly have gone  on  to  find  the
    summons  to  be  unreliable  also.   The   judge   has   salvaged   the
    determination from the  infelicities  of  [79]  by  making  very  clear
    findings at  [80]  (as  quoted  above)  that  the  appellant  has  been
    politically active in the United Kingdom and in Vietnam  and  that  her
    activities are likely to come to the attention of the authorities.   In
    effect, the judge has found that the summons supports  those  parts  of
    the appellant's account which he found to be true  and  accurate;  that
    approach  is  a  legitimate  one  and  has  not  led  the  judge   into
    inconsistency and error of law as the grounds assert.  For that reason,
    I have dismissed the appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 28 April 2015
