


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/09380/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |        Decision and Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 27 September 2018                 |        On: 11 October 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                  (SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 JUNED MIAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr S Karim, instructed by KC Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh  born  on  11  January  1995.   He
arrived in the UK on 16 October 2008 at the age of 13 years. On  27  October
2008 he made an asylum claim. On 12 February 2009 his claim was refused  but
he  was  granted  discretionary  leave  until  11  February   2012   as   an
unaccompanied minor. That leave was  subsequently  extended  until  11  July
2012, but an application made on 4 July 2012 for further leave  was  refused
on 29 October 2014. The appellant appealed against that decision, on  asylum
and human rights grounds.

The basis of the appellant's claim is  as  follows.  At  the  age  of  eight
years, his parents took him to the house of a man named Salam in  Dhaka  and
left him there. He was made to work for Salam  and  his  wife,  cooking  and
cleaning, and he was slapped and thumped when his  duties  were  not  to  an
acceptable level. His parents visited  him  four  or  five  times  but  then
stopped and that was the last time he saw them. One day Salam told him  they
were leaving the house and they  boarded  an  aeroplane  to  the  UK.  Salam
abandoned him after they arrived in the UK and he was  taken  in  by  a  man
named Mr Alim who took him to the Home Office on 27  October  2008  when  he
claimed asylum. He feared returning to Bangladesh as he would  not  be  able
to survive there.

The  respondent,  in  refusing  the  appellant's  claim  in  February  2009,
accepted his account of his domestic servitude in  Bangladesh  but  did  not
accept his account of events leading to, and following his  arrival  in  the
UK. The respondent did not consider  that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  on
return  in  terms  of  Article  2  and  3  of  the  ECHR,  but  granted  him
discretionary leave as an unaccompanied child on the basis that it  had  not
been possible to make contact with his  family  members  in  Bangladesh.  In
refusing  his  application  for  further  leave  on  29  October  2014   the
respondent considered that the appellant was at no risk on return  and  that
he no longer  qualified  for  discretionary  leave  under  the  Home  Office
policy. The respondent did not accept  the  appellant's  account  of  having
lost touch with his family and concluded  that  his  removal  to  Bangladesh
would  not  breach  his  human  rights.  When  considering  Article  8   the
respondent  concluded  that  the  suitability  exclusion  in  S-LTR.1.6   of
Appendix FM applied on the basis that the appellant's  presence  in  the  UK
was undesirable owing to his failure  to  disclose,  in  his  further  leave
application, a previous official reprimand by the police    in  March  2010,
his arrest for shoplifting in February 2010 and his conviction on  19  March
2014 for breach of a non-molestation order. The  respondent  concluded  that
the appellant's removal would not breach his Article 8 rights either  within
or outside the immigration rules.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 21 January 2015 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chamberlain  and
was pursued only on long residence/ private life grounds  under  Article  8.
The appeal was dismissed on 9 February 2015. At an error of law  hearing  on
21 May 2015 following a grant of permission to  appeal  that  decision,  the
Upper Tribunal, sitting  as  a  panel,  found  an  error  of  law  in  Judge
Chamberlain's decision and set it aside with directions  made  for  skeleton
arguments  addressing  the  matter  of  whether  section  117B(5)   of   the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  was  intended  to  apply  to
children.

The appeal was adjourned to a resumed hearing on 29 September 2015 before  a
different panel, of the President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey  and  Upper
Tribunal Judge Bruce. The panel accepted  the  appellant's  account  of  his
experience in Bangladesh of being  hired  out  to  a  master,  of  his  ill-
treatment by the master, of being abandoned by his master  upon  arrival  in
the UK and of having no ties  to  Bangladesh,  family  or  otherwise,  since
arriving in the UK.  The  panel  found,  however,  that  the  appellant  had
linguistic, cultural and social attachments to Bangladesh and  that,  whilst
the exercise of  reintegrating  in  his  country  of  nationality  would  be
challenging and difficult, it  would  not  give  rise  to  very  significant
obstacles for the purposes of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  immigration
rules. The  panel  did  not  consider  the  refusal  under  the  suitability
provisions to be sustainable in law. As for Article  8  outside  the  rules,
the panel considered that Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act  made  no  distinction
between adult migrants and child migrants so that little weight  was  to  be
accorded to the appellant's private life in the UK.  Having  considered  the
appellant's circumstances the panel concluded that this  was  a  case  where
the public interest prevailed and therefore dismissed the appeal on  Article
8 grounds within and outside the immigration rules.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was sought by the  appellant  on
three grounds: that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  erred  by  applying  section
117B(5) of the NIAA 2002 to the private life established  by  the  appellant
when he was a minor, which fell  outside  that  provision;  that  the  Upper
Tribunal had erred in  concluding  that  the  appellant  continued  to  have
linguistic, social and cultural ties  to  Bangladesh;  and  that  the  Upper
Tribunal had erred in concluding that the  appellant  would  not  face  very
significant  obstacles  to   reintegration   on   return   under   paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi). The Upper Tribunal granted permission itself,  in  order  for
there to  be  authoritative  guidance  given  on  the  important  issues  in
relation to the applicability of Part 5A of the 2002 Act to children.

The Upper Tribunal's decision was set aside by the Court Appeal,  without  a
hearing, upon consent by the parties in relation  to  the  first  ground  of
challenge. It was noted that since the Upper Tribunal's decision  the  Court
of Appeal had given judgment in MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on  the  application
of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  &  Anor  [2016]  EWCA
Civ 705, in which it was concluded, reflecting the principles in  Zoumbas  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74, that it would  be
inappropriate to treat a child as having precarious  status  merely  because
that was true of the parents. It  was  accordingly  agreed  that  the  Upper
Tribunal had erred by treating  the  appellant  as  having  held  precarious
immigration status as a child and so giving little  weight  to  the  private
life he had established in the UK. The Court of Appeal remitted  the  matter
to the Upper Tribunal to reconsider  its  decision  having  directed  itself
correctly in relation to s.117B(5).

The matter then came before us. It was agreed, further to directions  issued
by the Upper Tribunal on 24 May  2018,  that  the  scope  of  re-making  was
limited to a consideration of Article 8 including  a  consideration  of  the
relevant immigration rules.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appellant gave oral evidence before us, adopting his statement at  pages
A1 to A3 of the  appeal  bundle,  and  claiming  that  he  knew  nothing  of
Bangladesh having had a rough life there and that he had  a  very  different
life in the UK. When cross-examined by Mr Wilding he said that  after  doing
a motor mechanics course he had helped out a friend at his  garage.  He  had
been taken on full-time as an estate agent and had previously  worked  as  a
waiter in a restaurant.

Both parties made submissions.  Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the  appellant
could  not  demonstrate  very  significant  obstacles  to   integration   in
Bangladesh. He relied on the findings of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  2015  and
submitted that there was nothing in the evidence today which was capable  of
establishing that the Tribunal was wrong then  or  that  the  situation  had
changed. The appellant's work experience  demonstrated  his  resourcefulness
and capability of integrating into society  wherever  he  went.  His  skills
were transferrable to Bangladesh. The requirements of the immigration  rules
were therefore not met and there was a strong public  interest  against  the
appellant. Outside the rules, the appellant could not benefit from the  Home
Office policy on discretionary leave as the circumstances under  which  such
leave had been granted, namely as an unaccompanied minor,  had  changed.  He
had not accumulated six years of discretionary leave by the time  he  turned
18 and therefore could not qualify for settlement under the policy.  As  for
section 117B(5), whilst that did not apply to a child, it applied  once  the
appellant became an adult and little weight ought  to  be  attached  to  his
private life as an adult. At the time of the appellant's  recent  employment
his leave was precarious. In any event, even  if  section  117B(5)  did  not
apply, there was  nothing  preventing  the  appellant  from  continuing  his
private life in Bangladesh. The decision to  remove  him  was  proportionate
and did not breach his Article 8 rights.

Mr Karim submitted that the Upper Tribunal's acceptance of  the  appellant's
claim to have been enslaved as a  minor  was  crucial  and  was  an  unusual
circumstance. He had spent his teenage years and his adult life  in  the  UK
and had never lived independently in Bangladesh. He did not know  where  his
family was. He had no employment or accommodation readily available  to  him
in Bangladesh and in the  past  three  years  his  ties  to  Bangladesh  had
diminished whilst his ties to the UK had strengthened. There were  therefore
very significant obstacles to his integration in Bangladesh and  the  appeal
should be allowed on the basis that he could meet the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). Mr Karim relied  on  the  Home
Office Asylum Policy Instruction for Discretionary  Leave  at  section  10.1
and submitted that the appellant had  accrued  six  years  of  discretionary
leave and therefore was entitled to settlement under the  policy.  The  fact
that the requirements of the rules and the policy were  met  was  sufficient
for  the  appeal  to  be  allowed  under  Article  8.  In  any   event,   if
consideration had to be given to Article 8 outside  the  rules  and  policy,
the appellant was able to establish more  pros  than  cons  in  the  balance
sheet approach set out in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home Department [2016] UKSC 60. There was very little against the  appellant
and a lot in his favour. With regard to section 117B(5),  his  private  life
was not established at a  time  when  his  leave  was  precarious  and  that
continued to be the case. His private life was established whilst he was  in
the UK lawfully. His removal would be disproportionate.

Statutory Framework and Immigration Rules

In so far as it is material, paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  immigration  rules
provides as follows:

        "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
        remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
        of application, the applicant:


        (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
        lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any
        period  of  imprisonment)  but  there  would  be  very   significant
        obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country  to  which
        he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

Section 117 of the NIAA 2002 provides, so far as is material:


    "117A Application of this Part

    (1) This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

         (a)breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
    under Article 8, and

         (b)as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998.

    (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or  tribunal
    must (in particular) have regard-

         (a)in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and

         (b)in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
         considerations listed in section 117C.

    (3) In  subsection  (2),  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
    question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to  respect
    for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2)."





    "117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

    (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
interest.

    (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,
    because persons who can speak English-

         (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

    (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent,
    because such persons-

         (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

    (4) Little weight should be given to-

         (a)a private life, or

         (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious."


Consideration and findings

 In its decision of 23 November 2015 the panel of the  Upper  Tribunal  gave
full and detailed consideration to the appellant's circumstances in  the  UK
at that time and to the circumstances to which  he  would  be  returning  in
Bangladesh. Having accepted his account of how he came to  the  UK  and  his
claim that he had had no ties with Bangladesh since coming to the UK at  the
age  of  13,  the  panel  found  that  he  nevertheless  continued  to  have
linguistic, cultural and social attachments to that country and that he  was
unable to meet the requirement  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  to  show  very
significant obstacles to integration in Bangladesh. The Court of Appeal  did
not interfere with the Upper Tribunal's findings in that respect,  remitting
the appeal only in regard to the application  of  section  117B(5)  of  NIAA
2002.

We have  given  careful  consideration  to  the  evidence  produced  by  the
appellant since the Upper Tribunal made its decision  in  November  2015  in
order to assess whether it impacts upon the panel's findings or  whether  it
demonstrates that there has  been  a  material  change  in  the  appellant's
circumstances such that he is  now  able  to  demonstrate  very  significant
obstacles to integration in Bangladesh. However we can find nothing  in  the
evidence before us to lead us to reach any different conclusion. Whilst  the
appellant asserts a strong private life in the  UK,  the  evidence  is  very
limited. He has undertaken some employment in the UK, assisting a friend  in
his motor garage, working part-time as a waiter in an Indian restaurant  and
most recently working in  an  estate  agency.  There  is  no  suggestion  or
evidence of any family ties in the UK and  no  relationships  of  note.  The
only recent evidence produced before  us  consists  of  a  brief  letter  of
support from a local councillor, a letter from  the  estate  agents  and  an
unsigned letter from a friend. Whilst the appellant  claims  that  he  could
not integrate into Bangladesh, he was unable  to  give  any  reason  why  he
could not work in a restaurant in Bangladesh or find  work  in  a  car  body
shop, using the experience and skills he has achieved in the UK. His  skills
in both respects are plainly transferrable skills. There is, in  effect,  no
evidence of any significant aspects of a private life  which  could  not  be
replicated in Bangladesh. We find nothing in the appellant's  evidence  that
changes the findings of the panel at [17] in regard to the level and  nature
of any obstacles and difficulties he may face  in  establishing  himself  in
Bangladesh, despite the passage  of  time.  Accordingly  we  find  that  the
appellant cannot meet the requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  on  the
basis of his private life.

It was Mr Karim's submission that the appellant  benefitted  from  the  Home
Office policy on discretionary  leave  for  applicants  granted  such  leave
before 9 July 2012, but we do not agree. Plainly  the  appellant  no  longer
qualified for further leave on the same basis as previously, as  that  leave
was granted on the grounds of being an unaccompanied  minor  whereas  he  is
now an adult of 23 years of age. We do not agree with Mr Karim's  submission
that the appellant is entitled to settlement on the basis of having  accrued
six years of continuous discretionary leave  including  3C  leave  extending
until the present day. We agree with Mr  Wilding  that  the  calculation  of
leave would be from the initial grant in February 2009 until  the  appellant
ceased to be a minor, in 2013, which clearly falls short of  six  years.  We
accordingly reject Mr Karim's submission that the appellant  succeeds  under
Article 8 on the basis of an ability to meet the requirements of  the  rules
and the Home Office policy. We find he meets the requirements of neither.

Moving on, therefore, to the wider consideration of Article  8  outside  the
immigration rules, we  follow  the  "balance  sheet"  approach  to  such  an
assessment established in Hesham Ali. Plainly the appellant's  inability  to
meet the requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  means  that  the  public
interest  lies  in  favour  of  his  removal,  subject  to  his  ability  to
demonstrate compelling circumstances or sufficient  countervailing  factors.
That is made clear in section 117B(1) of the NIAA 2002. We take  account  of
the appellant's ability to speak English and to the  fact  that  he  is  now
working and therefore presumably financially independent, for  the  purposes
of section 117B(2) and  (3),  but  note  that  these  are  neutral  factors.
Section 117B(4) does not apply to the appellant as he has  been  in  the  UK
lawfully since his initial asylum claim.

As for section 117B(5) we are fully cognisant of the fact that that was  the
basis upon which the previous Upper Tribunal's decision was  set  aside  and
why the appeal was remitted by the Court of  Appeal.   We  accept  that  the
appellant's immigration status whilst he was a child  cannot  be  considered
as precarious, as is made clear in the cases of MA (Pakistan)  and  Zoumbas,
given that he cannot be considered to have been responsible  for  his  entry
to the UK or his immigration status thereafter  as  a  child.  We  therefore
give weight to the appellant's private life in the UK as a  child.  We  have
particular regard to his terrible experiences in  Bangladesh  and  in  being
brought to, and abandoned in, the UK in the manner claimed, to  his  studies
undertaken in this country and the friendships and ties  that  have  evolved
during his teenage years.

Where the parties diverged in their views was the impact of section  117B(5)
on the adult  appellant,  beyond  his  minority.  As  we  indicated  to  the
parties, we were somewhat surprised that this had not been  the  subject  of
discussion previously during the  lengthy  appeal  process  and  before  the
Court of Appeal. Mr Karim's submission was that the  word  "established"  in
section 117B(5) should be given its ordinary meaning and  that  the  concept
of precariousness  could  never  be  applied  when  private  life  had  been
established as a minor. Mr Wilding's submission  was  to  the  contrary  and
that an assessment of Article 8 was  fact  sensitive  and  was  ongoing  and
moveable. We have to say  that  we  find  ourselves  in  agreement  with  Mr
Wilding. There is nothing in the judgment in MA  (Pakistan)  which  supports
Mr Karim's case  and  we  find  of  particular  significance  the  Court  of
Appeal's emphasis in brackets at  the  end  of  [14]  of  the  Statement  of
Reasons, on the appellant's precarious immigration status while he  remained
a minor. Accordingly we consider that little weight is to be  given  to  the
appellant's private life once he became an adult.

However, if we are wrong about that, and the appellant's lack of  choice  as
a child as to his entry to, and stay in the UK has led to a situation  where
he cannot now be blamed for his immigration status,  and  consequently  that
we accord weight to the private life he has established not only as a  child
but also as an adult, we are still unable to  find  in  his  favour  in  the
proportionality  assessment.  It  remains  the  case   that,   despite   the
unfortunate  experiences  he  had  as  a  child  in   Bangladesh   and   the
circumstances in which he found himself abandoned in  the  UK,  and  despite
the lack of contact with his family since coming to the  UK,  he  is  now  a
healthy 23 year old male with the advantage of UK qualifications and  skills
which can assist him in re-establishing himself  in  the  country  where  he
spent 13 years of his life and to which he retains linguistic, cultural  and
social attachments. He has no significant links to the UK and  there  is  no
reason why he cannot establish himself into life in Bangladesh.  We  do  not
agree with Mr Karim that the "pros" far outweigh the  "cons",  in  terms  of
the balance sheet  approach.  We  find  that  there  are  no  compelling  or
countervailing  factors  outweighing  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
immigration control in this  case  and  we  conclude  that  the  appellant's
removal to Bangladesh would not be disproportionate  and  would  not  breach
his Article 8 rights.

Accordingly we dismiss the appeal under the immigration rules and  on  wider
Article 8 grounds outside the rules.

DECISION

We re-make the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal  on  Article  8
human rights grounds.




    Anonymity


    We note that the decision made by  the  President  was  not  anonymised
    although the previous decisions were, presumably because the  appellant
    was a minor at that point. We formally discharge any  anonymity  orders
    that were made previously by the First-tier Tribunal or Upper Tribunal.



Signed   [pic]                               Dated: 28 September 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
