
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09846/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st  November 2016                  |On 30th November 2016                |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Mohmmed [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr  J Holt, Counsel, instructed by Ison Harrison
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Cox made following a hearing at Bradford on 26th August 2016.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Sri Lankan born on 12th October 1977.   He
    arrived in the UK  with his wife and child on 7th  January  2015  on  a
    valid multi visit business visa  and  claimed  asylum  some  six  weeks
    later.  He was refused on 22nd June 2015.

 3. The appellant claimed that he went to work in Saudi Arabia as the  head
    of corporate sales and marketing for Khushim  Industrial  Equipment  in
    September 2008. He became  involved  with  the  Sri  Lankan  expatriate
    community there, and  was  appointed  as  the  labour  welfare  society
    member.  As a consequence he became friendly with Sri  Lanka's  foreign
    minister Mr Bogollagama who suggested that he help raise funds for  the
    Sri Lanka Freedom Party within the expatriate community.  Thereafter he
    became actively involved with the SLFP.

 4. The claimant began to receive threatening phone calls from  members  of
    the UNP in 2010, and in 2012 he was threatened as he  got  out  of  his
    vehicle. He decided to stop working  for  them.    However  in  October
    2013, whilst in the UK attending some training, he  was  asked  by  the
    SLFP to resume his work for them. There were further  clashes  in  2013
    and 2014 with members of the UNP culminating in October  2014  when  he
    was threatened with a knife at his Saudi home, in  November  2014  when
    unknown men went to his father's house asking  about  his  whereabouts.
    There were further threats in January 2015, and later that same  month,
    the claimant's home was broken into.

 5. The judge found that the claimant had given a credible account  of  his
    experiences in Saudi Arabia and Sri Lanka.  He  gave  detailed  reasons
    for his findings which are unchallenged.

 6. At paragraph 50 he wrote:

         "On the totality of the evidence and applying the lower standard of
         proof I am satisfied that:

         .    the appellant worked in Saudi Arabia as the Head of  Corporate
             Sales for an industrial company;

         .     the  appellant  as  a  successful  Tamil  businessman  became
             involved with the expatriate community and I am satisfied that
             as a result he would have had a high profile in  Saudi  Arabia
             within the Sri Lankan community;

         .    the appellant was asked  to  join  the  SLFP  and  he  started
             working for the party;

         .    the appellant was threatened in Saudi Arabia by members of the
             UNP and his car was damaged in 2012. He  started  working  for
             the SLFP but after the birth of  his  third  child,  the  SLFP
             approached him again and he decided to continue helping them;

         .    the appellant was attacked with a knife in Saudi  Arabia.   He
             decided to leave the country;

         .    unknown men came to the appellant's family  home  looking  for
             him; and

         .    the appellant's house in Sri Lanka was broken  into  after  he
             left Sri Lanka."

 7. The judge then considered whether there would be a  real  risk  of  the
    claimant suffering serious harm if he were to return to Sri Lanka.   He
    addressed the guidance provided in the country guidance case of GJ  and
    Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 and K
    (application of GJ) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  00512.   He  considered
    whether the claimant might fall within  subcategory  (b)  of  GJ  as  a
    person at risk, namely "certain opposition  politicians  and  political
    activists" but concluded that he did not.

 8. The judge then considered, in line  with  paragraphs  12.2  -  12.4  of
    Practice Directions and the Tribunal's observations in DSG  and  Others
    (Afghan Sikhs:  departure  from  CG)  Afghanistan)  [2013]  UKUT  1848,
    whether the claimant's case could  properly be distinguished  from  GJ.
    He noted that the evidence in his case was not dependent upon the  same
    or similar evidence as the evidence considered by the Tribunal in  that
    case, which itself acknowledged that the risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka
    was very fact specific.  He also noted that the political landscape  in
    Sri Lanka had changed significantly since the decision in  GJ.  He  set
    out the background material and  considered  the  Presenting  Officer's
    argument that, as the UNP were now in power, they would no longer  have
    any interest in the claimant especially as he had stopped his political
    activities.

 9. He then wrote as follows:

         "In my view  there  is  some  merit  to  this  argument.   However,
         applying the lower standard of proof I am satisfied that there is a
         real risk that the appellant will be of continued adverse  interest
         to the UNP as, in the light of his  work  for  the  SLFP  in  Saudi
         Arabia, they may think that the appellant will be  able  to  assist
         them in pursuing charges against members of the former  government.
         I believe this  probably  explains  why  they  tried  to  find  the
         appellant after the arrest of Basil Rajakapkse.

         Further, although there has been some improvement in the  situation
         in Sri Lanka, the police 'continued to routinely torture  and  ill-
         treat individuals taken into custody to  extract  confessions'  but
         also for personal vendettas or to extort 'bribes' (the  HRW  Rights
         Watch at page 95 of the appellant's bundle).  As  such,  it  is  my
         view, even if the men looking for the appellant were not acting  in
         an official  capacity,  there  is  a  real  risk  that  they  could
         bribe/persuade rogue  police  officers  to  help  them.   In  these
         circumstances I am satisfied that there is a  real  risk  that  the
         appellant  will  suffer  serious  harm   whilst   they   seek   his
         'assistance'."

10. On that basis he allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

11. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the Tribunal had effectively added  to  the  list  of  risk  categories
    identified in GJ to include opposition members.  Extending the list  of
    those at risk without giving adequate reasons is a  material  error  of
    law.

12. Alternatively, the judge had engaged in speculation and  there  was  no
    evidential basis for finding that, at paragraph 63, "if the men looking
    for the appellant were not acting in an official capacity  there  is  a
    real risk that they could bribe/persuade rogue police officers to  help
    them".

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lever for the reasons  stated
    in the grounds on 5th October 2016.

Submissions

14. Mr Diwnycz accepted that this was not a run of the mill case, as he put
    it, and relied on his grounds.

15. Mr Holt submitted that  the  decision  should  stand  and  the  grounds
    amounted to a disagreement with the decision.

Findings and Conclusions

16. There is no error of law in this decision.

17. First, with respect to GJ, the judge's approach was absolutely correct.
     His starting point was  the  country  guidance  case.   He  considered
    Counsel's argument that the claimant might fit within one of  the  risk
    categories outlined by the Tribunal and concluded that  he  could  not.
    He then looked at whether there were any grounds for departing from the
    country guidance case, applied the correct test, which he  set  out  at
    paragraph 55, and then considered both the  changes   which  had  taken
    place since GJ was decided, some three years ago,  and  the  claimant's
    particular situation.

18. The judge had already concluded that the claimant had  given  a  wholly
    credible account of the events leading to his  asylum  claim.   He  had
    accepted that specific threats had been made against him. He  had  also
    rejected  the  Presenting  Officer's  submission  that  the  claimant's
    profile within the SLFP was at a  low  level.  He  concluded  that  the
    claimant was effectively acting as the party's link to  the  expatriate
    community in Saudi Arabia.

19. That conclusion is unchallenged in the grounds.

20. Having found that the claimant  was  operating  at  a  reasonable  high
    level, and that threats had been made against him both before and after
    he had left Sri Lanka, he was entitled to reach the decision  which  he
    did, on the basis of the  changes  which  had  taken  place  since  the
    decision in GJ.

21. The submission in the grounds that the Tribunal had added to  the  list
    of risk categories in that case is unwarranted.  The judge did not  add
    to that list, he decided to distinguish GJ and gave wholly  sustainable
    reasons for doing so.

22. Neither is there any merit in the alternative submission that there was
    no evidential basis for deciding that the claimant would continue to be
    at risk from persons who might think that he would be  able  to  assist
    them in pursuing charges against members of the former government.  The
    judge referred to the attempt which was made to find the claimant after
    the arrest of the  former  economic  and  development  minister,  Basil
    Rajakapkse, who was arrested on his return to Sri Lanka in April  2016.
    He also referred to the background evidence in the Human  Rights  Watch
    Report of police practice, including personal vendetta.

23. The grounds disclose no error of law.



Decision

24. The decision of the original judge will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]    Date 30 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

