
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09469/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th June 2015                    |On 18th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            ATTIAT UN NOOR ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Joules Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Upson made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 18th December 2014.

Background

 2. The appellant, who has a dependent daughter, is a citizen  of  Pakistan
    born on 9th November 1958.  She arrived in the UK on 22nd January  2014
    and claimed asylum on the basis of her Ahmadi faith. She has  an  adult
    son here who has been here granted refugee status.

 3. The judge accepted the evidence that she was an Ahmadi but not that she
    has had any difficulties as a consequence of her faith in Pakistan, nor
    that she genuinely feared persecution on return.

The Grounds of Application

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal  in  detailed  grounds  which
    were relied upon by Mr Ahmed at the hearing.

 5. First, it is said that the judge misapplied the country  guidance  case
    of MN and Others (Ahmadi country conditions risk)  Pakistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00389. It was accepted in the grounds that  the  judge  had  asked
    himself the right question in stating that he had to resolve the  level
    of the appellant's commitment to her faith,  but  that  he  selectively
    concerned himself with paragraph 22 of MN which states that it has long
    been possible in general for Ahamdis  to  practice  their  faith  on  a
    restricted basis either in private or  in  common  with  other  Ahmadis
    without infringing domestic Pakistan law.  The judge's  description  of
    the appellant as a "low level Ahmadi" was erroneous and  did  not  take
    into account, in particular, of relevant  evidence  from  the  Ahmadiya
    Muslim Association which was not referred to at all during  the  course
    of the judge's findings.  The letter  confirmed  that  the  appellant's
    home was used as a place for female members meetings and  as  a  prayer
    centre.  Moreover there was no  reference  to  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant's son who had lived with her in the same  house  in  Pakistan
    and had given detailed evidence of their activities. He had been  found
    to be credible, having been granted asylum by UKBA. It was also  argued
    that the judge had erred in accepting the respondent's submission  that
    the appellant's asylum  claim  should  be  considered  on  an  entirely
    separate basis from that of her son, that he had inappropriately relied
    on a lack of a past tangible threat and had made inappropriate findings
    in relation to her reasons for claiming asylum.

 6. Finally, the judge had failed to consider the principles of  HJ  (Iran)
    and had failed in his duty to assess the evidence in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's motive for practising her religion secretly.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons stated in the  grounds
    by Judge Omotosho on 29 January 2015.

 8. The determination was defended by Mrs Pettersen at the hearing.

Findings and Conclusions

 9. The grounds acknowledge that the judge's approach to  the  question  of
    whether the appellant as an Ahmadi would  be  at  risk  on  return  was
    consistent with the approach by the Tribunal in MN.

10. It is right that the phrase "low level Ahmadi" is  not  a  particularly
    accurate shorthand for what the Tribunal said in that case,  which  was
    as follows:

      i) "An Ahmadi who has been found not to be reasonably likely  or  wish
         to engage in behaviour which would infringe domestic  Pakistan  law
         would not be at risk.  If an Ahmadi is able to demonstrate that  it
         is of  particular  importance  to  his/her  religious  identity  to
         practice and manifest his/her faith openly in Pakistan, in defiance
         of the restrictions in the Pakistan penal code he or she is  likely
         to be in need of protection."

11. However, the judge's approach is not outwith that guidance.

12. First, according to  the  letter  from  the  Ahmadiya  Association,  it
    appears that the appellant was able to practice her faith as she wished
    in Pakistan without risk of persecution.  The letter  states  that  her
    house was being used for Lajana meetings and as  a  prayer  centre.  It
    goes on to say that the situation  would  escalate  to  social  boycott
    because of the close proximity of  a non-Ahmadi  mosque  to  her  house
    which would create difficulties, but no  mention  of   whether  such  a
    boycott occurred.  It also says that she served the community as deputy
    president of the local ladies organisation from 2008 to  2013  and  was
    secretary for publications from 2010 to 2013.

13. There is no mention  of  any  difficulties  which  she  suffered  as  a
    consequence of her activities.  Indeed it is not the  appellant's  case
    that she herself has suffered persecution in Pakistan as a  consequence
    of her faith. It was a matter for the judge to decide  what  weight  he
    put on the lack of past persecution. It is relevant to  the  assessment
    of future risk.

14. The judge specifically rejected the appellant's claim that it  was  the
    kidnapping of her brother-in-law which triggered her decision to  claim
    asylum in the UK.  Mr Ahmed criticised the judge for holding it against
    her that she failed to remember the year of the kidnap, because  it  is
    not disputed that it occurred, but that was a matter for him.  Moreover
    the judge was entitled to take into account that the appellant returned
    to Pakistan in December 2013, after the kidnap had taken place.

15. The appellant has another son who remains in Pakistan and there  is  no
    suggestion that he is at risk.  The judge was entitled to observe  that
    the appellant was vague when being questioned about what ad happened to
    her in Pakistan and to  note  that  she  had  lived,  uneventfully,  in
    Rawalpindi for thirteen years.

16. Second, it is right to say that there is no mention of the  appellant's
    son's evidence in the judge's findings. Mrs Petersen informed  me  that
    he was granted status on an entirely different basis i.e. that  it  was
    accepted that he  had  been  proselytising  in  the  UK.   I  therefore
    conclude, on the basis of the information provided by  the  respondent,
    that the appellant's case is wholly  distinguishable  and  accordingly,
    not a material error for the judge not to have recorded it.

17. Finally, there was absolutely nothing in the evidence to establish that
    she had been able to practice her faith in  the  UK  on  any  different
    basis to the way she had practiced in Pakistan.  Accordingly there  can
    be no breach of the HJ (Iran) principles.

Decision

18. The original judge did not err in law  and  his  decision  stands.  The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

