
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09958/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2016                   |On 4 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MISS TRYPHINE KACHIPANDE
                        (anonymity directon Not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Muzira, Solomon Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State from a decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss promulgated on 26 April 2016, which  was
    set aside on 14 September 2016. For ease of reference my Error  of  Law
    Decision is annexed to this Decision.




    Background

2.   Miss Kachipande (to whom I shall refer hereafter as  the  Appellant  as
    this was her status before the First-tier Tribunal)  is  a  citizen  of
    Zimbabwe, born on 25 February 1993. She arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    on 19 February 2014 and made a claim for asylum on 13 January 2015. The
    Secretary of State's asylum decision, refusing her claim, was contained
    in a letter dated 1 July 2015.

3.   The Appellant's appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 6  April
    2015. The Judge dismissed the Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection. He made a finding that the Appellant was not a
    refugee and he further found that she did not qualify for  humanitarian
    protection. He also concluded that there was no engagement of Article 3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights. None of these  matters  has
    been the subject of challenge: there is no cross-appeal.

4.   The Judge then purported to  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds under Article 8 of the Convention. As  counsel  for  the
    Appellant conceded, the Judge's approach  was  flawed  and  accordingly
    this element of the decision was set aside.

5.   I am now required to remake that part of the decision.  At  the  outset
    of the hearing before me, it was agreed by the parties' representatives
    that there were three issues for me to determine:

    (a)  Should the Appellant's appeal be allowed  within  the  Immigration
    Rules?

    (b)  If not, then should it be considered outside the Rules?

    (c)  If so, should the Appellant's appeal be allowed under Article 8?

    With the concurrence of the parties, all the findings of fact  made  by
    the Judge in relation to refugee status,  humanitarian  protection  and
    the Article 3 determination are preserved. No additional  evidence  was
    placed before.

    Appellant's submissions

6.   Miss Muzira submitted on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules.  She  contends
    that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    integration in Zimbabwe. She  asserts  that  the  Appellant  has  never
    worked, that single women in Zimbabwe are particularly vulnerable,  and
    that she has no family or other support structures in Zimbabwe, matters
    rehearsed by the Judge at [37].

7.   She points to the Judge's findings that the  Appellant  was  mistreated
    [40] and that she is a lone, single woman unable  to  return  to  those
    relatives who mistreated her. She has never lived independently and has
    no support network. Her mother is  a  student,  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom and lacks the resources to relocate to Zimbabwe: she sent money
    to the Appellant while she was in Zimbabwe to help support her. In  her
    skeleton argument, Miss Muzira makes reference to  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, and in particular
    paragraph 14 which states:

         "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life."

8.   Even if the Appellant does not come within  paragraph  276ADE,  it  was
    submitted that her appeal should be allowed under Article  8,  although
    Miss Muzira struggled to identify any  'compelling  circumstances'  for
    the matter being considered outside the Immigration Rules.

9.   Miss Muzira referred me to Kugathas v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 as authority for the proposition that the
    protection of family life under Article 8 might extend to a parent  and
    an adult child in appropriate circumstances. She argued this was such a
    case as the Appellant was financially dependent on her mother and there
    were strong emotional ties.  She  said  it  was  significant  that  the
    Appellant's mother had not been to Zimbabwe since 2002 and that she now
    had a young child settled with her in the United Kingdom.

    Respondent's submissions

10.  Mr Armstrong placed reliance on the preserved findings of fact  to  the
    effect that there were no obstacles to the Appellant's  integration  in
    Zimbabwe, particularly paragraph 45 which reads:

         "... in the instant case, however, the Appellant lived in  Zimbabwe
         herself, was supported by her mother through financial  remittances
         over many years, and there is no reason, and no evidence  shown  to
         the contrary by the Appellant, why she could not return to  Harare,
         the capital city, and live there, even if she does so as  a  single
         woman."

11.  He submits that the Appellant, aged nearly 24, is  apparently  fit  and
    healthy with no disability and capable of  working  and  providing  for
    herself. He points to the Appellant's poor immigration history and  the
    statutory public policy considerations which must  be  considered.  The
    Grounds of  Appeal  indicate  that  the  Appellant  applied  for  entry
    clearance to join her mother in the United Kingdom and was refused  due
    to her age. Nonetheless she subsequently  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally and claimed asylum.

    The legal framework

12.  The parties were agreed on the  legal  framework  to  be  applied:  the
    Appellant would need to satisfy the Tribunal that she came  within  the
    ambit of paragraph 276ADE(1) which would entitle her to  the  grant  of
    leave to remain. In this instance the Appellant relies on sub-paragraph
    (vi):

         The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
             S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

         (ii)     has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

         [...]

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
             lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than   20   years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK. (emphasis added)

13.  Any public interest question falls to be addressed under the  statutory
    regime of section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

    Assessment and conclusions

14.  For convenience, I will express my  conclusions  by  reference  to  the
    three questions identified by the parties at the outset of the hearing.



    (a)  Should the Appellant's appeal be allowed  within  the  Immigration
    Rules?

15.  Unhesitatingly no.  The  Judge's  findings  of  fact  which,  with  the
    concurrence of both parties, have been expressly  preserved,  put  this
    matter beyond question. The Judge found there to be no reason  why  the
    Appellant cannot return to Zimbabwe (see paragraph 45).  Even  had  the
    Judge not so found, I do not consider  that  anything  in  the  matters
    relied on by Miss Muzira comes  close  to  constituting  "very  serious
    obstacles to integration". Undoubtedly the Appellant was ill treated by
    certain family members as the Judge expressly found (paragraph 40), and
    she cannot return to live with her Uncle and Aunt  (paragraph  56)  but
    she is  young,  fit,  capable  of  gainful  employment  and  personally
    resourceful. Adopting the broad meaning of "integration"  commended  in
    Kamara (above) the criterion prescribed in paragraph 276ADE(1)  is  not
    met. The Appellant spent her youth  and  childhood  in  Zimbabwe,  from
    where all her  social,  cultural  and  educational  ties  are  derived,
    notwithstanding  the  ill-treatment   she   suffered.   This   is   not
    incompatible with the concerns  for  single  women  voiced  in  Country
    Information and Guidance, Zimbabwe: Women, October 2014.

    (b)  If not, then should the Appellant's appeal be  considered  outside
    the Rules?

16.  Compelling circumstances need to be identified to support a  claim  for
    grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules:  see  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) and  others  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387 at paragraph 33. In this instance Miss  Muzira  was  unable  to
    demonstrate  any   such   compelling   circumstances.   The   Appellant
    experienced harsh treatment at the hands of family members but that  is
    a far from exceptional occurrence. Equally the fact that  she  will  be
    returning to her home country as  a  single  woman  is  not  a  special
    feature making it appropriate to consider her case outside the Rules. I
    can find no compelling circumstances in this case for adopting  such  a
    course.

    (c)  If so, should the Appellant's appeal be allowed under Article 8?

17.   The  conclusion  to  the  previous  question  is  sufficient   to   be
    dispositive of  this  appeal,  and  this  third  question  is  entirely
    academic. In deference to the  submissions  which  I  received  on  the
    matter, I should indicate that had I been  satisfied  that  there  were
    compelling circumstances for considering the appeal outside the  Rules,
    I would not have allowed it under Article 8.

18.  First, I do not consider family or private life under Article 8  to  be
    engaged. The Appellant is an adult of 23 years  of  age.  Ties  between
    young adults who have yet to establish their own family  life  separate
    from their parents may constitute family life. But on  a  fact-specific
    analysis of this case,  applying  the  ratio  of  Kugathas  as  further
    explained in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT
    00160 (IAC), such ties as exist between mother and  adult  daughter  do
    not extend beyond  the  of  normal  bonds  of  affection  and  emotion.
    Secondly, in any event, when the public interest questions under s 117B
    are addressed, any interference with the Appellant's private or  family
    life is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  operation  of  immigration
    control,  and  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
    established entirely when the Appellant was unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

19.  It therefore follows that in re-making that part of the decision  which
    was set aside, this appeal must also be dismissed under Article  8,  in
    addition to the earlier and unchallenged  dismissal  by  the  Judge  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds, and under Article 3 of  the
    Convention.



Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and  his  decision
to allow the appeal has been set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the appeal.


Signed   Mark Hill                               Date     3 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09958/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2016                  |On 14 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MISS TRYPHINE KACHIPANDE
                        (anonymity directon Not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Muzira, instructed by Solomon Solicitors


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS



1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Juss which was promulgated on 26 April 2016.  The appeal is brought  by
    the Secretary of State.

2.   The appeal was originally brought against a decision  made  on  1  July
    2015 refusing to grant asylum to the Miss Kachipande who is  a  citizen
    of Zimbabwe, born on 25 February 1993.  The judge reviewed the evidence
    at  some  length  and  his  substantive  legal  conclusions  appear  at
    paragraphs 46 and 47 of the decision.  He  made  a  finding  that  Miss
    Kachipande was not a refugee and he further  found  that  she  did  not
    qualify for humanitarian protection. Further, he found that  there  was
    no engagement of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.



3.   What he then proceeded to do in  a  brief  concluding  section  was  to
    consider the matter under Article 8 on the basis of a family life claim
    as between mother and adult daughter.  The flaw with that approach  was
    twofold.  First, the judge did  not,  as  was  required,  consider  the
    matter under  the  Immigration  Rules,  particularly  Appendix  FM  and
    276ADE.  In addition, not having considered the matter under the Rules,
    he failed to identify any compelling circumstance why the matter should
    be considered  under  Article  8  outside  those  Rules.  Plainly,  his
    conclusions under Article 8 cannot stand.

4.   Ms Muzira, who acts for Miss Kachipande, wisely conceded  both  of  the
    flaws which undermine the judge's conclusions on Article  8.   Although
    she had been minded to make submissions that these errors  of  law  may
    not have been material, she properly recognised that they were  central
    to the judge's determination and therefore this aspect of the  decision
    must properly be set  aside.  There  is  no  cross-appeal  against  the
    judge's findings on asylum, humanitarian protection, or Article 3.

5.   Mr Clarke, who appears for the Secretary of State, and Ms  Muzira  both
    agree, as do I, that having set aside that part of the decision  it  is
    for the Upper Tribunal to re-make the relevant  part  of  the  decision
    under the Rules; and, if that fails, then under Article 8  outside  the
    Rules if there is a compelling case for so doing. Neither  consider  it
    necessary to adduce any fresh evidence so far  as  that  is  concerned.
    The matter can be disposed of by reference to existing documentation on
    submissions.

6.   In all the circumstance, having found the error of law, I adjourn  this
    matter for the decision to be re-made but I expressly preserve all  the
    findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  relation  to
    refugee   status,   humanitarian   protection   and   the   Article   3
    determination.



Notice of Decision

i.   Having found an error of law, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is set aside in respect of the claim under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    the consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

ii.  Those aspects of the decision are to be re-made in the  Upper  tribunal
    on a date to be fixed with a time estimate of 3 hours.

iii. All the findings of fact made in the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation
    to refugee status, asylum, humanitarian protection and  the  Article  3
    determination are preserved.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     16 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
