



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: AA/09964/2012
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Sent         |
|On 14 January 2014                              |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                              zakarias shewandy

                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Ficklin instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Ethiopia, appeals with  permission  against
    the decision of the respondent to set removal  directions  to  Ethiopia
    having refused to recognise him as a  refugee,  to  grant  humanitarian
    protection, or to give him leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds.  The appellant was born in  Addis  Ababa,  before
    Eritrea came into existence.  His father is  Eritrean  and  his  mother
    Ethiopian.  The appellant is an Ethiopian citizen and has served in its
    army.  The respondent has not sought to remove  him  to  Eritrea:   the
    removal directions are limited to Ethiopia.

 2. The appellant travelled from  Ethiopia  through  Sudan,  Libya,  Malta,
    Italy and France before coming to the United Kingdom in July 2009.   He
    has made two asylum claims, the first in July 2009, when he arrived  in
    the United Kingdom; that  claim  was  refused,  and  Immigration  Judge
    Brunnen dismissed his appeal on  10  November  2009.   His  account  of
    deserting from the Ethiopian army was rejected by the first immigration
    judge, as was his account of being tortured in Ethiopia.  The appellant
    was admitted for psychiatric assessment immediately  after  receipt  of
    that determination.  The appellant did not appeal the first immigration
    judge's rejection of his account and his appeal. On 14 January 2011 the
    appellant made further  submissions,  supported  by  medical  evidence,
    which were eventually accepted as a fresh asylum claim, but rejected by
    the respondent.

First-Tier Tribunal hearing

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal: his appeal was heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers and  dismissed,  on  20  February
    2013.   Judge Chambers began by considering the credibility and factual
    findings of the first immigration judge and then considered the medical
    evidence  of  Dr  Nicholas  Smith  of  Freedom  from  Torture,  and   a
    psychological report from Dr Stephanie Sneider, as  well  as  a  letter
    from the appellant's General Practitioner.   He considered  the  effect
    of the new evidence on the negative credibility findings of  the  first
    immigration judge, with particular emphasis  on  the  effect  of  post-
    traumatic stress disorder on the reliability and  internal  consistency
    of the appellant's evidence.  He accepted that the medical evidence now
    produced showed that the appellant had torture scars and a  history  of
    self-harm.  However, he concluded that the evidence did  not  establish
    in which country and when the torture had occurred, and  therefore  was
    not probative of torture in Ethiopia  or  the  appellant's  account  of
    desertion from the Ethiopian army.

 4. The judge rejected the asylum, humanitarian protection  and  Article  3
    elements of the appellant's claim on that basis.   He  then  considered
    Article 8 ECHR.  He noted that the appellant had no family life in  the
    United Kingdom, nor indeed in Ethiopia, since he had last lived at home
    when he was 17.  He was one of nine children, from a farming family  in
    the  Ethiopian  countryside,  who  because  the   family   had   become
    impoverished, had all left home.  Although his appeal lacked merit,  he
    was not  mentally  well  and  had  encountered  difficulties,  suffered
    depression and felt suicidal, on his evidence, in all the countries  to
    which he had travelled:  he had not  been  happy  in  Ethiopia,  Sudan,
    Malta, Italy or France before coming to the United  Kingdom.   Although
    he probably had some private life here, there was little evidence of it
    and all his efforts while in  the  United  Kingdom  had  been  directed
    towards various applications to enable him  to  stay.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge decided  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  not  be
    disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR.

 5. The appellant challenged that determination in three ways:

          1) The first immigration judge's  negative  credibility  findings
             should not have been the starting point, given that there  was
             now evidence corroborating at least part  of  the  appellant's
             account;

          2) His evidence had not been subject to cross-examination and was
             therefore 'effectively unchallenged'; and

          3) The First-tier Tribunal's treatment of the risk assessment, in
             accordance with the principles in J v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
             629,  was inadequate in that he  had  failed  to  address  the
             suicide risk at each step in the enforcement procedure.

 6. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Designated  Judge  Shaerf,  who
    considered that the first and third grounds were arguable.  He rejected
    the second ground, since credibility was plainly in issue in the letter
    of refusal .   That was the basis on which this appeal came  before  me
    for an error of law decision.

Error of law

 7. On 31 July 2013, I  set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for error of law, to be remade by the Upper Tribunal.   I  did
    not consider that there was any merit in the Devaseelan point but I did
    consider that, given the appellant's mental health problems, the First-
    tier Tribunal judge should have considered all  of  the  steps  in  the
    enforcement procedure, as set out in J's  case.      I  summarised  the
    relevant history of this appeal in my decision as follows:

         "9.  At paragraphs 27 to 36 of his  determination,  Judge  Chambers
         considered the medical evidence ...

         10.  He noted that the medical evidence now before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal would have served as an aid to findings on  the  important
         issue of credibility and that Dr Smith considered the  scarring  on
         the  appellant's  body  to  be  highly  consistent  with   injuries
         sustained during torture, but even having  regard  to  the  torture
         evidence he concluded that the appellant had  not  established  the
         factual basis for which he  contended,  and  dismissed  the  asylum
         appeal.

         11.  Judge Chambers accepted that medical  facilities  in  Ethiopia
         were not well  developed  and  the  available  treatment  was  very
         limited but having regard to J v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and N v. Secretary of State for  the
         Home Department [2005] UKHL 31, he concluded that  the  appellant's
         circumstances did not reach the high threshold required  to  engage
         international protection under Article 3 ECHR.

         12.  The judge then considered Article 8 following the  five  steps
         set out in Razgar, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 840 and concluded that  the
         appellant had no family life in the  United  Kingdom.  His  parents
         were still in Ethiopia. All of his eight siblings  had  left  home.
         The appellant was  unwell  both  physically  and  mentally  and  in
         various places he had  travelled  to  he  had  encountered  further
         difficulties and as a result of which he had become  depressed  and
         felt suicidal.  He has  attempted  suicide.   Those  had  been  his
         feelings in Ethiopia, Sudan, Malta, Italy and France.  He concluded
         however that removal was proportionate,  dismissed  the  Article  8
         appeal and made no anonymity order. "

 8. I gave directions to accompany my decision: the appellant was  directed
    to file and serve all relevant medical  evidence  for  the  substantive
    hearing by 11 August 2013.  Both  parties  were  given  leave  to  make
    further submissions if so advised, but neither did so.

 9. Nor did the appellant comply with the medical evidence directions.  The
    most recent medical evidence on the file is that of Dr  Nicholas  Smith
    of Freedom from Torture, dated 12 October 2011.

Upper Tribunal hearing

10. On 14 January 2014, the case came back before me for the  determination
    to be substantively remade.  There was, in the event, no change at  all
    from the evidential situation at the end  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  The medical evidence was now substantially out  of  date  and
    there was no evidence as to how the appellant's  mental  health  and/or
    his private life might have progressed since 2011.  Absent any  written
    submissions  or  skeleton  arguments,  the  appeal  proceeded  on  oral
    submissions alone.

11. Mr Ficklin for the appellant apologised for not having provided any new
    medical evidence.  The appellant's consultant had refused  to  write  a
    report; he could not say which doctor it was who had so refused.  There
    was no new witness statement.   The  appellant  struggled  to  maintain
    contact with both his treating physicians and his solicitors, but given
    his poor mental health, that should not  be  held  against  him.    His
    psychiatric state was precarious, as the medical  evidence  of  torture
    and post-traumatic stress  disorder  established;  he  had  made  three
    attempts at suicide in the past three years, according to  Mr  Ficklin,
    and had been in and out  of  hospital  intermittently  since  the  last
    hearings.

12. Mr Ficklin accepted that on the evidence, the appellant could not  meet
    the high test set in N.   However, the evidence was that up to 2009, he
    was self-harming. While detained in Malta, he had tried to hang himself
    on one occasion, and on another,  to  cut  his  throat;  he  should  be
    regarded as having a moderate intent to die, while in  Malta.   He  did
    have scars on his throat, as set out in Dr Smith's  report.   Dr  Smith
    also noted deep incisions and high levels of body  scarring  consistent
    with torture.    Dr Smith considered that there was a moderate to  high
    risk of further self-harm and First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chambers  when
    dismissing the appeal had accepted that the determination should not be
    sent directly to the appellant, in case he self-harmed on receiving it.



13. There was  no  new  evidence,  but  that  was  not  evidence  that  the
    appellant's condition had improved and  his  state  of  mind  would  be
    exacerbated by the process of removal,  and  by  being  served  with  a
    negative determination.  Mr Ficklin asked me to substitute  a  decision
    allowing the appeal.

14. For the respondent, Mr Harrison reminded me that when  the  appellant's
    fingerprints were taken for Eurodac, while he was in Malta on  24  June
    2007, they  were  found  to  have  been  damaged.   The  appellant  had
    acknowledged that he had done so himself, and had altered the length of
    time he said he had spent in Sudan, to avoid disclosing  his  detention
    in Malta.  That, he contended, should damage  the  appellant's  overall
    credibility.  The appellant was Ethiopian by birth and citizenship and,
    on his own account, had served in the Ethiopian army.  His  account  of
    having deserted the army and being tortured in Ethiopia  had  not  been
    accepted by the respondent or by either of the  judges.  The  appellant
    had travelled through  five  countries  before  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom and although it purported to do so, the evidence  of  Dr  Smith
    could not establish, from the scarring he had, the country in which  he
    had been tortured.

15. The respondent's letter of refusal was prepared in October 2012, on the
    most up-to-date medical evidence then available.   It  was  regrettable
    that the appellant had not seen fit to provide current evidence for the
    Upper Tribunal hearing, despite being given plenty of time  to  do  so.
    There was no evidence of further self harm, although whether  that  was
    as a result of  the  beneficial  effects  of  continued  treatment  and
    monitoring, or  because  of  any  improvement  in  his  condition,  was
    impossible to state given the paucity of evidence before the  Tribunal.
    The Tribunal should not  be  prepared  to  infer  that  the   appellant
    remained at risk of suicide  attempts  at  any  stage  of  the  removal
    process.  Mr Harrison invited me to dismiss the appeal.

16. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Discussion

17. An asylum appeal must always be determined as at the date  of  hearing.
    The crucial question here is  the  appellant's  mental  state  and  the
    effect which that might have during the process of removal:  Mr Ficklin
    accepts that the appellant cannot show that  his  state  of  health  is
    sufficiently poor that removing him to Ethiopia would engage Article  3
    ECHR as in N's case.

18. The evidence before me is woefully  out  of  date.   There  is  no  new
    evidence at all from the appellant and I therefore  treat  the  factual
    matrix as that found by the First-tier Tribunal:  that he is Ethiopian,
    that his family have all left his home area, that he was in the army in
    Ethiopia and then left the country,  travelling  through  a  number  of
    other countries, in  all  of  which  he  suffered  depression,  and  in
    particular, in Malta, where he was detained and fingerprinted.  I  have
    regard to the appellant's attempt to erase his fingerprints  to  escape
    identification as the person detained there.  I accept  that  there  is
    clear evidence of torture, but not where or why it occurred.

19. The appellant does not keep in touch regularly with his doctors or  his
    lawyers, and there is simply nothing before me to indicate how  he  is,
    or what his engagement is with the United Kingdom now.

20. The test in J requires evidence  (at  the  lower  level  applicable  to
    international protection) of a minimum level of severity, such that the
    risk is  serious  and  removal  would  be  an  affront  to  fundamental
    humanitarian principles.  The appellant must show a causal link between
    the act or threatened act of removal or expulsion and such risk of self-
    harm, at the level of Article 3 ECHR.  The  fear  must  be  objectively
    well founded.  Only if all of that is shown must  the  respondent  show
    that there are effective mechanisms in the United Kingdom  and  in  the
    receiving state to reduce the threat of suicide.  Whilst Article 3  can
    in principle succeed, in relation to a foreign case,  the  standard  is
    particularly high and it is not suggested that the appellant has  shown
    that it is met.

21. The question which caused me to set aside the determination and  remake
    it was the risk to the appellant during the removal  process.   He  has
    had more than sufficient time to put evidence before the Upper Tribunal
    to assist me in considering that risk, if it still exists, but  he  has
    not done  so.   The  appellant  himself  has  not  provided  a  witness
    statement.   His  doctor  has  refused  to  give  more  evidence.   The
    appellant has not come close to establishing that, today, he would self-
    harm during the removal process.

22. I dismiss the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside and re-make  the  decision
in the appeal by dismissing it.





Date:                           Signed
                                    Judith Gleeson
                                    Judge of the Upper Tribunal


