
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/09595/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                      |Determination sent          |
|29 October 2013                            |30 October 2013             |
|                                           |                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                           MOHAMED SIRAJ KASIDEEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECREATRY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Pinder, instructed by Kulendran Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside  by  Deputy
      Upper Tribunal Judge Hall, in a decision dated 28 February  2013.  The
      hearing of the appeal was then adjourned to await a  decision  in  the
      then pending Country Guidance case, GJ. At the outset of  the  hearing
      before me Ms Pinder submitted that it was appropriate for this  matter
      to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing. Ms  Saunders
      agreed that this was so. I invited Ms Pinder to take  instructions  as
      to why: (i) this application had not been made earlier and (ii)  there
      had been service of a witness statement and skeleton argument as  late
      as the morning of the hearing. Having done so she  stated  that  there
      had been a change of solicitors since the Error  of  Law  hearing  and
      that the  current  solicitors  had  not  received  the  Error  of  Law
      decision, or the Tribunal's directions; such  documents,  it  appears,
      having been sent to the appellant's previous  solicitors  despite,  it
      was said,  notification  of  THE  change  of  solicitors  having  been
      provided to the Tribunal.

   2. Turning to the question of whether this appeal should be  remitted  to
      the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Senior  President  of  the  Tribunals'
      Practice Statement of 25th September 2012 provides as follows:

                 "7.   "Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal

             Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with relevant Practice Directions) to  re-make  the
             decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).


            [7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each occasion  to  proceed
             to re-make the decision instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:-


                  (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party
                      before the First-tier Tribunal  of a fair hearing  or
                      other opportunity for that party's case to be put  to
                      and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
                  (b)  the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                      which is necessary in order for the decision  in  the
                      appeal to be re-made is such that, having  regard  to
                      the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate
                      to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."


   3. DUTJ Hall made clear, in his decision of the 28 February, that the re-
      making of the decision on the appellant's appeal would be de novo,  no
      findings of fact being  preserved.  Given  this,  I  accept  that  the
      requirements of paragraph 7.2 (b) of the Senior  President's  Practice
      Statement are fulfilled.


   4. In such circumstances, and given that both parties are in agreement as
      to the appropriate course, I conclude that it is appropriate to  remit
      this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it to be determined  afresh
      and I direct that this be so.


   Decision


      The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  Upper
      Tribunal allows the appellant's appeal to the limited extent  that  it
      is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard de novo.


      To this end, a Case Management  Review  Hearing  has  been  fixed  for
      Hatton Cross hearing centre on 23 December 2013.   Both  parties  must
      file and serve any additional  evidence  to  be  relied  upon  at  the
      substantive hearing of the appeal, no later than 18 December 2013.


    Signed: M O'Connor
    [pic]
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal                          Dated: 29 October
    2013






































































