
[pic]
IAC-AH-sar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/09161/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24th November 2015                |On 18 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     HK
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Johnrose of Broudie, Jackson & Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of  Judge  Farrelly  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 16th February 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female Iranian  citizen  born  21st  July  1985  who
    claimed asylum when she arrived at Gatwick Airport on 6th July 2012.

 3. The application was refused on 25th July 2014, and the appeal heard  by
    the FtT on 26th January 2015.

 4. The FtT heard evidence from the Appellant and her sister, and concluded
    that it did "not believe the truth of the claim  given".   It  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant would be at risk if returned  to  Iran  and
    the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  in  the
    following terms;

    "1.  The Appellant seeks permission on the grounds that the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge applied the wrong standard of proof, speculated  and
         his findings are not corroborated by evidence, failed to take  into
         account/make findings on material evidence.

    2.   Although it can usually be assumed that an experienced judge  will
         be aware of and apply the correct  standard  of  proof  even  where
         there is no self direction, the combination of the apparent failure
         to refer to  and  consider  and  assess  the  mother  and  sister's
         evidence and the  possible  contradiction  between  the  background
         material and the  lack  of  acceptance  of  the  Appellant's  claim
         together with the  apparent  failure  to  make  a  finding  on  the
         Appellant's claimed illegal exit from Iran do  render  it  arguable
         that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  errors  of  law  in  his
         determination.

    3.   Permission is granted on all grounds".

 7. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending, in summary, that the FtT had not misdirected itself as
    to the correct standard of proof, had considered all of  the  evidence,
    made findings which were open to it on the  evidence,  and  followed  a
    country guidance decision.

 8. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in  law  such
    that the decision should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 9. Mrs Johnrose relied and expanded upon the grounds contained within  the
    application for  permission  to  appeal  which  may  be  summarised  as
    follows.

10. It was contended that the FtT had failed to identify at  any  point  in
    the decision, the standard of proof relied upon.

11. It was submitted that the judge had speculated  when  making  findings,
    and his findings were not supported by the evidence.

12. It was submitted that the FtT had failed to take into consideration and
    to make any findings on material evidence.

13. The FtT had not made any reference to the evidence of  the  Appellant's
    mother and sister.  The FtT had not given adequate reasons for findings
    made in  paragraphs  18-25.   It  was  not  clear  from  reading  those
    paragraphs whether the FtT was making findings or  simply  setting  out
    the Appellant's claim.

14. It was contended that the Appellant would be at  risk  if  returned  to
    Iran as an individual with  no  documentation.   The  FtT  should  have
    considered background  evidence  that  was  more  up-to-date  than  the
    evidence considered in SB (risk on  return  -  illegal  exit)  Iran  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00053.

The Respondent's Submissions

15. Miss Johnstone relied upon the rule 24 response and submitted  that  in
    paragraph 30 the FtT had referred to the correct standard of  proof  by
    stating that the FtT did not believe the truth of the  claim,  and  did
    not find it established that there is a real  risk  of  persecution  on
    return to Iran.

16. Miss Johnstone submitted that the FtT had given adequate  reasoning  in
    paragraphs 23-29 of the decision, and  had  considered  the  background
    information on Iran at paragraphs 10-13.

17. In relation to the Appellant's mother, Miss Johnstone pointed out  that
    she did not give oral evidence.  The FtT  had  considered  the  medical
    evidence in relation to the Appellant's mother at paragraph 28,  noting
    that she had a  diagnosis  of  post  traumatic  stress  disorder.   The
    reliability of the diagnosis had not been tested.   That  evidence  did
    not go to the core of the Appellant's claim.  It was accepted that  the
    Appellant's sister had given oral evidence before  the  FtT,  but  Miss
    Johnstone pointed out that she had not been in Iran when it was claimed
    that the Appellant and her mother had been  detained  and  ill-treated,
    and her evidence was repeating what she had been told.

18. In relation to the issue of illegal  exit  from  Iran,  Miss  Johnstone
    submitted that there was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    returned without documentation, and there was no  evidence  before  the
    FtT that would entitle it to depart from the findings in SB Iran CG.

The Appellant's Response

19. Mrs Johnrose disagreed that the correct standard of proof was  set  out
    in paragraph 30 of  the  FtT  decision.   The  correct  standard  is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, and it was submitted that there was no
    evidence that such a standard was applied by  the  FtT.   Mrs  Johnrose
    repeated her assertion that the FtT had not taken into account material
    evidence and had not made findings of fact and given  adequate  reasons
    for those findings.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. The FtT erred in not making  any  reference  to  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's mother and sister and not analysing that evidence  and  not
    giving reasons as to why the evidence was accepted or rejected.

22. The Appellant's mother did not give oral evidence but  had  supplied  a
    signed witness statement dated 3rd December 2014 which was contained at
    pages 13-15 of the Appellant's bundle before the FtT.  Included  within
    the Appellant's bundle at pages 17-18 was a letter dated  4th  December
    2014  from  a  social  worker  who  is  an   approved   mental   health
    professional, giving the view that the Appellant's mother was  not  fit
    to attend a Tribunal hearing.

23. The evidence contained within the statement  dated  3rd  December  2014
    appears to support the Appellant's contention,  as  her  mother  states
    that she was apprehended on 15th May 2012 together with  her  daughter,
    the Appellant, and subsequently  detained  and  tortured  before  being
    released on the same day as her daughter.  As the Appellant relied upon
    this evidence, the FtT should  have  analysed  it  and  explained  what
    weight, if any, was to be attached to it.  Failure to do so amounts  to
    an error of law.

24. The Appellant's sister gave oral evidence at the hearing and provided a
    witness statement  dated  13th  January  2015.   Her  evidence  may  be
    described, in the main, as repeating what she  has  been  told  by  her
    mother and sister, as she was not in Iran when they contend  they  were
    detained and ill-treated.  However her evidence also  referred  to  the
    transformation in her mother's health, which  was  said  to  have  been
    caused by her ill-treatment in Iran.  Therefore, the FtT  was  under  a
    duty to analyse and make findings upon that evidence, and  to  make  no
    reference to it is an error of law.

25. There is a contradiction when one reads paragraphs 13 and 22 of the FtT
    decision.  In paragraph 13 the FtT accepts that background  information
    supports the  claim  that  Iranian  authorities  use  measures  against
    political opponents which would not be acceptable in the west,  and  it
    is stated that "removal by people in plain clothes does occur with  the
    person being taken to places of detention, other  than  official  ones.
    Abuse, including rape is documented".

26. In paragraph 22 the FtT records  having  difficulty  in  accepting  the
    likelihood  of  the  Appellant's  prolonged  detention   with   regular
    assaults, including rape, taking place.  This is because the  Appellant
    had no political background, and it would be apparent that she  had  no
    information  to  give.   The  FtT  does  not  adequately  explain   the
    contradiction, as the Appellant's evidence appears to be  supported  by
    background evidence, and the FtT does not adequately  explain  why  her
    account was not accepted.

27. The FtT did not make a specific  finding  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant left Iran illegally.  At paragraph 31 it is  noted  that  she
    claimed to have left illegally.  The FtT  observed  that  there  is  no
    documentation to confirm whether she left illegally, but in  any  event
    this fact alone would not put her at risk, which was  confirmed  in  SB
    Iran CG.  Whether the Appellant left Iran illegally was an issue before
    the FtT, and findings should have been made as to whether  she  did  or
    did not.

28. In my view no clear findings are made in relation  to  the  Appellant's
    claim in paragraphs 18-25.  The FtT  appears  to  be  setting  out  the
    Appellant's claim, without making specific findings, and without giving
    adequate reasons as to why the account was not accepted.   This  is  an
    error of law.

29. Overall, I find that the arguable errors of law referred  to  by  Judge
    Coker in granting permission, are in fact material errors of  law,  and
    therefore the decision of the FtT must be set aside  with  no  findings
    preserved.

30. Both representatives indicated that if an error of  law  was  found  as
    contended on behalf of the Appellant, it would be appropriate to  remit
    the appeal back to the FtT to be heard afresh.

31. Having considered the Senior President's Practice  Statement  paragraph
    7.2, I find it appropriate to remit the appeal back to the FtT, because
    of the extent of fact-finding which is necessary.

32. The appeal before the FtT will take place  at  the  Manchester  Hearing
    Centre on a date to be advised and will be heard by an FtT Judge  other
    than Judge Farrelly.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

The FtT made no anonymity direction.  There was no request for anonymity  to
the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date 1st December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This must be considered by  the
First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date 1st December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

