
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09221/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL ARFON-JONES DL


                                   Between

                                    a a l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adebayo of A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) we make an anonymity order as the appellant  claims
    to be a refugee.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or Court directs otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify
    the appellant.  This direction applies to both the appellant and to the
    respondent and a failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
    Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a national of Kuwait  born  on  1  January  1965.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 December 2014  and  claimed  asylum.
    The basis of his claim is that he is an undocumented Bidoon and,  as  a
    result, there is a real risk of persecution on return to Kuwait.

 3. On 5 June 2015, the Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights  grounds  under
    Arts 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  Whilst the Secretary  of  State  accepted
    that the appellant was from Kuwait, she did not accept that he  was  an
    undocumented Bidoon.  On 5 June 2015, the Secretary of State also  made
    a decision to remove the appellant to Kuwait by way of directions under
    s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Acts 1999.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  principally  on  the
    basis that he was an undocumented Bidoon and that applying the  country
    guidance decision in NM (documented/undocumented Bidoon:  risk)  Kuwait
    CG [2013] UKUT 00356 (IAC) he was  at  real  risk  of  persecution  and
    entitled to asylum.

 5. In a decision promulgated on 22 April 2016, Judge  Page  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  In particular, he made  an  adverse
    credibility finding against the appellant  and,  although  he  accepted
    that the appellant may  be  a  Bidoon,  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant was an undocumented Bidoon and consequently at risk on return
    to Kuwait.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds challenging the judge's adverse  credibility  finding
    that the appellant had not established  that  he  was  an  undocumented
    Bidoon.

 7. On 25 May 2016, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Shimmin)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on what, he summarised, as four  of  the
    points raised in the appellant's grounds.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before us.

The Judge's Determination

 9. Before Judge Page, the  appellant  relied  upon  the  evidence  of  two
    witnesses, "B" and "F" both of whom had been granted refugee status  in
    the UK as undocumented Bidoons.   The  appellant  also  relied  upon  a
    letter from the Kuwaiti Community Association ("KCA")  dated  27  March
    2016 in support of his claim that he is an undocumented Bidoon.

10. Both B and F had told the KCA that the appellant  was  an  undocumented
    Bidoon and gave evidence to that effect before Judge Page.

11. Judge Page did not accept that the letter from  the  KCA  assisted  the
    appellant's claim as it did not expressly state that the appellant  was
    an undocumented Bidoon and was, in effect, based upon the assessment of
    B and F (see paras 20-24).

12. Although the appellant sought to challenge the judge's conclusion  that
    the KCA letter did not assist the appellant, permission to  appeal  was
    refused on that ground and was not pursued before us by Mr Adebayo, who
    represented the appellant.  We, therefore, say no more about it.

13. The substance of Judge Page's reasons for finding the appellant  and  B
    and F not to be credible witnesses is  found  at  paras  25-38  of  his
    determination.  In essence, he rejected the appellant's claim to be  an
    undocumented Bidoon - and therefore someone who  would  not  have  been
    educated and was illiterate and innumerate - on the basis that:

    (1)  It was not believable that the appellant could have made a journey
         from Cardiff to London in order to visit the  KCA,  buying  tickets
         etc, when he could not read or write;

    (2)  It was not believable that if the appellant  was  an  undocumented
         Bidoon and illiterate that he (and  indeed  F  and  B)  could  have
         signed their witness statements in legible handwriting;

    (3)  It was not believable that the appellant and  F  could  have  been
         taken by B, when the appellant and F arrived in London,  to  Harrow
         to the KCA if B was also someone who could not read and write as an
         undocumented Bidoon;

    (4)  It was not believable  that  the  appellant  could  use  a  mobile
         telephone if he was not numerate;

    (5)  It was not believable that the appellant could  have  left  Kuwait
         using a false passport (rather than a genuine  one)  without  being
         detected; and

    (6)  It was not believable that the appellant  could  have  raised  the
         funds to pay for, as he claimed, both himself and an agent  to  fly
         from Kuwait to the UK.

14. In his grounds, the appellant sought to challenge the judge's reasoning
    in respect of points (1)-(6).  In fact, the  First-tier  Tribunal  only
    granted him permission in relation to the substance of points (1)-(5).

Discussion

15. Mr Adebayo relied upon the grounds seeking  to  challenge  the  judge's
    reasoning as set out in (1)-(5).

16. First, Mr Adebayo submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account all the evidence in relation to the appellant and B  and  F  in
    concluding that it was implausible that  first,  the  appellant  and  F
    could travel from Cardiff to  London  and  subsequently  that  B  could
    assist them to travel from London to Harrow to the  KCA  if  they  were
    unable to read and write.

17. Mr Adebayo referred us to his record of the evidence given before Judge
    Page.  In addition,  Mr  Richards  assisted  by  referring  us  to  the
    Presenting Officer's record of evidence.   We  consulted  Judge  Page's
    record of evidence but it was difficult, and at  times  impossible,  to
    read.  It was, however, not inconsistent with anything to which we were
    referred by either Mr Adebayo or Mr Richards.  Indeed, the evidence  to
    which we were referred was accepted by both representatives.

18. In that evidence, Mr Adebayo submitted that the appellant had said that
    B did not read or write but he was studying now.  In response to  being
    asked how he had known which bus to take from Cardiff  to  London,  the
    appellant had said that he was studying and had been studying  for  two
    years.  He had also said that we (that is the appellant  and  F)  asked
    and that he knew some letters in English.  B in his evidence when asked
    whether he could read or write had said "not strong".

19. In relation to the signatures upon the statements of the  appellant,  F
    and B, Mr Adebayo submitted that the judge had not taken  into  account
    their respective evidence.  There was evidence from  the  appellant  in
    his screening interview at question 3 of the continuation sheet that he
    could read his name and his father's name.   Further,  F  in  his  oral
    evidence had said that he had been going  to  school  for  a  year  and
    although he could not read his statement someone had read it to him.  B
    when asked the same question had said that it was just a statement  and
    that he learned how to do it in the Mosque.

20. Mr Adebayo submitted that Judge Page had failed to take  this  evidence
    into account to explain firstly how the appellant and F had  been  able
    to travel from Cardiff to London and then, together with B,  to  Harrow
    and secondly how they had been able to sign their statements.

21. Secondly, Mr Adebayo submitted that Judge Page had not been entitled to
    conclude (at para 33) that the appellant would be  unable  to  use  his
    mobile telephone unless he was numerate given the appellant's  evidence
    that he was able  to  identify  telephone  numbers  of  individuals  by
    photographs on his telephone.

22. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of State acknowledged  that  he
    had misgivings about the judge's findings based upon the implausibility
    of the appellant travelling to London and then to Harrow and also  that
    he would be unable to use his telephone.  He  acknowledged  that  there
    were flaws in the reasoning  but  submitted  that  any  error  was  not
    material.  We will return to that latter point shortly.

23. In our judgment, Judge Page's reasoning is inadequate and his  decision
    is legally flawed.  First, he failed to take into account the  evidence
    of the appellant, B and F that they had acquired some language facility
    and, in fact, sought help that explained how they were able  to  travel
    (in the case of the appellant and F) from Cardiff to London and (in the
    case of all three individuals) from London to Harrow.

24. Likewise, there was evidence consistent with F and B  (and  indeed  the
    appellant) being able to carry out the relatively uncomplicated act  of
    signing their witness statements.  The context was, of course,  that  F
    and B had already been accepted by the Home Office to  be  undocumented
    Bidoons.

25. The points raised by the judge as to the implausibility  of  the  three
    individuals as  undocumented  Bidoons  (and  therefore  uneducated  and
    illiterate) having the ability to travel successfully from  Cardiff  to
    Harrow via London was not a point raised by the Secretary of  State  in
    the refusal letter.  It appears to us only to have become an  issue  at
    the hearing.  Whilst that does not in itself raise any concerns, it did
    require the judge to provide each of the witnesses  (the  appellant,  F
    and B) a full opportunity as a matter of  fairness  to  deal  with  the
    points which were being raised either by the Presenting Officer or  the
    judge.  At para 29, the judge himself recognises that B was  not  asked
    directly at the hearing how it was he could have  taken  the  appellant
    and F from London to Harrow.  The questions were, so far as we are able
    to  tell  from  the  evidence  to  which  we  were  referred   by   the
    representatives, directed to the underlying question of whether  B  was
    able to read and write.  As we have already noted, B's evidence was not
    that he could not read or write but rather that it  was  "not  strong".
    The judge makes no reference  to  that  and,  in  addition,  it  raises
    further concerns that B was not directly confronted with what became  a
    crucial issue for the judge at  the  hearing,  namely  his  ability  to
    assist F and the appellant to travel to Harrow.

26. Secondly, in our judgment, it was not properly open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude at para  33  that  the  appellant  could  only  use  a  mobile
    telephone if he was numerate given  his  evidence  that  he  only  made
    telephone calls to people as a result of their photographs being on his
    telephone and allowing him to  identify  them.   That  is  a  plausible
    explanation of his use of the telephone and the judge was not  entitled
    out of hand simply to ignore that explanation and conclude there was no
    way that the appellant could use the telephone unless he was  numerate.



27. Consequently, we have concluded that the  appellant  has  succeeded  in
    establishing errors in relation to the judge's decision as set  out  in
    (1)-(5) set out above in our paragraph 13

28.  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  those  flaws  were  not  material.   In
    particular, Mr Richards relied upon paras 35  and  36  of  the  judge's
    determination in which he rejected the appellant's account that he  had
    come to the UK with an agent using false passports  because  the  judge
    did not accept that the airfares for two individuals  could  have  been
    collected, as the appellant claimed  by  donation  at  the  appellant's
    Mosque.  That, as we have already noted, was a  finding  challenged  by
    the appellant in his grounds of appeal but permission was  not  granted
    in respect of it.

29. In assessing whether the errors we have  identified  are  material,  we
    must consider the judge's reasoning as a whole and  assess  whether  in
    the absence of the errors we  have  identified  the  judge  would  have
    reached the same conclusion.

30. In our judgment, we are not so satisfied.  It is clear to us  that  the
    judge's reasoning in paras  24-34  which  led  him  to  find  both  the
    appellant and his two witnesses not to be credible was a  central  part
    of his reasoning leading to his dismissal of  the  appellant's  appeal.
    Prior to even considering the appellant's account of how  he  travelled
    to the UK with the aid of  an  agent,  the  judge  stated  his  adverse
    conclusion at para 32 that "the appellant  could  not  possibly  be  an
    undocumented Bidoon" and at para 34 that the "only sensible conclusion"
    was that the appellant is educated which was, of course, the antithesis
    of his being an undocumented Bidoon.

31. Consequently, we cannot be confident that the judge's  adverse  finding
    would have been the same if  he  had  not  fallen  into  error  in  his
    assessment of the evidence of the appellant and his  two  witnesses  at
    paras 25-34 of his determination.

32. We would also add that we have some concerns in respect of the  judge's
    reasoning in para 38  that  it  was,  in  effect,  impossible  for  the
    appellant to leave Kuwait on a false passport and that,  therefore,  he
    cannot be an undocumented Bidoon.  The judge relies upon what  is  said
    by the Secretary of State at para 41 of the refusal  letter  which,  in
    turn, relies on a single source published on 22 March 2011 that  states
    that from April 2011 fingerprinting processes would be put in place  at
    the airport which would detect, for example, those seeking to leave  on
    fake passports.  The source  appears  to  be  two  news  items  on  the
    internet.  The judge's conclusion, based upon this evidence,  would  of
    course  mean  that  no  undocumented  Bidoon  could  leave  Kuwait   by
    aeroplane.   Only  if  they  had  a  valid  passport,  which  would  be
    inconsistent  with  their  being  an  undocumented  Bidoon,  could   an
    individual leave Kuwait through the airport.  The judge's conclusion is
    a very strong one to draw on the  basis  of  news  reports  from  2011.
    Whilst we have some (not unsubstantial) doubts whether that report  can
    bear the weight of the judge's conclusion, it is not necessary  for  us
    to reach a concluded view because, for the reasons we have given above,
    the nature of the judge's errors  in  assessing  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and his two witnesses which led to  his  adverse  credibility
    findings in respect of all three were material in any event.

Decision

33.  Thus,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss   the
    appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds  involved  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision cannot stand and  we  set  it
    aside.

34. Given the nature and extent of the fact finding  required  in  remaking
    the decision, as  none  of  the  judge's  findings  can  be  preserved,
    applying para 7.2 of the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  the
    proper disposal of this appeal is that it be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Page.

                                 Signed

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date
