
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/09860/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower           |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th June 2015                    |on 17th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                               REBAZ MUHAMMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Sharma (Solicitor, Harbans Singh & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant had claimed asylum in  the  UK  which  was  refused.  His
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision was  heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lodge and dismissed in a  decision  promulgated  on
    the 22nd of January 2015.  The  Appellant  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that the Judge ought to  have
    considered the issue of the presence of ISIS in Mosul and the 15C issue
    in relation to the safety of the Appellant if returned to Iraq.

 2. The submissions of the representatives are set out  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings. It is correct that the Judge did not consider the issue of
    internal relocation or the position of the  Appellant  in  relation  to
    article 15C and internal  armed  conflict.  The  issue  is  essentially
    whether this would have made  a  material  difference  to  the  Judge's
    findings.

 3. I would add that the Appellant was not found to be a  credible  witness
    in important respects and there is no challenge to the findings made by
    the Judge in relation to his father's politics and his  evidence  about
    his time at his uncle's friends house was not accepted.

 4. The Appellant relies on the August 2014 COI report and the new guidance
    in relation to the disputed areas of Iraq. Whilst the report  paints  a
    bleak picture for parts of Iraq Baghdad was expressly stated not to  be
    regarded as being contested.

 5. The reality is that although  the  Judge  should  have  considered  the
    question of  internal  relocation  within  Iraq  with  regard  to  this
    Appellant the facts that he had to apply to the country  guidance  case
    of HM and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT  00409  (IAC)  did
    not assist the Appellant. The relevant part of the head note  reads  As
    regards the current situation, the evidence does not establish that the
    degree of indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the  current  armed
    conflict taking place in the five central governorates in Iraq,  namely
    Baghdad, Diyala, Tameen (Kirkuk), Ninewah, Salah Al-Din, is at  such  a
    high level that substantial grounds have been shown for believing  that
    any civilian returned there would solely on  account  of  his  presence
    there face a real risk of being subject to that threat.

 6. The Appellant would be returning as a civilian and there was nothing in
    the findings made by the Judge that suggest that the Appellant has  any
    features that would  place  him  at  a  greater  risk  than  any  other
    civilian. The threat of terrorism is a fact of life in  many  parts  of
    the world, the UK included,  and  whilst  there  is  evidence  of  ISIS
    activity in Iraq the Appellant cannot  point  to  evidence  that  would
    displace the country guidance that applies.

 7. In the circumstances whilst it is clear that  the  Judge  did  fail  to
    address specific issues that had been raised in  the  Appellant's  case
    that failure could not be said to be material to the decision.  If  the
    Judge had addressed the issues he would  have  had  to  find  that  the
    Appellant could be expected to relocate to Baghdad and that it would be
    reasonable for him to do so. On that basis the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal stands as the disposal of the Appellant's appeal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 16th July 2015

