
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09513/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at IAC Harmondsworth                    |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 November 2013                           |On 22 November 2013          |
|Prepared 15 November 2013                     |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                   H A D A

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Heller, of Counsel, instructed by Messrs Waran
& Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Logo, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  on  8  June  1973.   He
    entered Britain as a Tier 4 Migrant on 17 July 2010 with leave to enter
    until 29 November 2012.  He returned to Sri Lanka on 11 July 2011,  re-
    entering Britain on 8 September that year.  His application for  asylum
    was not made until 3 October 2013.

2.   His application for asylum was refused on 11 October 2013.

3.   The  appellant's  claim  was  based  on  his  association  with  United
    National Party ("UNP"), his work with General Fonseka whom  he  claimed
    to have visited in prison, and accusations that  his  half-brother  had
    been involved in attacks on Katunayake Airport between 2007  and  2009.
    He stated that he worked as an actor in Sri Lanka, performing  in  2000
    in Vanni, and had performed for LTTE audiences.

4.   He was refused because it was not accepted that he was a member of  the
    UNP, but if  he  had  been  it  was  as  a  low-level  member  and  his
    involvement with the UNP and with General Fonseka was not accepted.  It
    was not considered that he would be of interest to the authorities.  It
    was also not  accepted  that  the  appellant's  half-brother  had  been
    implicated in the airport attacks due to his  link  with  the  UNP  and
    given the time that had passed since those attacks it was not  accepted
    that the authorities in 2013 would suspect the appellant or  his  half-
    brother of involvement.  Emphasis was  placed  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had travelled to and from Sri Lanka without  impediment,  and
    it was asserted that he was not of interest to the authorities.

5.   On  2  October  2013  the  appellant's  solicitors,  Messrs  Waran  and
    Company, wrote  to  the  Tribunal  at  Taylor  House  asking  that  the
    appellant's and his brother's claims be linked (although at that  stage
    the appellant's brother's  appeal  had  not  yet  been  refused).   The
    appellant's solicitors asked therefore that the appellant's  appeal  be
    adjourned.

6.   The appellant's grounds of appeal stated that the appellant's  and  his
    brother's appeals should not have been listed  separately,  and  argued
    that this appeal was not suitable for fast track.   The  reasons  given
    were that the claim was supported by "copious documentary evidence" and
    that it was ill-conceived to say that there was not a current  risk  on
    the basis of events which had taken place in 1989 and 2004.   Reference
    was made to the appellant's fear of return due to  more  recent  events
    including his wife's arrest, and it was stated that there was  a  nexus
    between the appellant's asylum claim and that of his half-brother,  and
    the interest the authorities had shown in both brothers.

7.   Although the judge recorded that ground of appeal at the  beginning  of
    the determination, there does not appear to have been any consideration
    of that ground of appeal or  any  reason  why  it  was  not  considered
    appropriate to take the case out of the fast track.

8.   It was on that basis, in particular, that Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Peter
    Lane  granted  permission  to  appeal.   The  matter  was  particularly
    relevant because the judge had placed weight on the absence of evidence
    from the appellant's half-brother, whereas the submission had been made
    that all documentary evidence was not before the Tribunal as  it  would
    not have been appropriate for the judge to have heard his evidence  and
    then made a finding on credibility which could  have  been  potentially
    damaging to the appellant's half-brother's claim.

9.   The judge did not find that the  appellant  was  credible,  and  it  is
    argued in the grounds of appeal that she had not  dealt  with  relevant
    issues such as the issue of whether or not the appellant, as  low-level
    opponent of the regime,  could  be  made  to  "disappear"  without  the
    attendant outcry which would arise  with  the  arrest  of  more  public
    figures such as General Fonseka, and that the judge had not taken  into
    account that the appellant might be in difficulties because of his half-
    brother's past, nor had she made a finding that the police had  visited
    the appellant's home in September 2013, and therefore there was ongoing
    interest in him.

10.  While I note Mr Logo's submission that the judge  was  clearly  dealing
    with the  issues in this case in the round,  I consider that  there  is
    merit in these grounds of appeal.  In particular, it was necessary  for
    the judge to make a finding regarding the visit to the appellant's home
    in 2013, and also I consider that it was  important  for  there  to  be
    detailed findings  regarding  the  appellant's  brother's  claim.   The
    reality is that until his appeal is heard there cannot be such detailed
    findings and therefore I consider that the hearing of this  appellant's
    appeal was premature.

11.  In short I consider that the appeal should have been taken out  of  the
    fast track and linked with that of the appellant's brother, or at least
    heard after the appeal of the  appellant's  brother.  While  Ms  Heller
    acknowledged that she had not  applied for the appeal to be  taken  out
    of the fast-track at the hearing because  that request had been refused
    twice  before the hearing, I still consider that the judge should  have
    dealt with  that issue in the grounds of appeal.

12.  While the judge did clearly  analyse  the  appellant's  claim  in  some
    detail and correctly considered up-to-date evidence as well as relevant
    country guidance in the determination in GJ and Others (post-civil  war
    returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319,  which   of  course  is
    primarily concerned with the return of Tamils -she did not  make  clear
    findings  with regard to the visit  to the  appellant's  home  by   the
    authorities  in 2013 (she make  an  incorrect  reference  to  September
    2012)  nor the questioning of his wife  let alone consider the  profile
    of the appellant as an entertainer  or indeed as  the  son  of  an  UTP
    activist.  Her  assessment  of  risk  on  return  in  paragraph  61  is
    therefore not based on  clear findings on all the evidence.

13.   I  consider  that  there  were  material  errors   of  law   in   this
    determination not only in not accepting that  the  appeal  had  wrongly
    been placed in  the  fast  track  (not  only  because  the  appellant's
    brother's appeal but also because of the complexity of the appeal), but
    also because of the lack of consideration of all the  evidence to which
    I have referred in  paragraph 12 above.   For  theses  reasons   I  set
    aside the decision of the judge.  I would emphasis that I consider that
    she had an almost impossible task in dealing with  an  appeal  of  such
    complexity in the Fast-track and  that  that  may  well  have  led  the
    lacunae in the determination.

14.  The appeal will  now proceed to a hearing  afresh  on  all  grounds.  I
    consider that it should be linked to  the  appeal  of  the  appellant's
    brother  which has been set down for hearing  at  Taylor  House  on  18
    December.

15.  I would add that I do not consider that this appeal  should  remain  in
    fast track, and I therefore, under the provisions of  Rule  30  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Fast  Track  Procedure)  Rules  2005,
    order that this appeal shall be removed from the Fast track procedure.

Decision.
        This appeal is allowed to the limited extent that it is remitted  to
    the first-tier  for a hearing afresh as I consider that  the   criteria
    set out in the Senior President of Tribunals  Practice  Directions  7.2
    are met.

Directions
   1. The  appellant's  representatives  should  immediately  serve  on  the
      respondent all further documents  (with translations)  on  which  they
      wish to rely.
   2. This appeal is taken out of the Fast track procedures.
   3. This appeal will proceed to a hearing on all issues.
   4. The appeal is to be linked to  the  appeal  of  the  appellant's  half
      brother, HADSA, AA/08683/2013 which ahs been  listed  for  hearing  at
      Taylor House on 18 December 3013.






Signed                                  Date: 15 November 2013.


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

