
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/09626/2014
                                                               AA/07352/2014
                                                               AA/07353/2014
                                                               AA/07354/2014
                                                               AA/07355/2014
                                                               AA/07957/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields         |                     Decision and Reasons|
|                               |Promulgated                              |
|On 5 February 2016             |                     On 2 March 2016     |
|Prepared on 10 February 2016   |                                         |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    N. A.
                                    S. A.
                                    M. A.
                                    D. A.
                                    A. A.
                                    A. H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

           THE SECRETARY OF STATE OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellants are citizens of Iraq, who claimed asylum  upon  a
           variety of dates following  legitimate  entry  to  the  UK.  The
           applications of the First to Fifth Appellants were refused on  9
           September 2014, when decisions to refuse  to  vary  their  leave
           were made, together with decisions to remove them from  the  UK.
           The application made by the Sixth Appellant (the mother  of  the
           Second Appellant) was refused  on  26  September  2014,  when  a
           decision to refuse to vary her leave  was  also  made,  together
           with a decision to remove her from the UK.
        2. The Appellants duly appealed against those immigration decisions
           and their appeals were linked  for  hearing  as  raising  common
           issues of fact, and in due course they were  heard  together  by
           First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher.  The  appeals  were   each
           dismissed in a decision promulgated on 1 June 2015 which roundly
           rejected as untrue the account of their experiences in Iraq that
           had been offered by the First, Second and Sixth Appellants.
        3. The Appellants lodged applications with the First Tier  Tribunal
           for permission to appeal,  which  were  refused  by  First  Tier
           Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 25 June 2015. He was satisfied that  a
           cogent and fully reasoned analysis  of  the  evidence  had  been
           provided to the Appellants,  which  dealt  adequately  with  the
           expert evidence relied upon,  and  concluded  that  the  factual
           account advanced by the First Second and  Sixth  Appellants  was
           not credible. Given those findings he concluded that  the  Judge
           had no proper basis upon  which  to  depart  from  the  existing
           country  guidance,  and  was  therefore  bound  to  dismiss  the
           appeals.
        4. The Appellants renewed  their  applications  for  permission  to
           appeal to the Upper Tribunal relying upon identical  grounds  to
           those advanced to the First Tier  Tribunal.  Their  applications
           were granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on 20  August  2015
           in the following terms;
            "The decision to dismiss  their  appeals  against  decisions  to
              remove them brought on grounds  that  they  are  entitled  to
              international protection is far from careless and I have read
              it several times before granting permission. It  might  stand
              up to the Appellants' attack. Nevertheless I give  permission
              to appeal on each ground raised. I am particularly  concerned
              that adverse credibility findings may have been made  without
              proper regard to the background material (ground  11  of  the
              renewed grounds) and that insufficient regard has been  shown
              for changes in Iraq (ground 6 of the renewed grounds)."
        5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated 2  September  2015
           in which she pointed to the adverse findings  of  fact  made  by
           Judge Fisher, which she argued were entirely adequate to dispose
           of the appeal in the light of the guidance to be found in  HM  &
           Others (Article 15c) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 409.  She  argued  that
           the Appellants had failed to identify  any  background  evidence
           that  was  before  the  Judge  that  would  have  warranted  his
           departure from that guidance.
        6. Thus the matter comes before me.

      The grounds of appeal


        7. The grounds are not  well  drafted,  and  in  my  judgement  the
           draftsman has fallen into all of the  traps  identified  by  the
           Upper Tribunal in VV (grounds of appeal) Lithuania  [2016]  UKUT
           53, and Nixon (permission to appeal; grounds) [2014] UKUT 368.
        8. As Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  observed,  this  was  far  from
           being a careless decision. Having had the benefit of hearing  Ms
           Brakaj's submissions upon paragraph  11  of  the  grounds  I  am
           satisfied that there is no merit in  the  unspecified  complaint
           that the evidence of the Appellants was credible  when  assessed
           against the background evidence that had been placed before  the
           Judge. Despite being given every opportunity to do so,  she  was
           unable to substantiate that complaint.
        9. Thus I am satisfied that the grounds fail to identify  with  any
           degree of specificity any arguable error of law with the Judge's
           rejection of the First Appellant's  account  of  events  at  the
           hospital where he worked in July 2014 as untrue. That  rejection
           was entirely adequately reasoned, and it was well  open  to  the
           Judge given the flaws in the First Appellant's own evidence that
           the Judge identified [34-36].
       10. The same point applies to the Judge's rejection  of  the  Second
           Appellant's  account  as  untrue.  Again  that   rejection   was
           adequately reasoned, and again it was well  open  to  the  Judge
           given the flaws in the  Second  Appellant's  evidence  that  the
           Judge identified [37-39]. I merely note that documents  she  had
           produced in evidence recorded that she had been  promoted  to  a
           more senior post in February  2007,  some  time  after  she  had
           claimed to have left Iraq for Syria as a result of perceiving an
           individual threat to her safety. There was simply no  answer  to
           that, and the Judge was perfectly entitled to conclude that  her
           promotion gave the lie to her account of when she had  in  truth
           left Iraq, and moreover that it was a part of the evidence  with
           which Ms L had not engaged when offering her opinions.
       11. Again the Judge's rejection of the Sixth Appellant's account  as
           untrue was well  open  to  him  on  the  evidence,  and  it  was
           adequately reasoned [40].
       12. The Appellants had relied upon the opinion evidence of Ms  L  to
           advance an  argument  that  as  educated  Sunni  women  who  had
           prospered  under  the  Ba'ath  regime,  the  Second  and   Sixth
           Appellants faced a particular risk of harm from  either  Islamic
           extremists opposed to female equality and education,  or,  those
           who sought some form of revenge against  those  associated  with
           that regime. The Judge noted that this argument had  no  support
           in what was then current country  guidance;  HM  and  HF  (Iraq)
           [2013] EWCA Civ 1276, and dismissed it. He was perfectly correct
           to do so, and Ms Brakaj has been unable to identify any error in
           that decision. The analysis of the Upper Tribunal, upheld by the
           Court of Appeal, was that the evidence did not establish a  real
           risk of serious harm,  whether  on  asylum  grounds,  Article  3
           grounds, or, under Article 15(c),  for  civilians  from  central
           Baghdad who are Sunni, or have Ba'ath Party  connections.  Those
           characteristics did not in themselves amount to  "enhanced  risk
           categories" under  Article  15(c).  Moreover,  the  subsequently
           published analysis of the Upper Tribunal in AA  (Article  15(c))
           Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 makes no alteration to that analysis for
           civilians from central Baghdad, even if the position has altered
           for other parts of the country. Since the  decision  in  AA  was
           promulgated on 30 September  2015,  following  hearings  in  May
           2015, it follows that the background evidence  reviewed  by  the
           Upper Tribunal in AA must have  included  all  of  the  relevant
           evidence on the issue that was placed before the Judge.
       13. The Judge was therefore faced with making an assessment  of  the
           risk of harm that would be faced by the members of  an  extended
           Sunni family upon their return to Iraq, when they had failed  to
           establish to the applicable low standard of  proof  either  that
           any of them had experienced any past persecution, or, that  they
           faced any individual targeting in the future  because  of  their
           connections, qualifications and expertise, or,  that  they  fell
           into any of the "enhanced risk categories" under Article 15(c).
       14. The Judge accepted that the First  and  Second  Appellants  were
           highly educated, and well qualified,  and  that  they  had  held
           senior positions in Iraq. Whilst the Judge was well  aware  that
           some members of the wider extended family had left Iraq (two  of
           the  Second  Appellant's  brothers),  the   First   and   Second
           Appellants had accepted in evidence that at  least  one  of  the
           First Appellant's brothers and his family remained  in  Baghdad.
           He was similarly  well  educated  and  qualified  to  the  First
           Appellant albeit  in  a  different  discipline,  and  indeed  he
           continued to hold a senior post at the same  hospital  at  which
           the First Appellant had previously been employed.
       15. In the circumstances, the grounds disclose no error  of  law  in
           the Judge's analysis of the  evidence  and  the  conclusions  he
           reached upon the  credibility  of  the  accounts  given  by  the
           Appellants. The grounds are upon a proper analysis no more  than
           a disagreement with his conclusions upon the  evidence.  As  the
           decision in AA has most recently confirmed, despite  any  recent
           deterioration in the situation within some parts  of  Iraq,  the
           Judge was perfectly correct to reject both the  asylum,  Article
           3, and humanitarian  protection  appeals  of  this  family.  The
           grounds raised  no  complaint  about  the  Judge's  approach  to
           Article 8.


      Conclusion
       16. In the  circumstances  I  am  not  satisfied  that  any  of  the
           complaints advanced in the grounds of appeal have  merit.  I  am
           not satisfied that the Appellants have established that there is
           any material error of law in the Tribunal's decision promulgated
           on 1 June 2015 that requires the decision to be  set  aside  and
           remade.


DECISION


The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  1
June 2015 did not involve the making of an error of law in the  decision  to
dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to be set aside  and  remade.
The decision to dismiss the appeal is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise the Appellants  are  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him. This direction applies both  to  the  Appellants  and  to  the
Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  proceedings
being brought for contempt of court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated: 10 February 2016
