

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09232/2013
                                                               AA/09233/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 28 October 2014                            |On 30 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                            TABINDA FATIMA FAROUQ
                             & AYZAD JAVED RAJA
                          (No Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Reid, dismissing their appeals against refusal of asylum.

 2. The hearing was on 6  January  2014,  but  the  determination  was  not
    promulgated until 1 July 2014.  The first point taken in the grounds of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is that as credibility was in  issue,  the
    delay rendered the determination unsafe.

 3. The grounds secondly assert inconsistency and lack of reasoning in  the
    adverse credibility conclusions.  Mr McGinley  referred  to  favourable
    findings at paragraphs 93 - 95.   He  said  this  was  followed  by  an
    unexplained finding of  "important  inconsistencies".   He  pointed  in
    particular to paragraph 101, which finds that the first appellant  gave
    an account of  her  son's  kidnap  and  rescue  "in  parts  lacking  in
    credibility" but then that the second appellant gave credible  evidence
    of his abduction.   Mr  McGinley  said  that  as  both  witnesses  were
    speaking to the same  incident,  although  from  different  viewpoints,
    either it took place or  it  did  not.   The  determination  was  self-
    contradictory, or at best unclear.

 4. The third significant aspect of the  grounds  is  a  criticism  of  the
    finding that the risk did  not  extend  throughout  Pakistan,  and  the
    appellants could relocate.

 5. Mrs O'Brien said that there had been unfortunate and lengthy  delay  in
    promulgation, but that was not by itself  fatal  to  the  determination
    (which is correct - see Symes and Jorro, Asylum Law and  Practice,  2nd
    ed.,  2010,  17.54).   However,  she  accepted  that  the   credibility
    conclusions are inadequate.  She said that the  case  might  have  been
    resolved by a clear finding on internal relocation, the first appellant
    being well qualified and able to maintain herself in Pakistan (a  point
    which I understood from Mr  McGinley  not  to  be  disputed)  but  that
    unfortunately the question  whether  there  was  a  real  risk  of  the
    appellant's  husband  tracking  her  down   and   targeting   her   was
    inadequately resolved.  There would have to be a rehearing.

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of its
    findings are to  stand.   Under  s.12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial  fact  finding
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are  not  to  include
    Judge Reid.

 7. At the rehearing, the  following  points  may  be  useful.   (i)  There
    appears to be common ground that absent any risk  relocation  would  be
    viable (and compare KA and others (domestic violence - risk on  return)
    Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC), headnote vi - vii and paragraphs 270-
     271).  Whether or not the evidence is found generally credible,  there
    should be a reasoned answer to the  question  whether  risk  might  now
    persist nationwide.   (ii) The second  appellant  being  a  citizen  of
    Canada, there is no apparent basis on which he  might  be  entitled  to
    refugee protection in the UK.  There might be a case to be  argued  for
    him on human rights, but only if the first  appellant  is  entitled  to
    protection here.

 8. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.





            29 October 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




