
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: AA/09127/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 31st January 2018                        |On: 5th February 2018         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     SMB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Madubuike, Broudie Jackson and Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo born in
    1991. He appeals with permission[1] against the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Alis) to dismiss his appeal on protection grounds.








    Anonymity


 2. This case concerns a claim for international protection.   I  have  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders and I
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The substance of the Appellant's claim for protection was that he had a
    well-founded fear of persecution in the DRC for reasons of his  imputed
    political opinion. Whilst he had no problems whilst living in  the  DRC
    he had come into conflict with his own  government  when  he  moved  to
    Algeria to take up a student scholarship as part of a scheme  sponsored
    by the Congolese Foreign Office. He had  joined  the  leadership  of  a
    student  organisation  ('CESRDCA')  and  had  come  under  pressure  to
    actively support the ruling party in Kinshasa, the PPRD.  The Appellant
    had been elected president  of  CESRDCA  in  November  2013  and  after
    approximately one year had been subject to a verbal warning by  a  PPRD
    loyalist. He was told that his scholarship may be cancelled and that he
    would be removed to the DRC. In December 2014 CESRDCA refused  to  take
    part in a census and after this the Congolese embassy refused  to  look
    after the members; the Appellant was informed that  his  behaviour  was
    "anti-government". He received warnings from contacts that he  knew  in
    the Foreign Office that he had  been  identified  as  someone  who  was
    inciting students against  the  government.  In  January  2015  he  was
    informed by a contact that he had  been  "blacklisted".  The  Appellant
    became afraid for his safety  in  Algeria,  travelled  to  the  UK  and
    claimed asylum within 48 hours of his arrival.


 4. The Respondent, whose 'reasons for refusal' letter is dated  12th  June
    2015, accepted that the Appellant is a Congolese national. She  further
    accepted that he was a member of the CESRDCA group whilst  studying  in
    Algeria between 2010 and 2015.  She did not however accept  that  these
    activities had  brought  him  to  the  adverse  attention  of  his  own
    government.  The warnings that the Appellant claimed to  have  received
    were all verbal and therefore could not be regarded as "reliable",  and
    his fears of  arrest,  imprisonment  and  execution  were  regarded  as
    speculative.  Protection was therefore refused.




 5. Having heard the Appellant's evidence the First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    number of positive findings of fact. It is accepted that:

              i) The Appellant  is  a  DRC  national  formerly  resident  in
                 Algeria;


             ii) Between 2010 and 2015 he was involved  with  the  Congolese
                 student organisation CESRDCA in Algeria;

            iii) He was President of a group connected  with  CESRDCA  which
                 was protesting for better rights for students.


 6. The Tribunal was not however satisfied that the Appellant faced a  real
    risk of persecution arising from these facts. The  determination  makes
    reference to the country guidance given in AB  &  DM  (DRC)  CG  [2005]
    UKIAT 00118, MK (DRC) CG [2006] UKAIT 0001 and BM & Others (returnees -
    criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 00293 (IAC),  and  to  Lokombe
    (DRC - FNO's - Airport Monitoring. Whilst  these  cases  agree  that  a
    person  with  a  perceived  political  profile  in  opposition  to  the
    government would be reasonably  likely  to  be  persecuted,  they  also
    demonstrate that no risk arises  simply  from  being  a  failed  asylum
    seeker. In order to establish such a risk claimants need to  show  that
    their activities would have  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    Congolese security forces.   The Tribunal considered that in this  case
    the facts do not bear out such a  conclusion.  Particular  reliance  is
    placed on the Appellant's evidence that his family in the DRC have  not
    been visited or asked about him; he may  have  "upset  people"  in  the
    embassy in Algiers but this does not mean that  his  profile  was  such
    that he would face difficulties in the DRC.   The  appeal  was  thereby
    dismissed.


 7. In this appeal the Appellant argues that the First-tier Tribunal  erred
    in its approach to the country guidance and background information.  It
    is submitted that this material demonstrates that  a  person  with  the
    Appellant's profile would be at risk.  It is further submitted that the
    First-tier Tribunal has not taken all material evidence  into  account,
    in particular the nature of the threats and interventions faced by  the
    Appellant in Algeria.





    Discussion and Findings


 8. My starting point for determination of this appeal, the parties were in
    agreement, was the wholly positive credibility assessment made  of  the
    Appellant by the First-tier Tribunal.  The Tribunal was not prepared to
    accept that the Appellant had any profile as an  APARECO  UK  activist,
    but then again the Appellant hardly claimed to have one,  stating  that
    he had only recently attended a  couple  of  meetings  of  this  group.
    Other than that, the determination contains no negative findings  about
    the Appellant's evidence.


 9. The ratio of the  decision  is  that  notwithstanding  the  Appellant's
    student activism in Algeria the authorities in the DRC have no interest
    in him.  The  Tribunal  deduced  that  conclusion  from  the  following
    propositions:

              i) In the country guidance the only risk category  into  which
                 the Appellant might fall  would  be  a  "person  having  or
                 perceived to  have  a  military  or  political  profile  in
                 opposition to the government";


             ii) The  Home  Office  guidance  stated  that  those  who  were
                 considered to pose a political risk or who were "high level
                 activists" would be targeted. Also at risk would be persons
                 on the 'blacklist' of the Direction Generale  de  Migration
                 (DGM), identified as persons wanted by the police in Congo,
                 those  believed  to  have   plotted   coups   against   the
                 government, and persons believed to have been  involved  in
                 attacks against Congolese activities whilst overseas;

            iii) The Home Office accept that  those  who  have  aggressively
                 opposed the regime, who  have  a  significant  and  visible
                 profile for so doing, are likely to face  a  real  risk  of
                 persecution;

             iv) The Appellant acknowledges that his family in the DRC  have
                 experienced no difficulties (ie no visits from police etc);


              v) Whilst he may have upset people in the embassy in  Algiers,
                 and campus police in Algeria may  have  searched  for  him,
                 that does not demonstrate  that  any  such  interest  would
                 extend to the DRC;

             vi) He has not suffered any problems himself in the DRC;

            vii) The sum of (iv), (v) and (vi) is that the Appellant  cannot
                 be considered by the Congolese authorities to fall into any
                 of the risk categories discussed at (i)-(iii).

10. Mr Madubuike acknowledges that the Appellant's family have not suffered
    as a result of his activities: that was the Appellant's  own  evidence.
    Further it is clear that the  Appellant  himself  has  not  encountered
    problems in the DRC. Whilst those were findings of  fact  open  to  the
    Tribunal on the evidence, it is submitted that  neither  justifies  the
    leap that the determination then takes to concluding that the Appellant
    would not today be at risk.  Mr Madubuike submits that the logic of the
    determination falls down at three hurdles.


11. First of all there was no country background material before the First-
    tier Tribunal indicating that family members of student dissidents  are
    likely to encounter problems; if there was Mr Madubuike has been unable
    to find it and the determination certainly does  not  identify  it.  Mr
    Diwnycz was not able to point to  any  passage  to  provide  evidential
    support for the Tribunal's conclusion that the Appellant's family would
    have suffered if he actually faced a risk.

12. Second, the fact that the Appellant had not encountered any problems in
    the DRC was neither here nor there, given that he had not been back  to
    that country for many years.

13. Thirdly, and perhaps most importantly, the risk analysis  presented  in
    the determination fails  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence about what actually happened in Algeria. Mr Madubuike  submits
    that had the  Tribunal  considered  the  totality  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence about the threat he faced there, it could  have  done  nothing
    else but to accept that he had a political profile to the  extent  that
    he would face a risk, as per the country guidance cases. In particular;

              i) The Appellant was elected President of CESRDCA;


             ii) He led protests about the living  conditions  of  Congolese
                 students which led him into conflict with students who were
                 actively connected to the regime, for instance the children
                 of regime officials;

            iii) In response to the  Appellant's  activities  the  Congolese
                 embassy proactively tried to prevent further attacks on the
                 regime by attempting to co-opt the Appellant and create and
                 alternative  student  grouping:  the  Appellant  and  other
                 students rebuffed these attempts and refused to co-operate,
                 in particular refusing to join the PPRD as  they  had  been
                 instructed by the embassy;

             iv) Because of tensions with embassy staff  CESRDCA  thereafter
                 addressed their  concerns  directly  to  Kinshasa,  writing
                 letters of protest to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,
                 Minister of Education and the offices of the President  and
                 Prime Minister;

              v) When the embassy in Algiers discovered this they  responded
                 by reporting to back to Kinshasa  that  the  students  were
                 anti-regime and that CESRDCA were influencing  students  to
                 rebel against the government. Someone  that  the  Appellant
                 knows in Kinshasa informed him  that  the  security  forces
                 were looking for ways to recall the leaders back  to  Congo
                 so that they could be arrested;

             vi) In further protests outside  the  embassy  in  Algiers  the
                 Congolese authorities called  the  Algerian  police  in  to
                 break up the demonstration;


            vii) Six separate individuals connected  with  the  regime,  and
                 known personally to the Appellant, have warned him that  he
                 would be arrested upon return to Kinshasa.   In  two  cases
                 the information came to the Appellant by way  of  a  threat
                 from officials within the  embassy  in  Algiers.    In  the
                 third it was from a family friend working  in  the  Foreign
                 Office in Kinshasa (the full details of all the  informants
                 mentioned, including  the  full  name,  connection  to  the
                 Appellant and position, are  supplied  in  the  Appellant's
                 statement and asylum interview but I do  not  include  them
                 here for obvious reasons) who had heard a lot of  "negative
                 talk" about the Appellant and his activities. These rumours
                 were confirmed to the Appellant by another civil servant of
                 his acquaintance, working  in  a  separate  department  and
                 whose spouse works in foreign affairs.  They  were  of  the
                 strong opinion that there was a clear risk to the Appellant
                 should he come home. Finally another  family  friend  in  a
                 position  in  a  government  department  contacted  him  in
                 January 2015 to tell him that his name had been  placed  on
                 the 'blacklist' and that he should do all he could to avoid
                 returning to the DRC. It  was  this  final  telephone  call
                 which led the Appellant to come to the UK and seek  asylum,
                 a decision galvanised by the fact that  embassy  staff  had
                 called in the Algerian police to search for the Appellant.


14. I accept that it is hard to see  from  the  findings  of  fact  in  the
    determination that the totality of that evidence  was  weighed  in  the
    balance.  One omission that is particularly striking is in paragraph 57
    where the determination refers to country background evidence about the
    DGM 'blacklist';  it would appear that the Tribunal then  weighed  that
    material in favour of there being no  risk  to  the  Appellant  without
    actually considering his express evidence that his name was in fact  on
    such a list.  Given the acceptance that the  Appellant  is  a  credible
    witness, it is hard to see why not. Reading the  detailed  and  careful
    determination as a whole the answer appears to be  an  accidental,  but
    nevertheless material, omission.  I am satisfied that  the  Appellant's
    detailed and credible evidence, summarised above, was relevant  to  the
    question of risk.


15. In his submissions Mr Madubuike placed reliance  on  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department's own guidance, the Home  Office  Country
    Policy and Information note 'Opposition to the Government in  the  DRC'
    published in November 2016.   This refers to the decision in BM  &  Ors
    and states "although the findings in BM refer to APARECO, they  can  be
    taken  to  be  equally  applicable  to  other   diaspora   groups   who
    aggressively oppose  the  regime"  [at  2.2.9].   Mr  Diwnycz  for  the
    Respondent submitted that looking at that  guidance  the  key  to  this
    appeal was whether the Appellant's behaviour would be considered by the
    Congolese authorities to be "aggressive".

16. I find that the evidence speaks  for  itself.  If  no  fewer  than  six
    persons connected to the regime were of the view that the Appellant had
    a) been identified as an active political opponent  of  the  government
    and b) that he faced imminent risk on return as a  result,  that  would
    strongly suggest that he  would  be  perceived  as  a  threat.  If  the
    Appellant was elected president of a student body who openly campaigned
    against the Congolese government, repeatedly protesting outside of  the
    embassy and indeed writing directly to ministers, that  would  strongly
    suggest that he could be considered  to  be  'high'  profile.   If  the
    Appellant has been told, by a credible source, that his name  has  been
    placed on the 'blacklist' such that he would be  arrested,  that  would
    strongly suggest that he did in  fact  face  such  a  risk.   The  only
    'evidence' pointing the other way was the absence of  interest  in  the
    Appellant's family members within the DRC. As Mr Madubuike points  out,
    without any evidential foundation in the  country  background  material
    that inference was not strongly suggestive of anything.   Applying  the
    lower standard of proof I am satisfied that the Appellant has made  out
    his claim and the appeal is allowed on protection grounds.



    Decisions and Directions


17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a error  of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside. The error of law is a  failure  to
    consider all matters relevant to risk assessment.


18. The  decision  is  remade  as  follows:   "the  appeal  is  allowed  on
    protection grounds".

19. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           1st February 2018


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge EB Grant on the 9th
October 2017 but was granted upon renewed application by Upper Tribunal
Judge Plimmer on the 28th November 2017.


