
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09799/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 11 December 2015                  |on 11 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                MANAS CHHABRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Jones instructed by Simman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan and follower of the  Hindu
       faith born in August 1990 in Kabul in Afghanistan.

    2. An application for further leave to remain in the UK made on 16  July
       2008 was considered and refused on  the  22  June  2010.  The  appeal
       against the refusal was heard by Immigration Judge R.J.N.B Morris  on
       the 29 September 2010 and the claims  for  leave  under  the  Refugee
       Convention,  Humanitarian  Protection  and  human  rights  provisions
       dismissed.

    3. Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  refused  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Gill on 2 November  2010  but  granted  on  a  renewed
       application by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Latter  on  25  November  2010.
       Directions were given and the case thereafter came before Immigration
       Judge Drabu CBE sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal on  8
       February 2011 who, despite noting in the record of  proceedings  that
       the  parties  agreed  that  the  determination   has   material   and
       fundamental flaws, does not appear to  have  made  an  order  finding
       error of law and setting the determination aside although a  separate
       handwritten note records that the second stage hearing was  adjourned
       and asking for a date to be fixed.

    4. On 10 May 2011 the matter came before  Mr  Justice  Blake  and  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Gleeson for mention in  which  submissions  were  made
       that the Afghan Country Guidance case at that time was  substantially
       out of date and querying whether an up-to-date decision was required.
       The matter was thereafter referred to  the  country  convener,  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Allen,  and  considered  by  him  at  a  further  'for
       mention' hearing on 27 July 2011 and again on 26 July 2012. The  case
       was identified as one of a number  of  possible  cases  suitable  for
       consideration although did not form one of  those  finally  selected.
       The county guidance case of TG and others (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)
       Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595  (IAC)  was  promulgated  on  the  3
       November 2015. The decision considered the position of both followers
       of the Hindu and Sikh faiths in Afghanistan.

    5. At the commencement of the hearing an issue was raised regarding  the
       stage the proceeding have reached in light of the  lack  of  suitable
       orders. As the Upper Tribunal has  no  power  to  remake  a  decision
       unless a material error has been found and the original determination
       set aside the parties were invited to make further submissions on the
       nature of the error. Mr Jarvis in his submissions accepted there  are
       some errors in the determination, some stronger than others, and that
       those identified in relation  to  paragraphs  21(iii)  regarding  the
       finding of sufficiency of  protection  and  22  as  outlined  in  the
       grounds and submissions were material to the decision.

    6. The determination shall therefore  be  set  aside  and  the  decision
       remade.

The appellants case


    7. The appellant lived with his parents, siblings, and  extended  family
       members in Kabul in Afghanistan. His  father  made  and  sold  herbal
       medicines. In his 2006 witness statement the appellant stated that at
       that time his father owned a shop in Kabul were he sold and  repaired
       bicycles. His mother is a housewife.

    8. The appellant claims to have received no formal education but  to  be
       able to read and write a little Hindi which  he  was  taught  by  his
       father.

    9. The appellant refers to  incidents  in  Kabul  during  the  time  the
       Taliban were in power  and  thereafter  including  his  father  being
       approached by a group of men seeking to kidnap the appellant although
       they were left alone when his  father  pleaded  for  forgiveness  and
       mercy. As a result of fears for his safety it was arranged  that  the
       appellant should leave Afghanistan which he did on 11 September  2006
       when he was collected by an agent with whom he flew from Kabul  to  a
       transit point from where they flew to the United Kingdom, arriving on
       the evening of 12 September 2006. He  claimed  asylum  the  following
       day.

   10. The appellants' fear is that if returned to Afghanistan  he  will  be
       killed.

   11. In his oral evidence the appellant referred to his application to the
       Red Cross in 2009 claiming he has continued to  try  and  locate  his
       family. The appellant has been educated and is now  employed  in  the
       United Kingdom initially on a part-time  basis  but  since  September
       2015 full time. The appellant claim to have no savings and to own  no
       property in Afghanistan. The appellant has a good command of English.

   12. The First tier Tribunal determination of Judge Morris  [21(d)]  noted
       the appellant's evidence that arrangements were only made for him  to
       leave Afghanistan as his sister's marriage had been arranged  and  it
       was intended they would join  the  appellant  in  the  UK  after  the
       wedding in three months' time. In his  oral  evidence  the  appellant
       claimed not to have seen his sister's husband and not to  have  known
       his name as he was a child and was only told by his parents.

   13. The appellant claimed that when he came to the UK he was not provided
       with a contact number by his parents. When it was put to him that  it
       was strange that a 16 year old boy would be sent to the  UK  with  no
       means of contact with home to  say  he  had  arrived,  the  appellant
       referred to a family friend in the UK who would  find  out  where  he
       was.

   14. The appellant was asked about a named individual in the UK, Mr Gabba,
       who he stated he had not asked if  could  provide  funds  if  he  was
       returned. The appellant claimed that if he  received  remittances  he
       would be more of a target in Afghanistan as  it  would  be  sent  via
       Western Union.

   15. The appellant claimed his father's shop had been burned down and that
       he did not know if he was still in business. The  appellant  was  not
       sure if contact had been made with anyone in Kabul.

   16. A witness Mr Gibbs was called. He had not been asked by the appellant
       if was able to provide funds to assist if returned to Afghanistan but
       claimed that if he was asked he has a  girlfriend  and  they  are  to
       marry in 18 months and so it may be difficulty but that he  would  do
       his best to help with some things and  provide  about  "a  couple  of
       hundred pounds a month"

Discussion


   17. The situation for members of the Sikh and Hindu faiths was considered
       in detail in the country guidance case of TG and others (Afghan Sikhs
       persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT  595  (IAC)  the  headnote  of
       which reads:
           Risk to followers of the Sikh and Hindu faiths in Afghanistan:
           (i)    Some  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  in
           Afghanistan continue to suffer harassment at the hands of Muslim
           zealots.
           (ii)   Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities in  Afghanistan
           do not face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment such  as
           to entitle them to a grant of international  protection  on  the
           basis of their ethnic or religious identity, per se. Neither can
           it be said that the cumulative impact of discrimination suffered
           by the  Sikh  and  Hindu  communities  in  general  reaches  the
           threshold of persecution.
           (iii)  A consideration of whether an individual  member  of  the
           Sikh and Hindu communities is at risk real of  persecution  upon
           return  to  Afghanistan  is  fact-sensitive.  All  the  relevant
           circumstances must be considered but careful attention should be
           paid to the following:
                a. women are  particularly  vulnerable  in  the  absence  of
                    appropriate protection from a male member of the family;


                b. likely financial  circumstances  and  ability  to  access
                    basic accommodation bearing in mind
                    -  Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member  of
                        the Sikh and Hindu communities
                    -  such individuals  may  face  difficulties  (including
                        threats, extortion, seizure of  land  and  acts  of
                        violence) in retaining property and /  or  pursuing
                        their remaining  traditional  pursuit,  that  of  a
                        shopkeeper / trader
                    -   the  traditional  source   of   support   for   such
                        individuals, the Gurdwara  is  much  less  able  to
                        provide adequate support;
                c.  the  level  of  religious  devotion  and  the  practical
                    accessibility to a suitable place of  religious  worship
                    in light of declining numbers and the evidence that some
                    have been subjected to harm and threats to  harm  whilst
                    accessing the Gurdwara;
                d. access to appropriate education for children in light  of
                    discrimination against Sikh and Hindu children  and  the
                    shortage of adequate education facilities for them.
           (iv)    Although  it  appears  there   is   a   willingness   at
           governmental level to provide protection, it is not  established
           on the evidence that at a local level the  police  are  willing,
           even if able, to  provide  the  necessary  level  of  protection
           required in Refugee Convention/Qualification Directive terms, to
           those members of the Sikh and Hindu communities  who  experience
           serious harm or harassment amounting to persecution.
           (v)    Whether it is reasonable to expect a member of  the  Sikh
           or Hindu communities to relocate is a fact sensitive assessment.
           The relevant factors to be considered include those set  out  at
           (iii) above. Given their particular circumstances and  declining
           number, the practicability of settling elsewhere for members  of
           the Sikh and Hindu communities  must  be  carefully  considered.
           Those without access to an independent income are unlikely to be
           able  to  reasonably  relocate  because  of   depleted   support
           mechanisms.
           (vi)   This replaces the county guidance provided in  the  cases
           of K (Risk - Sikh - Women) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00057 and
           SL and Others (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005]
           UKAIT 00137.

   18. The appellant has not established that during his time in Afghanistan
       he  was  subject  to  persecution  although  his  evidence   of   the
       experiences of  his  family  are  in  accordance  with  the  evidence
       referred to in TG.

   19. The burden  of  proving  entitlement  to  a  grant  of  international
       protection rests upon the appellant with the standard of proof  being
       that referred to as the 'lower standard'.

   20. The appellants claim that if  returned  he  will  be  killed  is  not
       substantiated by the  evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  It  is
       accepted there may be a degree of  harassment  but  members  of  this
       faith group are able to attend the temple and prey and in the  street
       are not as easily identified as a follower of the Sikh  religion  who
       will wear a turban.

   21. In his witness statement dated 9 December 2015, in there is reference
       to the decision in TG and others, the appellant  claims  he  will  be
       unable to relocate to  Afghanistan  given  the  precarious  situation
       there. His claim not  to  be  able  to  practise  his  faith  is  not
       substantiated and is not supported  by  the  country  information  or
       country guidance case law which shows that followers  of  this  faith
       group are able to attend the temple and follow their faith.

   22. The appellant has been found to be generally a credible  witness  but
       risk has to be assessed at the date of the hearing in  light  of  the
       prevailing country conditions and not those that existed in 2006 some
       ten years ago when the number of Sikhs and Hindis is likely  to  have
       been greater than it is now.

   23. The appellant's family in Kabul at the time he left are said  by  him
       to be his father, mother, older brother and sister,  younger  sister,
       sister-in-law and his nephew. His sister  married  shortly  after  he
       left indicating other family members on his brother in law's side.

   24. The appellant claims he has not had any contact with his family since
       he left Afghanistan. The significance of the question  put  in  cross
       examination regarding the provision of a  telephone  number  is  that
       many agents are paid a proportion of the fee to bring  an  individual
       to the UK with the  balance  being  paid  on  safe  delivery  at  the
       intended destination which is confirmed in a telephone call.    There
       is no evidence this was the arrangement in  this  case  or  that  the
       appellant should be expected to know that  the  arrangements  between
       his father and the agent were. This point is therefore neutral.

   25. The appellant claims in his later witness statement to have no family
       and no home to return to in Afghanistan for support or protection  of
       any kind.

   26. The appellant clams to have attempted to trace his family through the
       Red Cross. A letter from the Red Cross  dated  10  August  2009  [A's
       bundle. Subjective material. Page 3] is in the following terms:
           "Dear Manas
           Re: Red Cross Message for Ramesh Chhabra
           We refer to your Red Cross Message of 31 August 2007.   We  very
           much regret  that  with  the  detail  you  have  given  us,  the
           International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has been  unable
           to deliver the message to the above  mentioned  person  and  has
           returned it as 'Back to Sender'.
           We would like to assure you  that  all  appropriate  sources  of
           information have been tried and we are sorry  our  enquiries  in
           this case have been unsuccessful.
           Please bear in mind that even though the ICRC has been unable to
           find the sought persons, this does not mean that your  relatives
           cannot be traced through other channels.
           If you can obtain any new or additional information we  will  be
           pleased to review the case. You could also write another RCM  to
           another relative at a difference address if you would like to do
           so.
           Yours sincerely"

   27. No copy of the details provided the Red Cross have been provided  and
       nor has it been shown the appellant has contacted the Red Cross again
       to see if any other avenues are available such as via the  Temple  or
       Hindu community members in Kabul or family in the UK. The letter also
       only refer to one named individual.  If  this  is  his  father  there
       appears no reason why further messages  could  not  be  sent  to  his
       mother or older siblings whom the  Red  Cross  can  then  attempt  to
       trace. The claim his family are not in Kabul and cannot be found  has
       not been substantiated on the facts as all  attempts  to  trace  them
       have not been undertaken.

   28. The submission the respondent was attempting to go behind a preserved
       finding by reference to paragraph 13(x) of the determination of Judge
       Morris has no arguable merit as this is not a  finding  of  fact  but
       where the Judge records part of the appellant's case put to him.

   29. There is also a possible contradiction in the  appellant's  evidence.
       In his original witness statement at paragraph 5 he claims  that  his
       father's shop was attacked during the time the Taliban were in  power
       and set on fire, destroying the  front  of  the  shop.  In  his  oral
       evidence he stated his father owned the shop but  that  it  had  been
       burned down indicating  possible  exaggeration  in  the  more  recent
       evidence.

   30. The appellant is a healthy young adult male who has shown an  ability
       to move to another country and make friends and form a  life  of  his
       own by securing employment. It  must  be  accepted  that  this  is  a
       country where there are no faith based barriers.

   31. The applicant has not discharged the burden of proof upon him to show
       he has no family in Kabul. The reality is that the appellant has made
       no concerted effort to find his family. A letter dated  2009  is  not
       proof of the facts claimed in 2016. If the family remain in Kabul the
       appellant has not substantiated his  claim  that  there  will  be  no
       family members willing and able to provide support or  assistance  in
       reintegration. The appellant lived in Kabul for the first 16 years of
       his life and will not be stranger to life there.

   32. It is accepted  that  the  appellants  educational  qualification  in
       travel and tourism may not be in great demand in Kabul at  this  time
       but the fact he has a UK education and good command  of  English  has
       not been shown not to be an asset in the job market, including within
       government where the discrimination referred to in TG  against  those
       wishing to start  their  own  business  has  not  been  shown  to  be
       prevalent.

   33. The fact the appellant has failed to prove he has no family available
       means he has failed to show he has depleted support mechanisms. It is
       also the case that his friend confirmed that he is likely to be  able
       to assist with �200 per month ($288) which has not been shown  to  be
       insufficient to enable the appellant to meet his  basis  needs  until
       established. It is also the fact that another close friend  Mr  Gabba
       has not been asked if he would assist, meaning the appellant has  not
       discharged the burden of proof upon him to show sufficient  financial
       support is not available. The claim by the appellant that if  he  was
       dependent upon remittances this would place him at  greater  risk  is
       not made out. Families  working  abroad  regularly  remit  income  to
       Afghanistan if they have  family  remaining  there  and  the  country
       information fails to establish a greater risk for this reason per se.
       The World Bank estimates that 15% of rural households in  Afghanistan
       receive remittances from abroad, covering around 20% of the  family's
       daily expenditure. A 2007 report released by the  International  Fund
       for Agricultural Development estimated remittances to Afghanistan  in
       2006 at USD 2.5 billion, accounting for 29.6% of Afghanistan's  total
       GDP  at  that  time  and  according  to  the   UN   Afghanistan-bound
       remittances from Iran alone amounted to  USD  500  million  annually,
       equivalent to 6% of Afghanistan's GDP in December 2008. Over  31%  of
       all Afghan households are estimated to receive remittances from  Iran
       or Pakistan. The claim the  remittances  will  have  to  be  sent  by
       Western Union is not make out.  In Afghanistan the most prominent way
       to send remittances are hawala dealers, traditional financial service
       providers  who  enable  remittance  transfer  through  a  trust-based
       network of agents. Money transfers sent via hawala are generally more
       affordable than those sent through other remittance channels.

   34. The private life the appellant has in the UK has been considered. The
       Immigration Rules, 276ADE is  not  satisfied  as  the  appellant  has
       failed  to  show  there  are  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
       reintegration into life in his home state. If considering  the  claim
       outside the Rules, section 117 has been considered when assessing the
       proportionality of the decision. The respondent has  established  the
       decision is proportionate to the legitimate aim on the facts. Article
       8 does not give a person the ability to choose  where  they  wish  to
       live and was not relied upon outside the Rules by  Ms  Jones  in  any
       event.

   35. Reference has also been made to the statement of Frankie West of  the
       London Borough of Richmond upon Thames Asylum and Refugee  team  [A's
       bundle. List of Subjective material. Page 2]. This is dated 6  August
       2010 and is somewhat dated. It describes the appellant  as  a  person
       who was initially reluctant to discuss the emotional aspects  of  his
       life but who developed a trust and was able to open up to his support
       worker. It is written:
           "I have observed  Manas  develop  from  a  young  boy  with  few
           independent living skills and anxiety about the  whereabouts  of
           his family and settling into the local community  into  a  young
           man who is keen to succeed in this country and repay in kind for
           all that he has received from the  UK.   Manas  is  residing  in
           permanent accommodation in Hounslow which he has  furnished  and
           decorated himself.  He still  worries  about  his  family  which
           causes him to feel low and depressed.  He  has  had  no  contact
           with them whatsoever since coming to the UK  despite  contacting
           the Red Cross to see if they could assist him in tracing any  of
           his family."

   36. The appellant has clearly moved on further since 2010  and  there  is
       insufficient up to date evidence to show that there  are  any  health
       issues at large in  this  case  sufficient  to  warrant  a  different
       decision being made.

   37. Having considered the evidence against the guidance  provided  by  TG
       and others and the country information relied upon by the  appellant,
       I find he has failed to discharge the burden of proof upon him to the
       required standard to prove he is entitled to a grant of international
       protection as a refugee or on any other protection  or  human  rights
       grounds.

Decision

   38. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.
       This appeal is dismissed.

  Anonymity

   39. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8 February 2016

