
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09816/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2016                           |On 15 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              SAEIDEH BAEIDFAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Saeideh Baeidfar, was born on 31 March  1981  and  is  a
    female citizen of Iran.   She  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 22 June 2015 to refuse to grant her asylum.  The First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Wedderspoon), in a decision promulgated on 7  June
    2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the hearing at Liverpool on 30 November 2016, Mr  McVeety,  for  the
    respondent, did not seek to  defend  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He accepted that the judge's  findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's claimed adherence to the Christian faith were not adequate.
     At [63], the judge wrote:

         The appellant has attended a church in Liverpool and in  Manchester
         regularly since residing in the UK.  I  accept  the  appellant  has
         been baptised.   However,  I  find  it  is  reasonably  likely  the
         appellant has sought to follow the Christian faith  in  the  UK  to
         bolster her asylum application.  I found her witnesses Mr Kelly and
         Mr McIntyre to be well meaning but in considering  the  credibility
         of the appellant the Tribunal can  take  account  [of]  but  cannot
         wholly depend upon their  opinions  as  to  the  sincerity  of  the
         appellant's faith.  The Tribunal must consider all the  matters  in
         the round and the vagueness of the appellant's  account  about  the
         events in Iran in November 2014 leads the Tribunal to find that  it
         is not reasonably likely that the appellant is a genuine  Christian
         convert.

 3. The judge appears to accept [64] that the  appellant  had  "evangelised
    individuals" or, more particularly, one individual known  as  ES.   The
    judge comments that, "with such limited evidence the Tribunal concludes
    that it is not reasonably likely  that  the  appellant  would  seek  to
    evangelise if returned to Iran".  It is not  entirely  clear  what  the
    judge means in this  context  by  the  expression  "with  such  limited
    evidence".  If the judge was accepting that the appellant had sought to
    evangelise and had evangelised one individual in Iran, it is not  clear
    by the fact  that  she  had  only  evangelised  one  individual  should
    preclude her from engaging in evangelising activities upon  her  return
    to Iran; it could be said that even  the  greatest  evangelist  has  to
    start somewhere.  In any event, the  reason  given  by  the  judge  for
    rejecting the possibility the appellant would  engage  in  evangelising
    upon return to Iran does not appear to be consistent with her  findings
    at [63] that the appellant is not a Christian convert at all.  Further,
    the findings at [63] also ignore the fact that the appellant claims  to
    have become a Christian whilst in Iran;  read  literally,  the  judge's
    comment that "it is reasonably  likely  the  appellant  has  sought  to
    follow the Christian faith in the UK to bolster her asylum application"
    leaves begging the question as to whether her practise of  Christianity
    in Iran had been similarly bogus.  I acknowledge also  the  observation
    of Judge Rimington (who granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal) that the judge has somewhat cursorily dismissed "the evidence
    ... of the religious witnesses contrary to the  Dorodian  ([01/TH/1537)
    guidance".

 4. For the reasons that I have given, I find that the judge's analysis  of
    the evidence concerning the appellant's claimed Christianity is  flawed
    by legal error.  I set aside the decision.  None  of  the  findings  of
    fact shall stand.  There will need to  be  a  new  and  thorough  fact-
    finding exercise.  That exercise is best conducted  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to which this appeal  is  returned  for  the  decision  to  be
    remade.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 7 June  2016  is
    set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.   The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  Wedderspoon)  for  that
    Tribunal to re-make the decision.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

