

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: AA/09883/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 1st August 2017                           |On: 3rd August 2017          |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     MS
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Ms Benfield, Counsel instructed by Satha & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in 1989. He appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Khawar) to
    dismiss his protection appeal.








    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for international protection. Part of that
    claim turns on the Appellant's sur place activities  and  whether  they
    have come to the attention of the Sri Lankan authorities.   Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2012 with leave to enter as
    a student. He claimed asylum in January 2015  alleging  that  he  would
    face a real risk of  persecution  in  Sri  Lanka  for  reasons  of  his
    political opinion/ethnicity.  He  stated  that  he  had  suffered  ill-
    treatment in the past when he was (rightly)  accused  by  the  security
    forces of association with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).
    He feared that this would be repeated in the future, not least  because
    the security  forces  had  continued  to  demonstrate  that  they  were
    interested in him and members  of  his  family.  He  submitted  various
    documents  in  support  of  his  claim.  These  included  receipts   of
    complaints made to the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka,  a  letter
    from a lawyer and a document confirming that he had been  arrested  and
    held at Dehiwala Police Station.


 4. The claim was rejected on the 26th June 2015. The  Secretary  of  State
    for the  Home  Department  did  not  consider  it  plausible  that  the
    Appellant would have been able to exit the country had he been a person
    of interest; she identified a discrepancy between the evidence that the
    Appellant had given about the circumstances in which  he  was  released
    from detention, and the description of the same in the  letter  from  a
    lawyer in Sri Lanka.   In  respect  of  the  documentary  evidence  the
    Secretary of State noted that the contents of the  documents  generally
    "resonated with the asylum narrative" but declined to give the evidence
    any significant weight on the basis that forged  documents  are  easily
    available throughout the country.

 5.  The  Appellant  appealed  to   the   First-tier   Tribunal   and   his
    representative lodged a  bundle  of  further  evidence.  This  included
    evidence of sur place political activity in the Appellant's support for
    the London-based Transitional Government of  Tamil  Eelam  (TGTE).  The
    bundle also included a medico-legal report prepared by Dr Raj  Perseud,
    Consultant Psychiatrist. The report was dated the  7th  June  2016.  Dr
    Perseud concluded that the Appellant was depressed and found him to  be
    exhibiting classic symptoms of Post-Traumatic Stress  Disorder  (PTSD).
    As to the specific question of fitness to participate  in  proceedings,
    Dr Perseud said this:

         "In my opinion he is currently not fit to give  evidence  but  this
         depends quite a bit on his mental state on the day as he appears to
         be suffering from too serious a set of symptoms which lead  him  to
         be distracted and confused. If he is better  on  the  day  and  the
         proceedings are handled sympathetically and take into  account  his
         psychiatric disorder and that questions about past  trauma  are  of
         particular difficulty for those  suffering  from  PTSD  then  under
         those circumstances he may be fit to attend legal  proceedings  and
         instruct Counsel"

 6. At a  Case  Management  Review  hearing  on  the  10th  June  2016  the
    Respondent put the Appellant on notice that she intended  to  challenge
    the veracity of the report said to have been written by Dr Perseud. The
    note of proceedings made that day by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart records that the HOPO Mr Das Gupta submitted a redacted copy of
    a report prepared by Dr Perseud in another case. He submitted that  the
    text therein bore striking similarities to that in the report about the
    Appellant and that this gave rise to  deep  concerns.  The  matter  was
    adjourned to enable Dr Perseud to comment on the  comparison  drawn  by
    the Secretary of State.  Directions were made that he disclose notes of
    his consultation with the Appellant.


 7. In response to these directions  the  Appellant's  representatives  had
    obtained a further letter  from  Dr  Perseud.  He  wrote  on  the  28th
    September 2016 to confirm that he was the author of  the  report  about
    the Appellant. He confirmed that he  had  seen  the  Appellant  in  his
    Harley St consulting rooms, that he  had  applied  standard  diagnostic
    tests and had had regard to the Appellant's GP notes. He observed  that
    patients  exhibiting  PTSD  symptomology  will,   by   definition,   be
    experiencing similar things: "what this means is that this  group  will
    tend to tick all the boxes in any questionnaire measuring whether  they
    have psychiatric diagnoses such as PTSD. If they are 'ticking  all  the
    boxes' aggregately in terms of having all the symptoms, then when  this
    is recorded in case after case they will start to look very similar  if
    not identical".

 8. When the matter came before Judge Khawar on the 30th January  2017  the
    Appellant's representative Counsel Mr  Paramjorthy  indicated  that  he
    would not be calling the Appellant to give evidence. He relied  on  the
    Appellant's written statements and the evidence of Dr Perseud.   In its
    'assessment of credibility and fact' the First-tier Tribunal made clear
    that this was not a decision, or  evidence,  that  had  impressed.  The
    Tribunal noted that Dr Perseud did not appear to  have  considered  how
    the Appellant had managed to achieve a  2:1  in  his  BSc  and  provide
    detailed instructions to  his  solicitors.  Nor  were  his  conclusions
    consistent with the evidence from the TGTE that the Appellant had  been
    attending numerous meetings, organising events  and  taking  an  active
    role in the movement in the UK.  The  report  contained  a  substantial
    number of paragraphs that were  "word  for  word"  identical  to  those
    written about another patient and the Tribunal did not consider that an
    adequate explanation  had  been  given  for  those  similarities.   The
    determination further notes that the report was, by  the  time  of  the
    hearing, some eight months old and that there was no  further  evidence
    about  fitness  to  give  evidence.  For  these  reasons  the  Tribunal
    concluded that the opinion offered by Dr Perseud  was  "unsustainable".




 9. As to the remaining evidence the determination found, at paragraph  27,
    that it contained "significant examples which show a lack  of  internal
    consistency, contradictions and improbable events".  The  determination
    notes that the Appellant's "failure  to  provide  oral  evidence  means
    there is no explanation  proffered  and  thus  an  adverse  credibility
    conclusion being drawn".  At paragraph  33  the  Tribunal  declines  to
    place weight on  the  Sri  Lankan  documents  filed  "in  view  of  the
    objective evidence  as  to  the  ease  with  which  ostensibly  genuine
    documents are capable of being  obtained  in  Sri  Lanka".  The  global
    conclusion is drawn at paragraph 34  with  the  Tribunal  finding  that
    there is no risk to the Appellant as  a  person  perceived  to  have  a
    significant role in  post-conflict Tamil  separatism.   The  appeal  is
    thereby dismissed.



    The Appellant's Challenge

    Procedural Unfairness


10. The primary ground of  appeal  is  that  the  decision  is  flawed  for
    'procedural unfairness' in that the Judge's conduct of the hearing  was
    unfair, or alternatively that it gave rise to the impression  that  the
    Appellant was not permitted a fair  hearing.    In  particular,  it  is
    alleged:


           a) That the Tribunal,  having formed a provisional view  of  the
              evidence, did not maintain an open mind;


           b) That the Tribunal refused to explain its concerns  about  the
              evidence to Counsel,  thus  preventing  him  from  addressing
              those forensic challenges;


           c)  That  the  Tribunal  refused  to  permit  Counsel  to   make
              submissions/failed to take his submissions into account;

           d) That the Tribunal erred in drawing an adverse inference  from
              the fact that the Appellant was not called.

11. The ground of appeal reproduce what is described as the  verbatim  note
    taken by Counsel for the Secretary of State for the Home Department,  a
    Mr Sobowale, during an exchange between the Judge and  the  Appellant's
    Counsel Mr Paramjorthy:


    Judge:       Mr Paramjorthy I have not had  the  opportunity  to  fully
    consider
                  the asylum interview record but even on a cursory  reading
      there
                  are a number of issues  which  arise  in  respect  of  the
      Appellant's
                  credibility


    Counsel:     Sir, can you draw my attention to those matters, so that I
    can
                 assist the Tribunal and deal with.... (Counsel is  stopped
    from
                 speaking)


    Judge:       No. You are not here to give evidence on  behalf  of  your
    client
                 and for example there is no explanation  as  to  how  your
    client
                 was able to conduct an asylum interview then and now be
                 unable to give evidence


    Counsel:     Sir, I can assist the Tribunal by  making  submissions  on
    the basis
                  that mental health symptoms are erratic and  I  can  refer
      you
                  to....... (Counsel is stopped from speaking)


    Judge:       No you are giving evidence again I won't allow it


    Counsel:     But Sir, I can refer you to  the  report  attached  to  Dr
    Perseud's
                 letter and to the findings in Dr Perseud's  report  as  to
    the fact that
                 the A's  mental health condition is dependent on how the A
    feels
                 on the day in question and further I can refer you to the
                 background evidence and the case law, pertaining to any
                 concerns that you have in respect of the evidence and make


                 submissions; that would not be giving evidence.


    Judge:             No I will not permit you to give evidence  for  your
    client.


    Counsel:     Sir, will you please record in your determination  that  I
    sought to
                 make submissions on matters that this experienced Tribunal
    had
                 concerns about but was prevented from doing so


    Judge:       Mr Paramjorthy with pleasure, with pleasure. I will not be


                 threatened in this jurisdiction or any other  jurisdiction
    for that
                 matter and I will record your request in the determination


    Counsel:     Sir, the reason that I have asked you to record the matter
    is so
                 that it is on the record and I am  representing  a  client
    who prima
                 facie has mental health issues and  I  must  discharge  my
    duty of
                 care to my client and at the same time comply with my duty
    of
                       candour to the Tribunal.

    Judge:       Move on with your submissions


12. The grounds  are  further  supported  by  a  signed  witness  statement
    prepared by Mr Paramjorthy, dated the 28th March 2017.  Mr  Paramjorthy
    adopts the note reproduced in the grounds and  avers  that  it  accords
    with his  recall  of  events,  and  his  own  contemporaneous  note  of
    proceedings.




    Failure to make findings/give reasons


13. The second ground of appeal centres on the findings  at  paragraphs  33
    and 34 of the determination. In particular, it is  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal:


           a) Failed to engage  with  the  evidence,  apparently  accepted,
              that that the Appellant has had active involvement  with  the
              TGTE in London, an organisation considered by the  Government
              of Sri Lanka to be a proscribed terrorist group,  members  of
              whom will face arrest upon return to the country;


           b) Failed to give adequate reasons as to why no weight could  be
              placed on the various supporting documents, accepted  by  the
              Respondent to "resonate with the narrative".




    The Secretary of State's Response


    Procedural Unfairness


14. Mr Avery indicated at the outset that he  was  not  in  a  position  to
    challenge the note set out in the grounds, or Mr  Paramjorthy's  record
    of events. Counsel who had represented the Secretary  of  State  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Sobowale,  had  been  sent  copies  of  the
    grounds and Mr Paramjorthy's statement, and his  comments  invited.  He
    had responded via email to indicate that he could  recall  the  hearing
    very well, inter alia because "it was one of those rare  appeals  where
    there is a visible manifestation of conflict between the Judge  and  my
    opponent during the course of the hearing".   Although he was unable to
    access his notes of the hearing (due to them being in storage)  he  was
    able to say this:


         "It is fair to summarise that during the  course  of  my  opponents
         submissions the Judge took issue with part of his speech  and  this
         caused friction between the two. My opponent wished to expand on  a
         particular aspect of the evidence in the appellants bundle  however
         the Judge was not prepared to entertain the issue being explored in
         these circumstances. The judge was quite robust in maintaining  his
         position as was my opponent in  trying  to  pursue  the  issue  and
         ultimately before he moved on to the rest  of  his  submissions  he
         asked the judge to record that he had not been  able  to  make  the
         submission that he had wished to. I recall that  as  this  exchange
         had unfolded, I then began to write down verbatim  what  was  being
         said, in part as the atmosphere  was  beginning  to  get  a  little
         confrontational and I just wanted to  keep  my  head  down,  so  to
         speak".


15. Given the position taken by Mr Sobowale, Mr Avery indicated that he had
    no questions for Mr Paramjorthy, who had attended the hearing in  order
    to appear as a  witness.  Mr  Avery  nevertheless  submitted  that  the
    conduct of the hearing had  to  be  assessed  in  the  context  of  the
    proceedings  overall.  The  Tribunal  had  evidently   been   extremely
    concerned about the  decision  not  to  call  the  Appellant,  and  had
    rejected the contention that he was unfit to give evidence for  medical
    reasons. It was entitled to expect evidence to come from the  Appellant
    directly and not from his Counsel.




    Failure to make findings/give reasons


16. As to the remaining  grounds  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  paragraph  33
    amounted to a Tanveer Ahmed[2] assessment of the Sri  Lankan  material.
    The Tribunal had rejected  with  reasons  the  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant himself, and viewing those documents in the round  with  that
    assessment  in  mind,  and  with  the  objective  material   indicating
    widespread availability of forgeries,  it  was  perfectly  entitled  to
    afford those documents no weight. The Tribunal  had  properly  directed
    itself  to  the  risk  categories  in  GJ  and  Ors   (post-civil  war,
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  It  was  entitled  to
    conclude on the evidence that the Appellant would not be considered  to
    be a threat to the unitary integrity of the state.














    Discussion and Findings


    Procedural Unfairness


17. I note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has elected not to  make  any
    comment about the grounds of appeal, those having been forwarded to him
    in June of this year and his response invited.


18. In her submissions Ms Benfield asked me to  recall  that  this  was  an
    Appellant who had been diagnosed with depression and PTSD. Although the
    determination addresses  at  length  Dr  Perseud's  opinion  about  the
    Appellant's ability to give coherent  evidence,  the  Tribunal  nowhere
    doubts those diagnoses; nor indeed were they subject  to  challenge  by
    the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department.   Against   this
    background, Ms  Benfield  placed  reliance  on  two  decisions  of  the
    President of this Chamber, Mr Justice McCloskey. In Elayi (fair hearing-
    appearance) [2016] UKUT 00508 (IAC) the President underlined the  long-
    standing principle in English common law that justice must not only  be
    done, it must be manifestly be seen to be done.  In AM  (fair  hearing)
    Sudan [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC) two related  points,  pertinent  to  this
    appeal, are made about how the inalienable  right  to  a  fair  hearing
    should be protected. First:


         "The assiduous judge who has invested time and  effort  in  reading
         all of the documentary materials  in  advance  of  the  hearing  is
         entitled to form provisional views.  Provided that such  views  are
         provisional only and the judge conscientiously  maintains  an  open
         mind, no unfairness arises".


    And second:

         "If a judge has concerns or reservations about the evidence adduced
         by either party which have not been ventilated by  the  parties  or
         their representatives,  these  may  require  to  be  ventilated  in
         fulfilment of the "audi alteram partem" duty, namely the obligation
         to ensure that each party has a reasonable opportunity to  put  its
         case fully".

19. In this case, I regret to say, it appears to  me  inevitable  that  the
    hypothetical observer of the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal
    would have been left with serious concerns about the fairness  of  that
    hearing.


20. The Appellant was faced with a general challenge  to  his  credibility,
    based in the refusal  letter  on  three  points.  First,  there  was  a
    discrepancy about what he said and what his Sri Lankan lawyer had  said
    about his escape from  detention.   Second,  the  supporting  documents
    could  have  been  forged.  Third,  an  alleged  variance  between  the
    Appellant's claim to have left through the airport and  the  background
    material. The decision not to call the Appellant was taken  by  Counsel
    in light of those matters delineated in the refusal letter. Each  point
    was addressed in the Appellant's witness statement, and with  reference
    to the country background material and/or the guidance in GJ.

21. What happened at the beginning of the hearing (in the absence  of  oral
    evidence, the outset of Mr  Paramjorthy's  submissions)  was  that  the
    Tribunal indicated that there were, on a "cursory reading" a number  of
    other issues arising from  the  asylum  interview  that  concerned  the
    Tribunal.  Mr Sobowale and Mr Paramjorthy  appear  unanimous  in  their
    recollection that having given that indication, the  Tribunal  declined
    to explain what those concerns were.   They were later  summarised  [at
    paragraph 27 of the determination] as a "myriad of unexplained aspects"
    in the case but at the hearing itself Mr Paramjorthy was left  with  no
    idea what those concerns might have been.  I  have  little  doubt  that
    had those reservations been explained, Mr Paramjorthy could  have  made
    submissions on the Appellant's behalf without himself giving  evidence.
    For instance, one  of  the  matters  raised  in  paragraph  27  of  the
    determination was the  apparent  discrepancy  between  the  Appellant's
    evidence at the  asylum  interview  that  he  was  not  involved  in  a
    political party in this country and the letter from the  TGTE  that  he
    was in fact politically active in the diaspora. Had that  concern  been
    brought to Mr Paramjorthy's attention he would have been able to  point
    out that no discrepancy arose, since the asylum interview took place in
    May 2015 and the Appellant did not join the TGTE until June 2016.  I am
    satisfied that the Tribunal's decision  not  to  explain  its  concerns
    deprived the Appellant of an opportunity to put his case, and that this
    was an error in approach. The  hypothetical  observer  at  the  hearing
    would have seen an Appellant with a diagnosed  mental  illness,  wholly
    reliant upon his Counsel, being deprived of an opportunity  to  address
    forensic challenges central to  the  determination  of  his  case.   It
    follows that justice was manifestly not seen to be done in this appeal,
    and the determination must therefore be set aside in its entirety.



    Failure to make findings/give reasons


22. It follows  that  I  need  say  very  little  about  the  reasoning  at
    paragraphs 33 and 34 of the determination.   That is  fortunate,  since
    there is very little  to  be  said.  The  scant  conclusions  expressed
    therein do not engage with the great number of documents produced inter
    alia from the Human Rights  Commission  of  Sri  Lanka,  nor  with  the
    apparently accepted evidence that the Appellant had latterly had a role
    to play in the activities in London of the TGTE.    The  Respondent  is
    quite correct to say that the Tribunal  would  have  been  entitled  to
    find, per GJ, no risk of harm on the basis of  limited  involvement  in
    diaspora  politics,  but  the  Tribunal  was  nevertheless  obliged  to
    undertake  some  analysis  of  the  evidence  before  reaching  such  a
    conclusion.  Its failure to do so was an error  of  law.  I  note  that
    since the First-tier Tribunal decision was promulgated involvement with
    the TGTE has assumed a particular significance in light of the Court of
    Appeal decision in UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 85.




    Decisions


23. For the reasons set out above I am satisfied that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law and it is set aside
    in its entirety.


24. The parties agreed  that  in  the  circumstances  the  appeal  must  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined de novo.

25. There is an order for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             2nd August 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew) on the
12th April 2017

[2] TA v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 00439

