

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09063/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Laganside Courts                   |Determination Sent           |
|On : 20th August 2013                         |On : 10th September 2013     |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                            nabel sharif mohamed

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Stuart McTaggart, instructed by R.P. Crawford &
Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Margaret O'Brien of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In February 2012 Mr Mohamed applied for asylum, having  travelled  from
    Somalia to Belfast, he said, the previous month.  The  application  was
    refused on 20th September 2012, and on the same  date  a  decision  was
    taken to remove Mr Mohamed, who was informed in the Notice of  Decision
    that if he did not leave the  United  Kingdom  voluntarily,  directions
    would be given for his removal to  Somalia.   An  appeal  against  that
    decision came before the First-tier Tribunal on 7th March 2013, and was
    dismissed by Judge Fox.  Leave was then sought to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and this was granted by Designated Judge McCarthy.  When  the
    matter came before me today, it was agreed on all hands that there were
    material errors of law in the First-tier determination, requiring it to
    be set aside.  I shall briefly set out those errors below.

2.    Judge Fox's principal finding is that the appellant is not a  national
    of Somalia at all.  But no other nationality is suggested, although  at
    paragraph 34  of  his  determination  Judge  Fox  finds  that  "if  the
    Appellant is now returned to his country of nationality, there is not a
    real risk that he will suffer a breach of his  protected  rights  under
    Article 3."  If the judge is referring to Somalia, that contradicts his
    finding that the appellant is not a national of Somalia.  At  the  same
    time, the judge believes that the appellant will enjoy  the  protection
    of "powerful forces" on his  return  to  Mogadishu,  all  the  more  so
    because, not being a Somali national, he will not  be  identified  with
    any particular clan.

3.   This is all completely illogical.  If one is  not  a  Somali  national,
    and has no connexion with any of the Somali clans, it is  hard  to  see
    how one would enjoy extra protection in Somalia.  The proposition  that
    it is safer to go to Somalia if one is not a citizen  of  that  country
    than if one is, may not be expected to trigger an influx of tourists to
    that country.  The practicalities of involuntary removal to Somalia for
    a non-national are, it is true, for  the  respondent  rather  than  the
    judge, as the appeal is against removal in principle, rather  than  the
    removal directions which might be set once appeal rights are exhausted.
     But an airline would no doubt be  unwilling  to  carry  the  appellant
    without a passport or travel document.

4.   Judge Fox was certainly justified in finding it odd that the  appellant
    could speak so little Somali ~ not even the word for  'mother'  or  the
    numbers one to ten ~ when both his parents were  Somali  and  spoke  to
    each other in Somali at home.  In this country,  it  is  generally  the
    case that the children of first-generation migrants will be fluent both
    in the mother tongue of their parents, which is spoken at home, and  in
    English, which is spoken outside the home.  But it is not  unknown  for
    the children of migrants to speak only English, for example if they are
    being brought up by a single parent who chooses  to  speak  English  at
    home, or if each parent has a different native language and they prefer
    to communicate with each other in English.  At all events, it does  not
    necessarily follow that inability to speak the majority language  of  a
    country means that one is not a citizen of  that  country.   There  are
    many British citizens with little or no English.

5.   The safety which  Judge  Fox  believes  the  appellant  will  enjoy  in
    Mogadishu stems from his inference that  his  mother  "is  one  of  the
    protected and fortunate few who can reside happily in Mogadishu."   She
    is said to have stayed on  in  Mogadishu  after  taking  the  appellant
    there, and to have purchased her own property, which suggests that  she
    is a woman of substance.  But there is no evidential  basis  for  this.
    At Q.132-133 and Q.144 of the asylum interview, the appellant said that
    his mother had gone to live in Mogadishu with her uncle's relative, but
    he did not know the area, as he had only stayed there for one day,  and
    he did not know where she was now.  In his later witness statement, the
    appellant said that his mother had moved to Ethiopia.  So  the  premise
    on which Judge Fox bases the safety of return to Mogadishu falls away.

6.   There are other passages in the determination where  the  reasoning  is
    very obscure.  At paragraph 13, Judge Fox says that he does not propose
    to deal individually with the points raised against  the  appellant  in
    the Refusal Letter, but instead has looked at the matter in the  round,
    which is "the first and most comprehensive way of reviewing  the  issue
    of credibility."  This seems to misunderstand the task  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, which is not to 'review'  the  respondent's  credibility
    findings, but to make its own findings.  At  paragraph  19,  Judge  Fox
    bizarrely considers "the opposing view" that the  appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge of the Somali language is genuine.   That  implies  that  the
    appellant's ignorance of the Somali tongue is a pretence, and  that  he
    can speak it perfectly well.  But why should he pretend  not  to?   "It
    could be", suggests Judge Fox, "that this is just part of his story  to
    gain access to the United Kingdom."  Why someone who is  not  a  Somali
    but who speaks fluent Somali should pretend  not  to  speak  Somali  in
    order to be recognised as a refugee from  Somalia  is  not  immediately
    obvious.

7.   This is not a case where there  has  been  an  error  of  law  but  the
    findings of fact by the  First-tier  Tribunal  can  stand.   There  are
    certainly problems with credibility,  which  are  pointed  out  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter.  As the parties agree, the appeal will have
    to be heard de novo, and in accordance with Practice  Statement  7.2(b)
    that should be on remittal to  a  different  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.




     DECISION

      The  appeal  is  allowed  to  the  extent  that   the   first-instance
    determination is set aside and the case is remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                          6th September 2013



