
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09771/2014
                                                               AA/09772/2014
                                                               AA/09773/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 July 2016                      |On 30 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     B N
                                     Q M
                                     N N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Anderson, Manuel Bravo Project
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, BN, QM and NN are husband, his wife and minor child and
    are citizens of Zimbabwe.  The first appellant has a son  (P)  who  was
    born in September 2004 and holds British/Zimbabwean joint  nationality.



 2. The appellants appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Dearden)
    against the decision to deport them to Zimbabwe.  Judge  Dearden  in  a
    determination promulgated on 9 April 2015, dismissed the  appeal.   The
    appellants now appeal, with permission, to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    appeal came before Judge Plimmer at Bradford on 30 September 2015.   In
    a determination promulgated on 2 October 2015, she found that there was
    an error of law in Judge Dearden's decisions such that they fell to  be
    set aside.  Unfortunately, Judge Plimmer is unwell and a transfer order
    has been made (dated 15  February  2016)  in  respect  of  the  resumed
    hearing.

 3. The hearing proceeded by way of  submissions  only  on  28  July  2016.
    There had been an unfortunate delay in this case when the Secretary  of
    State had failed to comply with directions given by  Judge  Plimmer  in
    October 2015.  Ms  Anderson,  on  the  other  hand  who  acts  for  the
    appellants did comply with the directions.

 4. As Judge Plimmer observed in her error of law decision, it is necessary
    for  the  Tribunal  to  consider  Section  117C  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) whilst the appeals  engage
    paragraph 399 of HC 395 (as amended):

 5. The first appellant  was  sentenced  to  a  period  of  twelve  months'
    imprisonment on 26 July 2007 at Bradford Crown Court on two  counts  of
    being in possession of a false or improperly obtained passport.  It  is
    that conviction (the first appellant's only conviction) which  has  led
    to the deportation decision.

 6. The parties are  agreed  that  the  only  issues  which  remain  to  be
    determined in this appeal are whether it will be unduly harsh  for  the
    child NN (who is 16 years old) to live in Zimbabwe and whether it  will
    be unduly harsh for both NN and P (the latter being a  British  citizen
    who cannot be deported and is aged 10 years)  be  separated  from  each
    other and, in the case of P, to be separated from the other  appellants
    by reason of the  deportation.   Before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Section
    117C(4) was not the subject of submissions whilst sub-Section (5)  both
    representatives  agreed  was  the  focus  of   the   only   issue   for
    determination by the Tribunal.

 7. It is accepted by both parties  that  the  principal  appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with both children, NN and P.  They
    all live together with the second  appellant  in  a  family  unit.  The
    Tribunal is required to consider the circumstances in the round and  is
    not limited to  considering  only  circumstances  appertaining  to  the
    qualifying children.  (See MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450).

 8. Mr Mills told me that he agreed with Ms Anderson's submission that  the
    first appellant did not represent any threat to  the  wider  community.
    The false document offence for which he  was  convicted  has  not  been
    repeated and nor has he had any trouble with the United Kingdom  police
    or authorities since he has been released from prison.

 9. There  is  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  the  first  principal
    appellant's behaviour when in prison had been  "exceptional".   I  note
    that the principal appellant has engaged in voluntary work. Ms Anderson
    submitted that he has  become  fully  integrated  into  United  Kingdom
    society.  Child P will start at secondary  school  in  September  2016.
    Child NN has been offered a place at a sixth form college  starting  in
    September 2016.  There is a great  deal  of  evidence  adduced  by  the
    appellants from teachers and headmaster of the  school  attended  by  P
    which indicate both children are bright and  work  hard  yet  are  very
    fearful of the disruption which would be caused to their education  and
    lives generally if either they were to be separated or, in the case  of
    NN, removed to Zimbabwe with her parents.  NN has taken  her  GCSEs  in
    the summer of 2016 and is currently awaiting the results.

10. I have the benefit of  a  report  prepared  by  an  independent  social
    worker, Ms Christine Brown.  This report considers in detail the likely
    effect which the enforcement of the  deportation  order  on  the  three
    appellants will have upon both NN and P.

11. The documentary evidence (which  has  been  skilfully  compiled  by  Ms
    Anderson) presents a very thorough picture of the lives of the children
    P and NN.  There is  clearly  an  extremely  strong  bond  between  the
    siblings and between P and his parents.  Mr Mills, in  his  submission,
    acknowledged that Christine Brown's  report  painted  a  picture  of  a
    "happy  family"  and  I  have  seen  no  reason  to  depart  from  that
    description.  The principal appellant's behaviour  has  been  exemplary
    since he finished his prison sentence several years ago.  He  has  been
    unable to work but has engaged in voluntary activities to  the  benefit
    of his community.  He has done everything  possible  to  encourage  and
    enable his children NN and P to make the best of  the  education  which
    has been offered to them in the United Kingdom.   I  note  that  NN  in
    particular has become  an  extremely  valuable  member  of  her  school
    community.  I acknowledge that P would be able to enter  Zimbabwe  with
    the  remainder  of  his  family  as  he  has  joint  Zimbabwean/British
    nationality.  I acknowledge also, however, that if he were required  to
    do so he would lose the advantages of his British nationality  and  (at
    least for the time being) his EU citizenship.  I find that it would  be
    unduly harsh to expect  him  in  these  circumstances  to  relocate  to
    Zimbabwe.  He is at a crucial stage of his education  (about  to  enter
    into a secondary school) and the same is also true of the child NN  who
    will be moving with her friends and peer group to study at a sixth form
    college for her A levels.  The expert Christine Brown has described the
    dislocation and "grief" which will be caused  to  the  family  life  of
    these children if they are either removed to Zimbabwe,  separated  from
    the family and social milieu (which provides them with security in  the
    United Kingdom) to Zimbabwe or, indeed, if they were to  be  separated.
    It is my opinion that it would be unduly  harsh  for  either  of  those
    scenarios to be put into effect.

12. In reaching my decision I have had regard  to  all  relevant  parts  of
    Section 117 of the 2002 Act (as amended). I have had proper  regard  to
    the  public  interest  which  favours  the  removal  of  the  principal
    appellant. Seeking to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  with  a
    false document is a serious offence which has an adverse effect, albeit
    indirectly, upon other members of the community. It is not, however, an
    offence of violence or of sexual nature. Moreover, I have no  doubt  at
    all that the principal appellant, if he is  to  be  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain, will seek and find  work,  in  consequence  not  be  a
    burden on the British taxpayer.  I am satisfied on the present evidence
    that he has integrated in United Kingdom society.  I am aware also that
    he has not had something other than  a  precarious  status  within  the
    United Kingdom since his asylum appeal was dismissed some years ago.

13. I have referred in this decision to paragraph 399 of HC  395  although,
    like Judge Plimmer, the appeal cannot be allowed or dismissed under the
    Immigration Rules for the reasons which she gives in her error  of  law
    decision at [10-12].  The reasons which I have given above, the appeals
    of the three appellants are allowed on human rights grounds (Article  8
    ECHR).  I emphasise again that I have dealt in my decision  as  regards
    the appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  with  the  only  matter  which
    remained at issue between the parties, namely that as  to  whether  the
    effect upon the qualifying children  of  deportation  would  be  unduly
    harsh.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  set  aside  by  a  decision  of
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer dated 2 October  2015.   Following  a  transfer
order of the Upper Tribunal, I have remade the  decision.   The  appeals  of
the three appellants, BN, QM and NN against the decisions of  the  Secretary
of State dated  24  November  2014  are  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds
(Article 8 ECHR).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane










