
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09647/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 September 2015                  |On 9 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     MS
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, instructed by Wick & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Preliminary

 1. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in relation to  the
    appellant because of the nature of the case.  I consider it appropriate
    to make a similar order in the  Upper  Tribunal  under  Procedure  Rule
    14(1) to prohibit the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to
    lead members of the public to identify the appellant.  To  give  effect
    to this order the appellant is to be referred to as MS.

Background to the appeal

 2. The appellant was born on 20 September 1996 and is an Iranian  citizen.
    She arrived in the UK  on  31  December  2013  and  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival.  The appellant underwent a screening interview on arrival  and
    as she was under 18 she was given a self-completion form to  return  by
    28 January 2014,  which  she  did.   Attached  to  that  form  was  the
    appellant's first statement.  On 17 March 2014, the appellant  attended
    an interview through a Farsi  interpreter  and  on  1  April  2014  her
    solicitors made further written submissions on her behalf.

 3. The Home Office considered the appellant's evidence and on  30  October
    2014 decided that she was not a refugee or a person otherwise  in  need
    of international protection and that removing her from the UK would not
    violate  the  UK's  obligations  under  the  human  rights  convention,
    focusing on Articles 2, 3 and  8.   The  Home  Office  also  took  into
    account the appellant's age but found that the proposed  removal  would
    not be contrary to the wellbeing of a child and therefore s.55  of  the
    UK Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  was  not  engaged
    because the appellant would be able to return to her family in Iran and
    would be entitled to the services of the Iranian authorities.

 4. On 31 October 2014  the  Home  Office  issued  a  notice  refusing  the
    appellant leave to enter and it is against  this  immigration  decision
    that the appellant appealed as she was entitled to do under s.82(1)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. The appeal was heard and dismissed by Judge Walker in her decision  and
    reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walker  that   was
    promulgated on 11 June 2015.  Judge Walker found that the appellant was
    not a refugee or that the immigration decision would violate  the  UK's
    obligations under the human rights convention.

 6. On 6 July 2015, the appellant was granted permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against Judge Walker's decision.

Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. Although the appellant relied on seven pages of grounds of application,
    when granting permission to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly
    rejected all but the first.  The appellant did not apply to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for the rejected grounds to be admitted and as I explained  at
    the  hearing  I  do  not  have  jurisdiction  to  entertain  any   such
    application at the hearing.

 8. Mr Richardson objected to the restriction I imposed on the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He reminded me of the guidance given in Ferrer (limited appeal
    grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT  00304  (IAC)  but  in   light   of   the
    clarification given in MR (permission to appeal:  Tribunal's  approach)
    Brazil [2015] UKUT 00029 (IAC) I see no force in his argument.

 9. Therefore, the only ground available to  the  appellant  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal relates to whether Judge Walker overlooked  material  evidence
    in relation to the appellant's refugee claim.  In the  words  of  Judge
    Kelly:

         "Paragraph 1 of the application does however raise matters of  some
         concern.  It appears that the  Tribunal  may  have  overlooked  the
         signed statement  (with  translation)  of  [anonymised:  SS  -  the
         appellant's boyfriend] [pages 28 to 30 of the  appellant's  bundle]
         and what were said to be an exchange of emails between him and  the
         appellant [pages 32 and 33 of the appellant's bundle].  Whilst  the
         Tribunal may still have attached little weight to  these  documents
         in the absence of oral  testimony  from  SS  at  the  hearing  [see
         paragraph 45 of the decision] it is nevertheless arguable that  the
         judge's finding that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  any
         evidence of her claimed romantic relation with him [paragraph 46 of
         the decision] was unsustainable and material to the outcome of  the
         appeal."

10. Mr Avery relied on the somewhat unusual rule 24 response.   I  describe
    it as unusual because although settled by Mr Avery  himself  it  admits
    that the appellant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  opposed  even
    though the Home Office file was not available to him  at  the  time  of
    making the response.  Mr Avery confirmed that having seen the papers he
    continued to oppose the appeal, being  satisfied  that  the  judge  had
    considered all relevant evidence.

Decision on error of law

11. Having heard from Mr Richardson and Mr  Avery,  I  am  satisfied  Judge
    Walker's decision is free from legal error.

12. The challenge is mounted in relation to paragraphs 45, 46 and 49 of the
    decision and reasons statement and I acknowledge that when taken out of
    context it is arguable that  Judge  Walker's  comments  contain  errors
    because they appear  to  misrepresent  the  evidence  or  to  impose  a
    requirement for certain corroborative evidence.

13. In particular, in paragraph 45 Judge Walker said the  appellant  relied
    "on an unsigned email from [SS]."  This appears to be at odds with what
    she recorded in paragraphs 29 and 35, where she describes the appellant
    as relying on a statement from  SS.   In  paragraph  46,  Judge  Walker
    appears to ignore the email evidence between the appellant and SS  when
    she stated that the appellant  had  "not  filed  any  emails  or  phone
    records".  At paragraph 49, Judge Walker comments  that  the  appellant
    did not provide any evidence of her marriage such as photographs of her
    wedding which no doubt would have been taken.  Judge Walker  identified
    that the appellant was in regular contact with her mother  in  Iran  by
    mobile phone and SMS messaging.

14. However, as I have  indicated,  these  arguments  take  Judge  Walker's
    comments out of context.  When examined in context there  is  no  legal
    error.

15. With regard to the contents of paragraph 45, the appellant provided  in
    evidence an email which contained the email address of SS but which was
    unsigned.   Separately,  the  appellant  provided  a  printout  of  the
    contents of that email but without the email  header  together  with  a
    translation.  The printout was signed and dated.  In order to link  the
    statement to SS, the appellant relied on the  document  containing  the
    email heading.  That document was unsigned.

16. Judge Walker  was  clearly  concerned  about  the  reliability  of  the
    appellant's core account.  In paragraphs 42, 43 and 44 she had examined
    the appellant's own accounts and found  them  to  be  inconsistent  and
    unreliable.  She then considered what other evidence was available  and
    turned to the three documents (the unsigned email, the signed statement
    and the translation).  She only  had  the  appellant's  word  that  the
    account contained in these documents came from her boyfriend but  Judge
    Walker had found that the appellant was not a reliable witness.  It  is
    implicit in this context that Judge  Walker  was  concerned  about  the
    reliability of the evidence attributed to SS.

17. Fortifying me that this is the right understanding of paragraph  45  is
    the fact that Judge Walker goes on to find that the appellant's account
    as to why SS did  not  attend  the  hearing  was  beyond  belief.   The
    appellant's evidence was that SS was willing to attend the hearing  but
    her solicitor had told her not to bother bringing him to  the  hearing.
    If this is true, then it would be remarkable advice from  a  solicitor,
    particularly an experienced solicitor such as  those  representing  the
    appellant because it would be tantamount to them advising the appellant
    not to provide supporting evidence.  In such circumstances, it was open
    to Judge Walker to find that the reliability of the  evidence  from  SS
    was undermined.

18. Turning to the content of paragraph 46, the criticism again  takes  the
    judge's comments out of context.  Judge Walker was not saying that  the
    appellant had not filed any emails  of  phone  records.   Judge  Walker
    recorded in paragraph 29 that there had been  email  exchanges  between
    the  appellant  and  SS  but  that  they  were  "entirely  focussed  on
    establishing contact between them."  The  full  text  of  paragraph  46
    reads, "The appellant claims to have been in  a  romantic  relationship
    with SS since she came to the UK but she has not filed  any  emails  or
    phone records which would lend credibility to this assertion."   Having
    read those emails, that finding was open to her even though  there  are
    some terms of endearment in those messages.  The emails did not, in the
    eyes of Judge Walker, lend any credibility to the romantic relationship
    because of the lack of detail.

19. The final criticism relates to paragraph 49 and  whether  Judge  Walker
    was imposing a requirement for corroboration.  Again, in context, it is
    clear  that  Judge  Walker  is  merely  identifying  that  she  has  no
    independent evidence to sustain the appellant's account, an account she
    had found unreliable and therefore which could not stand  on  its  own.
    Judge Walker is merely considering alternatives to ensure she  has  not
    overlooked anything and in so doing identified that the appellant might
    have been able to obtain supporting evidence through her mother.  I  am
    satisfied that Judge Walker was not expecting the appellant to  provide
    photographs of her wedding but was finding that the  appellant  had  no
    evidence to corroborate her  account  that  she  was  married  and  her
    account on  its  own  was  unreliable.   In  context,  I  find  nothing
    objectionable or unlawful in Judge Walker's observations.

20. In light of the above, I find there is no legal error in  the  decision
    and reasons statement, and it is upheld.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of  Judge  Walker  does  not  contain  an
error on a point of law and is upheld.




                      Signed   Date


                           Judge McCarthy
                           Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
