
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09896/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th August 2016                           |On 15th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                               MS FATOU MANNEH
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
      Appellant in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Nicol) promulgated on 16th April 2015.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia and her date  of  birth  is  [  ]
      1990.


   3. She arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2014 and claimed  asylum  in
      October 2014.  The application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
      in a decision dated 17th November 2014.

   4. The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom with the benefit of  a
      visit visa granted so that she could visit her  sister.   She  claimed
      asylum on the basis that she was a lesbian.

   5. The Judge having heard evidence from the Appellant found that she  had
      attempted to put herself in  the  best  light  by  claiming  to  be  a
      lesbian.  He noted she changed her position when  challenged  about  a
      man  and  moved  to  the  position  of  being  bisexual.    He   noted
      discrepancies in her interviews which had been noted in the Letter  of
      Refusal and which he had set out in  the  Decision  and  Reasons.   He
      rejected her account in its entirety and dismissed her asylum appeal.

   6. The grounds asserted that the Judge had dismissed the entirety of  the
      account as not credible but had  not  given  the  matter  the  anxious
      scrutiny required and had failed to consider  the  situation  for  gay
      people in  the  Gambia  in  that  culture  and  the  attitude  of  the
      Authorities.  Secondly, it is asserted that the  credibility  findings
      were based on peripheral matters and thirdly, that the Judge  made  no
      findings in relation to her fears  of  becoming  a  victim  of  forced
      marriage.

   7. The Secretary of State provided a Rule 24 response  arguing  that  the
      Judge's findings, which start at paragraph  31  of  the  Decision  and
      Reasons, give cogent reasons for rejecting the Appellant's claim.  The
      Judge found that the Appellant's sister's evidence  contradicted  that
      of the Appellant in a key respect; namely where the Appellant  claimed
      that her father had reported her to the Authorities in the Gambia  and
      her sister was equally certain that he had not.

   8. So far as the question of forced marriage is concerned  the  Secretary
      of State pointed out that the Judge had rejected the Appellant's claim
      in its entirety, which included her claim that she would be  subjected
      to forced marriage.

   9. The Appellant was  represented  by  Counsel  before  the  First-  tier
      Tribunal.  She is no  longer  represented.  She  did  not  attend  the
      hearing before me.

  10. I am satisfied that she was served with notice of the hearing  at  the
      address that she has provided  to  the  Tribunal.   There  is  neither
      explanation for her absence nor application for an  adjournment.   She
      did not attend to argue her case before the Upper Tribunal.   In  that
      event and having read the Decision and Reasons I find that  the  Judge
      rejected her claim in its entirety for reasons properly  open  to  him
      and did not fall into error.



  11. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

  12. There was no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  I  see  no
      justification for making one.




Signed                              Date 12th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
