
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA091702014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 July 2017                            |On 03 August 2017                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                    [R K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Evans, Harry Pratt, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Rosa Kasongo, was born on 1 January 1983 and is a female
    citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC).   She  entered  the
    United Kingdom and claimed asylum in June 2014.  By a decision dated  7
    October 2014, the respondent refused her  claim  for  protection.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Sharkett)  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 31 October  2016,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In a lengthy and thorough decision, the judge found that the  appellant
    had worked for the UDPS in the DRC;  that  she  had  given  a  credible
    account of her arrest and detention by the DRC authorities in 2011; she
    had also given a credible account of her second arrest;  that  she  was
    recognised by soldiers who had  previously  arrested  her  in  Kinshasa
    where she had been previously arrested.  At [91], the judge wrote:

         "I accept that the appellant was involved with the UDPS  and  as  a
         result of that she was arrested on two occasions  and  subsequently
         released and then she was arrested a third time for a  reason  that
         she was not connected with.  I accept she was held at Makala prison
         for a time and that conditions were harsh."

 3. The country guidance for UDPS members in DRC is still provided  by  the
    decision of  MM (UDPS members - Risk on return) Democratic Republic  of
    Congo CG [2007] UKAIT 00023.   The  grounds  of  appeal  at  [8]  quote
    paragraph [250] of that decision:

         "Mindful of the  risk  categories  as  identified  in  AB  and  DM,
         confirmed in MK and now re-affirmed by us, we recognise that had we
         found the Appellant to be credible, we would have concluded that as
         a person who had a role in the  UDPS  and  who  was  known  to  the
         authorities and who had been detained and ill-treated by  them  for
         his political opinion and who had escaped from detention, he  would
         arguably, not least to the lower standard of proof, be at  risk  on
         return to the DRC.  Conversely, he would not be  at  real  risk  on
         return, if we found the Appellant to be no more than a mere  member
         of the UDPS."

 4. At the Upper Tribunal initial hearing in Manchester,  Mr  McVeety,  for
    the respondent, told me that it was the inevitable consequence  of  the
    judge's positive credibility findings (the judge did disbelieve certain
    other parts of the appellant's account) that, subject to the  authority
    of MM, the appeal should be allowed.   I  agree.   Notwithstanding  the
    fact that  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  fabricated  or
    embellished certain parts of her account, the fact that  she  has  been
    found to have been a low level member of the UDPS and that she had been
    arrested on more than one occasion for UDPS activities, indicates  that
    she is likely to be regarded as something more than a "mere member"  of
    the UDPS.  In the circumstances  and  in  the  light  of  Mr  McVeety's
    submission, I allow the appeal.  I remake  the  decision  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  on  asylum  and
    Articles 2/3 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  31
    October 2016 is set aside.  All of the findings of fact shall stand.  I
    have remade the decision.  The appellant's appeal against the  decision
    of the respondent dated 7 October 2014 is allowed on asylum grounds and
    on Article 2/3 ECHR grounds.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 31 July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 31 July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


