



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09684/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th October 2015                          |On 22nd October 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                              mrs GJURIJE DUNGU
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Collins of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Fijiwala

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 15th January 1976 is a citizen of  Albania.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by  Mr  Collins  of  Counsel.
    The Respondent was represented by Miss Fijiwala a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for asylum and that application  had
    been refused by the Respondent.  The Appellant had then  appealed  that
    decision and her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Clarke
    sitting at Taylor House on 3rd February 2015.  The judge had  dismissed
    her appeal on all grounds.  Application  was  made  for  permission  to
    appeal and permission to appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Robertson on 25th March 2015.  Permission was refused for reasons
    given on all of the Grounds of  Appeal.   Application  was  renewed  on
    essentially the same grounds and permission was granted by Deputy Upper
    Tribunal Judge Black on 29th June 2015.  The judge indicated  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's  analysis  of  the  evidence  was  arguably
    inadequate and that since medical  evidence  went  to  credibility  any
    failure properly to analyse the medical evidence was  material  to  the
    outcome  of  the  appeal  and  therefore  the  grounds  were  arguable.
    Directions were issued directing the Upper Tribunal to  firstly  decide
    whether an error of law had been made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3. Mr Collins submitted in accordance with  Grounds  of  Appeal.   It  was
    submitted the starting point should have been a  consideration  of  the
    trafficking case of AM and BM and he emphasised the fact that there was
    no standard case  in  terms  of  trafficking  from  Albania.   He  also
    submitted that there had been no analysis of  the  risk  of  her  being
    killed as a result of "honour killings".  It  was  submitted  that  the
    decision was short and did not engage with the  country  guidance  case
    and was fixated on evidence that was not available.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was submitted by Miss Fijiwala that the findings made by  the  judge
    were open to her and even though the judge had said that the  Appellant
    had been largely consistent, the question of consistency did not equate
    to credibility.

 5. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submissions and  documents.   I  now  provide  that  decision  with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The Appellant was a married woman from Albania.  She  had  claimed  her
    husband had left her in August 2012  to  go  to  Belgium  for  economic
    reasons.  The Appellant had decided to go to Belgium with her  16  year
    old son to find her husband.  She had flown to Belgium.  She  had  then
    tried to contact her husband by telephone unsuccessfully so decided  to
    earn some money before returning to Albania.  She had fortuitously  met
    an Albanian woman she knew on arrival in Ghent, a  town  that  she  had
    gone to from Brussels Airport.  She left her 16 year  old  son  in  the
    care of this lady while she went to find work.  She did not know  where
    her friend lived that looked after her son but had  a  contact  number.
    She had also on that same day met five Albanian men who said they would
    help her find work in a hotel.  Whilst they did indeed take her to  the
    hotel she was kept in a room and essentially imprisoned by threats  and
    sexually abused for about a month until 15th December  2013.   The  men
    had also given her a Belgian SIM card so that she could put that in her
    phone, that they had not taken off her, to enable her to speak both  to
    her son and her friends.  She also took the opportunity  to  phone  her
    father-in-law in Albania who said that  she  would  be  killed  by  her
    husband when he found out what she had been doing.  She finally escaped
    from the room by opening the unlocked door.  She went to France,  threw
    away her phone, failed  to  claim  asylum  there  and  entered  the  UK
    unlawfully in a lorry.

 7. The refusal letter was detailed and took issue with the credibility  of
    the Appellant's  account  referring  to  several  significant  features
    within that account.  The Respondent had also noted the failure of  the
    Appellant to claim asylum in Belgium or  France,  her  lies  concerning
    having a family member in the UK and her delaying  claiming  asylum  in
    the UK.

 8. The judge's decision was concise.  He  had  adequately  summarised  the
    facts and evidence.  He had available all the documentary evidence  and
    referred to such in paragraph 9.  There is nothing to  suggest  he  had
    not considered all  that  evidence.   His  findings  on  fact  and  his
    conclusions are somewhat brief.  There are some cases that  do  require
    lengthy consideration for a variety of reasons, whilst other cases  can
    be dealt with rather more briefly.  This was potentially one such case.

 9. It is said the judge focussed on evidence that was  not  available  and
    placed too much weight upon it.  The refusal decision by the First-tier
    Tribunal  correctly  noted  that   the   judge   was   not   suggesting
    corroborative evidence was  needed  but  he  was  entitled  to  draw  a
    conclusion from the lack of corroboration (TK Burundi [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    40).  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  on  refusal  made  the  perfectly
    proper and obvious point as  to  the  evidence  that  could  have  been
    provided by the Appellant's son and indeed the Appellant's  friend  who
    on the Appellant's own account had provided an extraordinary  level  of
    help at no notice to the Appellant whilst in Ghent.  There  is  nothing
    to suggest the judge had not read and considered the medical  evidence.
    Indeed his observations as to a  potential  inconsistency  in  evidence
    given to the doctor (paragraph  15)  plainly  shows  he  had  read  and
    considered that evidence.  Permission granting appeal was largely based
    on the alleged failure of the judge to deal with the medical  evidence.
    The  reality  is  that  the  medical  evidence  once  read  within  the
    Appellant's bundle demonstrates that it was  very  short  and  provided
    little or nothing of evidential value.

10. The judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    generally consistent in her evidence.  However consistency of  evidence
    does not equate to credibility.  It could be  said  the  Appellant  had
    provided a consistent but fanciful account.  It was also  not  true  to
    say as at paragraph 13 of the Grounds of Appeal that the Respondent had
    accepted there were reasonable grounds to find the Appellant  had  been
    trafficked.  More accurately the Respondent had accepted on an  initial
    assessment  there  were  such  grounds  but  after  a   more   detailed
    examination of the case did not find there to be such grounds that  the
    Appellant  had  been  trafficked  and  that  was  evidence  within  the
    trafficking report.  That was available to the judge.

11.  Whilst  the  judge's  conclusions  on  credibility  are  brief,  those
    paragraphs that dealt with that matter (12 to 16) contain a sufficiency
    of reasons as to why the judge did not find her to be credible nor that
    she had been trafficked.  That was not just  a  decision  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence available but wholly reasonable when  looking  at
    that evidence.  Having found that she was not trafficked in any way the
    case of AM and BM is irrelevant.

12. The First-tier  Tribunal's  refusal  of  permission  took  the  correct
    approach in this case.  There was no material error of law made by  the
    judge.

Decision

13. There was no material error of law made by the judge and I  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
.



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

