
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09096/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2016                   |On 19 January 2017                   |
|Prepared 4 November 2016             |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                       Mr Mohammed Zakir Hussain Moni
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Smith, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of  Bangladesh,  date  of  birth  1  December
    1976, appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 2 June 2015, to
    refuse a claim to be in need of protection under the Refugee Convention
    and also in  the  alternative  of  Humanitarian  Protection  under  the
    Qualification Directive.  The refusal  is  extensively  set  out  in  a
    decision letter dated 2 June 2015.  The matter came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pooler (the judge), who on 4  July  2016  dismissed  the
    appeal  on  all  grounds  including  Article  8  ECHR  and  under   the
    Immigration Rules. Permission to appeal the judge's decision was  given
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on26 July 2016.

2.   Ms  Smith  argued  that  the  judge  has  made  in  effect  a  decision
    inconsistent with the positive  credibility  and  consistency  findings
    which the judge had found of the Appellant's account.  It is correct to
    say that the Appellant had come to the United Kingdom initially in 2008
    where he had remained before returning to Bangladesh. The Appellant and
    children with his wife had entered the United Kingdom in  2011  on  the
    basis of his wife having a student visa issued at an earlier date.  The
    Appellant's claim  to  be  at  risk  of  persecution  arises  from  his
    employment with a Dhaka businessman, Mr Sawkat, who, it was  said,  had
    influence with the local police and  because  of  his  association  and
    business partner's connections to the government through a Mr Mohzam, a
    politician who subsequently became a government minister.

3.   The judge certainly did [at D 20, 24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29  and  30]
    accept much of what the Appellant had  said  and  found  the  Appellant
    credible.  The judge also accepted that Mr Sawkat was a businessman who
    had  connections  with  Mr  Mohzam  and  others:  The  former  being  a
    government minister in the Awami League Party (ALP).  ALP is  still  in
    power, I am told by Ms Smith.

4.   The judge  also  was  provided  with  some  background  evidence  which
    indicated various matters about risks that may  be  posed.   The  judge
    ultimately concluded that the risks posed  in  the  home  area,  namely
    Dhaka and I assume its conurbation,  which  is  pretty  substantial  in
    size, were such that there were real risks of ill-treatment there.  The
    judge did not accept that risk extended throughout  the  very  populous
    country of Bangladesh and concluded that there were other cities  where
    the Appellant could reasonably go.  The difference between the cases is
    simply this: is the Appellant says he is at risk throughout the country
    from state agents or those with connections to the authority who  could
    persecute him  or  give  rise  to  serious  ill-treatment.   The  judge
    considered and found that there was not such  risk  and  that  internal
    relocation was a  reasonable  option  even  though  the  Appellant  had
    subjectively based fears as to what might still happen to him elsewhere
    in Bangladesh.

5.   In this respect the matter was  entirely  one  for  the  judge  on  the
    evidence that was provided and the arguments that were  advanced.   The
    Upper Tribunal should not interfere with judges' decisions  because  it
    might have formed a different view on the  same  evidence.   Rather  if
    there  is  a  lack  of  reasons  or  inadequacy  of  reasons,  but  not
    exclusively, in the light of the material  before  the  judge  then  an
    error of law will arise.  Although I might not have  reached  the  same
    decision I do not find the judge's decision discloses  an  inconsistent
    basis but rather there is  a  large  measure  of  acceptance  that  the
    Appellant was a reliable witness but that his, that is the  Appellant's
    assessment of risk was not sustainable.  Accordingly I do not  find  it
    is appropriate for me to interfere in that decision,  which  the  judge
    was entitled to make.

6.   It is also apparent that the judge looked at the Immigration Rules.   I
    do not see any cogent argument that would satisfy me that an  error  of
    judgment or in law in fact was made as to the application of the  Rules
    and whether the Appellant came within them.  Ms Smith wholly  correctly
    emphasises that the two children, who are  Bangladeshi  nationals,  who
    have been in the United Kingdom since about 2011 have naturally settled
    in the United Kingdom and have provided a range of evidence which shows
    the progress they are making.  The judge  accepted  that  there  was  a
    measure of disruption to them through removal were that  to  occur  and
    was satisfied  that  on  the  information  before  him  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances which went to show that the matter should  be
    looked at outside of the Immigration Rules.

7.   It seems to me that that was a decision the judge was entitled to  make
    and the very matters that Ms Smith rightly raised as to the  children's
    best interests equally are the same but the  question  is  whether  the
    circumstances are exceptional.  In answer to that  question  the  judge
    found it was not.  I do not see from the arguments put that there  were
    any exceptional circumstances.  The position is on the basis that  they
    entered the United Kingdom the parents were aware of the limited period
    of time in which the Appellant's wife held a visa and an integral  part
    of being a student coming to the UK is of course  that  you  intend  to
    return at the conclusion  of  your  studies.   It  is  clear  that  the
    Appellant  did  reasonably  promptly  after  entering  the   UK   claim
    protection but I do not see that makes the matter any better  in  terms
    of the assessment of exceptional circumstances.  The  judge  took  into
    account the public  interest  and  obviously  the  importance  that  is
    attached  to  it  by  Parliament  through  Section  117A  -  C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.

8.  The judge did, although not required to, look at the matter  outside  of
    the Rules but gave very cursory reasoning for taking the view that  the
    Respondent's decision was proportionate.  In the circumstances  and  in
    the light of the above it does not seem to me that any inadequacies  in
    that exercise are material  or  would  lead  to  a  different  decision
    arising for  the  real  crux  of  the  matter  was  whether  there  are
    exceptional and compelling circumstances.

9.   In the  circumstances,  I  do  not  find  the  Original  Tribunal  made
    material errors of law in the  assessment  of  the  evidence  that  was
    provided.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 12 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 12 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

