

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal number: AA/09048/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On September 30, 2016             |On October 5, 2016             |
|                                  |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                 MOHAMED [B]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Medley-Daley (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Mr Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, citizen of Algeria, presented submissions to  remain  on
    October 18, 2011. The respondent refused this application  on  June  1,
    2015 and the appellant appealed on June 15, 2015 under section 82(1) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The appeal was heard by Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McClure (hereinafter referred to as "the Judge") on  February  5,  2016
    and in a decision promulgated on February 19,  2016  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant appealed the article 8 ECHR decision  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McCarthy on  March  15,  2016.  Permission  was  granted  because  when
    considering Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act the Judge also  had  regard
    to factors in Section 117B(1) to (5).  In  light  of  the  decision  of
    Treebhawon and others  (section  117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT  674  this  was
    arguably an error in law.

 4. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 5.  Mr  Medley-Daley  adopted  the  findings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Treebhawon and submitted that the Court  of  Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 in paragraphs [17] to [20] endorsed this  approach.




 6. The Judge had accepted there was a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    between the appellant and his step-child. The Judge did not resolve the
    issue of the reasonableness of the child leaving the United Kingdom and
    in particular whether it was reasonable to expect a British/EU child to
    leave the United Kingdom.

 7. Mr Bates noted the Judge  was  sympathetic  to  the  situation  but  he
    concluded that Section 117B(6) was not to be dealt with on its own  but
    was a factor that the Judge had to take into account in the appellant's
    favour. The Court of Appeal in MA had moved away from  what  the  Upper
    Tribunal stated in Treebahowan and whilst the grant of  permission  may
    have been correct at the time, the Court of Appeal had  made  it  clear
    that it was not an error to consider Section  117B(6)  alongside  other
    factors. Mr Bates referred to paragraphs [45], [47], [49] [56] and [74]
    of MA. There was no distinction drawn by the Court of Appeal between  a
    child who had been here seven years or a British child  and  the  Judge
    was entitled to have regard to the appellant's immigration history. The
    child was not being required to leave the United Kingdom as  the  child
    would remain with her mother. Any separation  would  be  temporary  and
    following the decision in R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
    separation - proportionality)  (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT  189  the  fact  the
    relationship was entered into when the appellant's  immigration  status
    was precarious was a factor to have regard to.


 8. Mr Medley-Daley responded to Mr Bates's submission by arguing there was
    no guarantee they would meet the Rules  in  the  future.  There  was  a
    strong relationship between the child and the appellant  and  therefore
    the separation would be  significant.  Although  the  appellant  had  a
    previous conviction he had only received a conditional discharge and it
    was arguable excessive weight had been attached to this.

 9. I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS ON ERROR OF LAW

10. In granting permission to  appeal  Designated  Judge  McCarthy  stated,
    "Were it not for the Upper Tribunal's decision in Treebhawon and others
    (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 I would have refused permission."


11. It therefore follows that permission was given because of that decision
    and if that decision has been overturned or "tweaked" then the question
    of whether there is an arguable error in law  falls  to  be  re-visited
    again.

12. Both representatives referred to the decision of MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 but the background to the current issue before me has  its
    foundations from the Immigration  Act  2014.  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Immigration Act  2014  provides  that  a  person  with  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a child who had lived in  the  UK
    for 7 years or more or is British will be permitted to remain in the UK
    if it would not be reasonable to expect the child to relocate.

13. In MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 the Court held that the  test  is
    the same in  all  these  different  contexts,  meaning  that  the  word
    "reasonable" involves the same assessment process. Whilst  sympathising
    with the approach taken in Treebhawon the Court of Appeal  nevertheless
    felt obliged to follow the Court of  Appeal  decision  in  MM  (Uganda)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 450.

14. In MA the Court of Appeal make it clear (paragraph [49])  that  Section
    117B(6) establishes a starting  point  that  leave  should  be  granted
    unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

15. In assessing the appellant's  appeal  the  Judge  reminded  himself  of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act and from paragraph [32]  of  his  decision
    the Judge made a number of significant findings.

16. The Judge noted:

     a. Whilst the parties claimed  to  have  been  living  together  since
        November 5, 2010 they actually moved in together into  the  current
        premises in June 2015 but between 2013 and  June  2015  they  lived
        separately.


     b. The appellant's  partner  would  not  satisfy  the  minimum  income
        requirements and therefore could not meet the Rules.


     c. The relationship was genuine and their relationship was ongoing and
        substantial. However, the relationship was started at a  time  when
        the appellant was here  unlawfully  and  precariously.  Significant
        weight should be attached to this factor.


     d. The appellant has acted as a father to his partner's  child  albeit
        between 2013 and June 2015 they were not residing  together  which,
        in the mind of the Judge, was a substantial period of time.


     e. In addition to not meeting the financial requirements the appellant
        was an overstayer and had never had leave to remain since  February
        2008.


     f. His criminal offence was modest.


     g. The prospect of the appellant being successful in applying  to  re-
        enter  would  be  very  limited.  The  prospect  of  removal  would
        interfere with family life.


     h. The appellant had not established a private life that would  engage
        article 8 ECHR.


     i. Section 55 of the 2009 Borders Act was considered and the child has
        developed a  substantial  and  significant  relationship  with  the
        appellant and although the child has lived most of  her  life  with
        her mother alone the removal of the appellant would impact  on  the
        child albeit the child would continue to remain with the mother.


     j. The appellant has not pursued his asylum claim.  Initially  he  did
        not attend his interview and at the hearing he did not  pursue  his
        protection claim. He deliberately stayed on knowing  full  well  he
        had no legal basis to be here.


     k. His relationship with his partner has to be viewed in that  context
        and it developed whilst he was here unlawfully.


     l. The child's interest is protected because she will remain with  her
        mother. Limited prospect of the appellant's partner  and  child  of
        travelling to Algeria.

17.  If  Mr  Medley-Daley's  submission  that  Section  117B(6)   overrides
    everything is correct then there would be an error. However, I  do  not
    accept that is the correct interpretation of the law. It  is  a  strong
    starting point but the Judge had regard to  this  and  then  went  onto
    consider whether  there  were  strong  arguments  that  countered  that
    starting point and  having  done  so  he  concluded  it  would  not  be
    disproportionate to refuse the application. Those arguments are set out
    above in the Judge's findings. On the basis that it was correct for the
    Judge to consider factors other than the child  was  British  and  that
    there was a genuine and subsisting relationship I am satisfied that the
    Judge was obliged to give weight to all of the matters he did.  He  was
    then required to decide whether those factors  outweighed  the  genuine
    and subsisting relationship and the fact the child was British.


18. I see no error in this approach and it may well be that if MA had  been
    out when permission was given then this  case  may  not  be  before  me
    today.

19. I therefore find no grounds to set aside the Judge's decision.


    DECISION


20.  There is no material error.  The  original  decision  stands  and  the
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                 Dated: October 5, 2016

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I uphold the original fee decision.


Signed                                  Dated: October 5, 2016

 [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
