

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09176/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 14 March 2016                              |On 1 April 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                       MISHAAL MUSKIM SHATAB AL ANIZI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr H. Sadiq, of Adam, solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes who dismissed his  appeal
      against the refusal of his  asylum  and  human  rights  claim.  As  Mr
      McVeety   recognised,   correctly   and   realistically,   that    the
      determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses  an  error  of  law
      material to the outcome, it is necessary for me to identify the nature
      of that error only briefly and to indicate the scope  of  the  hearing
      that must follow in the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The issue to be  resolved  in  this  appeal  was  a  narrow  one.  The
      appellant's claim to be an undocumented  Bidoon  from  Kuwait,  having
      been born in Magwaa  and  subsequently  lived  in  Salabiya,  also  in
      Kuwait, was rejected by the respondent who, relying  upon  a  language
      analysis report, concluded that the appellant was a citizen  of  Iraq.
      The  respondent  rejected  also  the  appellant's   account   of   his
      experiences of persecutory ill-treatment in Kuwait.


   3. In the reasons for refusal letter the respondent set out  the  reasons
      why the claim had been rejected. The respondent  accepted  that,  when
      questioned in interview the appellant's answers provided no  basis  to
      disbelieve him:

           "You were asked the major religion in Kuwait, the appearance  of
           the Kuwaiti flag, the countries that border Kuwait, the name  of
           the leader and the year he came to power and the year Kuwait was
           invaded by Iraq, which you answered correctly. In  addition  you
           were able to correctly identify the 6 provinces of  Kuwait,  the
           international dialling code for Kuwait, the currency and  public
           holidays celebrated in Kuwait"


      Despite that, the respondent observed:


           "Whilst it is noted that you were able  to  demonstrate  a  good
           knowledge of Kuwait, it is also considered that this is  generic
           information on Kuwait widely available in the public domain  and
           could be the result of living in  Kuwait  rather  than  being  a
           national thereof. It is also considered this evidence  does  not
           specifically identify you as being a Kuwaiti Bidoon:


   4. Pausing there, it might be observed that, as the respondent saw fit to
      put all of these detailed questions to the  appellant,  it  cannot  be
      thought that the accuracy of his  responses  was  immaterial,  because
      otherwise the exercise would have been futile.


   5. In respect of  her  approach  to  the  language  analysis  report  the
      respondent said this:

           "Consideration has been given to the  content  of  the  language
           analysis report, but has not been  considered  as  determinative
           without  also  considering  all  of  the   available   evidence.
           Therefore this report has  been  considered  in  line  with  the
           nationality  questions  that  you   were   asked   during   your
           substantive asylum interview."


      That suggests that the respondent took as a starting  point  that  the
      appellant had  demonstrated  a  good  knowledge  of  Kuwait  and  then
      considered whether his claim to be a  Kuwaiti  Bidoon  rather  than  a
      citizen of Iraq was displaced by the language analysis report.

   6. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan said:


           "The grounds of appeal claim that the report and other  material
           establish that Iraqi dialects can be  found  in  Kuwaiti  Arabic
           speech, arguably undermining the Judge's ultimate conclusion.


           However, arguably,  it  also  undermines  paragraph  31  of  the
           determination and the finding that: ...  on  the  basis  of  the
           unexplained elements of Iraqi Arabic... the  appellant  has  not
           proved that he is a citizen of Kuwait..."

   7. The grounds challenge also the weight given to the report, both by the
      respondent and the judge, given that the  conclusion  reached  by  the
      report was equivocal.


   8. The language analysis report addressed and considered  separately  the
      hypothesis  that  the  appellant  "belongs  to  an  Arabic  linguistic
      community that occurs in Kuwait" as the appellant claimed  to  be  the
      case and the hypothesis that  the  appellant  "belongs  to  an  Arabic
      linguistic community that occurs  in  Iraq",  which,  if  established,
      would  be  irreconcilable  with  the  appellant's  claim  to   be   an
      undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait. The conclusions  reached,  emphasised
      by repetition in bold type, were, in respect of the  first  hypothesis
      that the appellant belonged to the Kuwaiti linguistic community:


           "The language  analysis  can  neither  confirm  nor  refute  the
           hypothesis, as results obtained do not  constitute  a  basis  on
           which to assess  the  linguistic  community  as  stated  in  the
           hypothesis."


      and in respect of the second hypothesis, that the  appellant  belonged
      to an Iraqi linguistic community:


           "The  language  analysis  somewhat  suggests  that  the  results
           obtained  more  likely  than  not  are  inconsistent  with   the
           linguistic community as stated in the hypothesis."


   9. That was far from a ringing endorsement of the respondent's  suspicion
      that the  appellant  was  from  Iraq  rather  than  from  Kuwait.  The
      observation made by Judge Jordan  in  granting  permission  to  appeal
      concerning the existence of Iraqi dialects in Kuwaiti speech is  found
      at para 3.2 of the linguistic analysis report:


           "However,  some  distinctive  local  features  related  to   the
           dialects of adjacent areas of Southern Iraq are also part of the
           Kuwaiti dialect..."


  10. In his submissions,  Mr  Sadiq  referred  also  to  page  C24  of  the
      respondent's bundle prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing where
      there is further evidence of a Mesopotamian dialects found in  certain
      areas of Kuwait.


  11. Indeed, at page 12 of the language analysis report, the conclusion  in
      respect of the second hypothesis was expressed at the lowest level  of
      certainty that ranged between 0, +1, +2 and +3. Given the satisfactory
      answers  given  to  the  nationality  questions,  plainly  a   careful
      examination was required of the detailed reasons given in  the  report
      for reaching that somewhat guarded conclusion. It can be seen from the
      report, considered as a whole,  that  deviations  were  detected  from
      expected linguistic responses in the assessment of both hypotheses and
      it can be seen that, in respect of the first, that the  appellant  was
      from an  Arab  linguistic  community  that  occurs  in  Al-Magwa,  the
      appellant's claimed place of birth in Kuwait, under a heading "General
      Comments" the report recorded that:


           "According to the analyst, the interviewee's use  of  Arabic  is
           consistent with that of a native speaker."


  12. My observations do not constitute, and are not intended to be, a  full
      judicial assessment of  this  evidence  but  are  intended  simply  to
      explain the obvious need, apparent of the face of the  report,  for  a
      rigorous examination of this key evidence,  assessment  of  which  was
      pivotal to the outcome of the appeal.


  13. The findings of the judge begin at paragraph 13 of his  decision.   He
      commenced by saying:

           "In the broadest terms, the account given by  the  appellant  is
           capable of occurring in Kuwait. That is not to say that  I  find
           the Appellant's account credible;  simply  that  the  background
           evidence raises the possibility that it is so.


           The Respondent drew the conclusion  that  the  Appellant  was  a
           citizen of  Iraq  substantially  on  the  basis  of  a  language
           analysis report produced by a firm called Verified."


      The judge noted that:


           "The report is equivocal, one of  the  two  analysts  concluding
           that he could "neither confirm nor refute the  hypothesis"  that
           the Appellant "belongs to an Arabic  linguistic  community  that
           occurs in Iraq."


      It is notable that the judge  did  not  reproduce  the  whole  of  the
      sentence in which that phrase occurred, ending with a full  stop  what
      should have been a comma, and omitted the final, qualifying, phrase:


           "... as the results obtained do not constitute a basis on  which
           to assess the linguistic community as stated in the hypothesis."

  14. Similarly, when considering the second hypothesis, that the  appellant
      was from an Arab linguistic community in Iraq, the judge recorded  the
      conclusion that the results obtained:


           "... are more likely than not  consistent  with  the  linguistic
           community as stated in the hypothesis."


      But there is no indication at all that he had regard to the extent  to
      which the  second  hypothesis  was  considered  to  be  undermined  by
      linguistic deviations from what was expected  of  a  person  from  the
      Iraqi linguistic community. A superficial examination of that part  of
      the report suggests that there were at least 8 such deviations and, at
      one point of this part of the report it is recorded that:


           "Syntactic dialectic features noted in the person's  speech  are
           partly  consistent  with  and  partly  inconsistent  with  Iraqi
           Arabic."


  15. None of this has been discussed in the decision of the judge.  Nor  is
      there any indication that the judge  took  account  of  the  level  of
      certainty  with  which  the  conclusions  in  respect  of  the  second
      hypothesis were expressed. The judge noted that:


           "What is unquestionably the case is  that  both  analysts  found
           significant elements of Iraqi Arabic in the Appellant's speech."




      And  the  judge  said  of  the  appellant's  correct  answers  to  the
      nationality questions put to him in interview:


           "I find that his performance points towards a personal knowledge
           of that country rather than research  for  the  purposes  of  an
           interview."


      But as the judge  did  not  accept  to  be  credible  the  appellant's
      evidence of his journey to the United Kingdom, in particular  that  he
      did not know until shortly before his departure  that  he  was  to  be
      brought to the United Kingdom, the judge  reached  these  conclusions,
      set out at paragraph 31 of his decision:

           "The Appellant's speech has been found to  include  elements  of
           both Kuwaiti and Iraqi Arabic. The presence of Iraqi Arabic  has
           not been explained by authoritative objective evidence.  I  find
           that the Appellant has a level of knowledge of Kuwait consistent
           with his living or having lived there.  For  the  reasons  given
           above, I find that the Appellant has not been truthful about the
           manner in which he left Kuwait. He did not do so using an agent.
           His lack of candour in respect of these matters leads me to  the
           conclusion that he has not proved to the lower standard that  he
           is an undocumented Bidoun. On the basis of unexplained  elements
           of Iraqi Arabic in his speech, I find that the Appellant has not
           proved that he is a citizen of Kuwait.


           I find, on the balance of probabilities... that the Appellant is
           a citizen of Iraq who has lived and  worked  in  Kuwait.  Having
           reached this conclusion, I reject the  Appellant's  evidence  of
           events hat he has attributed to his claimed ethnicity ..."


  16. However, as we have seen, there was some  evidence  before  the  judge
      that did explain the presence of Iraqi linguistic tracts in the speech
      of a person living in Kuwait:


           "However,  some  distinctive  local  features  related  to   the
           dialects of adjacent areas of Sothern Iraq are also part of  the
           Kuwaiti dialect..."

  17. Drawing all of this together, I arrive at a clear conclusion that  the
      assessment of the evidence is legally flawed for a number of  reasons.
      First, the decision of the judge does not disclose  that  an  adequate
      assessment of the language report has been  carried  out.  It  is  not
      apparent that the judge has appreciated the guarded level of certainty
      expressed in the report, nor that he has had adequate  regard  to  the
      extent to which overall conclusions were qualified by deviations  from
      that which was expected in linguistic terms. There  is  no  indication
      that he has recognised that the results of the assessment of the first
      hypothesis were qualified by a statement he omitted from the  sentence
      reproduced in his decision,  that  being  that  the  results  "do  not
      constitute a basis on which to  assess  the  linguistic  community  as
      stated in the hypothesis".  Further,  a  key  aspect  of  the  judge's
      reasoning,  that  the  presence  of  Iraqi  dialectic  tracts  in  the
      appellant's speech went unexplained, was a finding uninformed  by  the
      evidence mentioned above.


  18. It is clear that the  conclusions  of  the  language  analysis  report
      cannot be regarded to be determinative. Therefore, what was  required,
      and what is absent from the decision under challenge, was  a  detailed
      examination of the evidence as a whole, not limited  to  the  language
      report and the appellant's responses  to  the  nationality  questions.
      There is a need to engage with the evidence of  fact  offered  by  the
      appellant concerning his account of  his  experiences  in  Kuwait  and
      reach clear credibility findings, in the light of, or informed by, the
      language report and the correctly answered nationality questions.

  19. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that the judge made  an  error
      of law in his assessment of the evidence  that  was  material  to  the
      outcome so that his decision cannot stand.

  20. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.
      No findings of fact made by Judge Heynes are to be preserved.


                               Signed              [pic]
                               Date:    14 March 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


