
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(First Tier Tribunal and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: AA/09040/2013


                        THE FIRST TIER TRIBUNAL ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 May 2014                                 |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                                     RM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr J Kirk, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the appellant, who is a  citizen  of  Iran
    against a determination of the First-tier Tribunal rejecting her appeal
    against a refusal of asylum and holding that there was no  infringement
    of her human rights under Articles 2 or 3 of the  European  Convention.
    In the course of dismissing  the  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection the judge made substantial adverse findings of  credibility,
    having had the advantage, which this Tribunal does not have, of  seeing
    and hearing the appellant give evidence.

 2. The appellant's case is that she worked  as  a  midwife  in  a  private
    clinic in a surgery in Iran.  In 2010 she had the grave  misfortune  to
    have been raped by an unknown assailant.   This  traumatic  experience,
    amongst other things, caused her  to  suffer  from  depression.   As  a
    result of some friendships that she made as a result of  the  treatment
    that she obtained for her depression from a  psychologist,  she  became
    politically active. She started doing work in a deprived  area  of  the
    country assisting other women  who  had  been  abused  by  men  and  in
    particular helping them if they became pregnant, on occasion performing
    abortions.

 3. Abortion in those circumstances is illegal in Iran and if the  claimant
    had been discovered carrying out these abortions the consequences would
    have been serious for her, and indeed serious for those upon  whom  she
    performed the abortions.  For that reason she was  careful  to  conceal
    her activities from her employers at the government health  centre  and
    from other people who  were  aware  of  what  she  did  for  a  living.
    Nevertheless it was her case that one of her friends  who  had  similar
    concerns and similar political goals was planning to write  an  article
    or a report about the abuse of  women  in  Iran  which  would  be  read
    overseas, and bring  that  problem  to  the  attention  of  the  United
    Nations.  In support of that aim and objective the appellant was  asked
    by the friend to provide details to the friend, in trust, of particular
    cases that she had dealt with.  She agreed to do so, and in a period of
    some six months, whenever she met  this  lady  she  handed  over  notes
    relating to cases with which she had dealt.  Those notes identified the
    patients upon whom the operations had been performed,  with  dates  and
    details. The one thing that was apparently missing from  them  was  the
    appellant's own name.

 4. It was after the appellant had come on leave to the United  Kingdom  to
    visit her  sister  and  her  children  in  October  2011  that  trouble
    apparently blew up.  The appellant had obtained  an  extension  of  her
    leave.  Although there was no written evidence of this, on her  account
    she had phoned somebody at the health centre and spoken to  the  senior
    supervisor who had informally given her permission to stay on in the UK
    a little longer, and she also made arrangements with a locum  to  cover
    her shifts. It was while she was making these arrangements for extended
    absence that she discovered from the locum that a  letter  had  arrived
    from the governing board, the General  Medical  Council  for  State-run
    healthcare in Iran, addressed to the  appellant.   The  locum  had  not
    opened that letter and the appellant did not ask her to do  so  because
    such letters were quite common and she did not think anything of it  at
    the time, but subsequently  she  received  an  email  from  her  cousin
    stating that there was a second letter from the General Medical Council
    which had arrived at the health centre.  She asked her cousin  to  open
    both the letters and discovered that the first one had requested her to
    report to the General Medical Council, without giving  a  reason.   The
    second one had said that she was to report to the  disciplinary  branch
    of the General Medical Council, again without giving any reason.

 5. Neither of those letters was produced  in  evidence.   The  explanation
    that was given was that there was a danger (or it  was  perceived  that
    there would be a  danger)  that  those  documents  would  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities in  Iran  were  they  to  be  scanned  and
    emailed in the way that other documents that were produced in  evidence
    were sent.

 6. The appellant's version of events  was  that  after  this,  some  plain
    clothes officers  from  the  Iranian  intelligence  services  had  come
    looking  for  the  appellant  at  the  clinic.  She  alleged  that   it
    subsequently transpired that some of her friends had been arrested  and
    detained, including the lady to whom she is said to have  supplied  the
    details  of  the  illegal  abortions.   In  consequence  of  that,  the
    appellant became frightened.  She found out that members of the  police
    or plain clothes members of the police  or  intelligence  services  had
    taken computer evidence, and there had been alleged  threats  to  other
    members of her family. Her father came over to the United Kingdom for a
    family conference as to what to do and on his return to Iran he and her
    mother were detained by the authorities, but managed  to  obtain  their
    release by raising money for suretyship. In consequence of all of these
    developments she claimed asylum, but was refused.

 7. That was the account that she gave to the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,
    and he disbelieved it.  The determination goes into considerable detail
    as to why the judge came to the conclusions that he did.  He made fact-
    findings that she was indeed an Iranian citizen who  had  worked  as  a
    midwife at a government health centre and in a private clinic, but  she
    did not carry out illegal abortions in Iran and  she  did  not  provide
    information regarding those illegal abortions to the friend to  use  as
    material in a publication or report.  He also found as a fact that  no-
    one associated with her had been arrested in Iran  in  connection  with
    illegal abortions or political activity aimed at the promotion  of  the
    rights of abused women, and that she was not at risk of prosecution  or
    of ill-treatment if she returned to Iran.  She  had  not  met  the  low
    threshold for showing a well-founded fear of persecution for a  Refugee
    Convention reason.

 8. It is a careful and  well-reasoned  determination.   Nevertheless,  the
    grounds of appeal seek to challenge it on a number of bases, the  first
    being that a finding made by the judge that is said to have been at the
    heart of the criticism of the appellant's credibility  was  "perverse".
    In order for a fact-finding or any type of finding to  be  perverse  it
    has to be outwith the reasonable range of determinations  or  decisions
    that the decision-maker is entitled to reach, and therefore that  is  a
    strong criticism to make or to sustain.   The  finding  that  is  under
    challenge is in paragraph 21 of the determination, and it is the  first
    ground on  which  the  plausibility  of  the  appellant's  account  was
    challenged by the judge.  He says that there  are  inconsistencies  and
    implausibilities in the appellant's account  of  carrying  out  illegal
    abortions.  He then sets out what that account is and he says:

         "However, there are inconsistencies in her account because although
         she accepted that there were  substantial  risks  in  carrying  out
         illegal abortions which attracted severe penalties and although she
         undertook the procedures in secret she was prepared to provide  her
         psychologist friend with detailed information regarding  the  cases
         she had been concerned with.  Her name may not have  been  supplied
         with the  information  handed  over  but  nevertheless  I  find  it
         inconsistent and implausible that the appellant who  said  she  was
         aware of the risk she was taking  by  performing  abortions  should
         provide details of her work which she well knew might be used in  a
         publication.  Even if she was not named as a source of  information
         there was a real risk that her identity  would  get  known  to  the
         authorities because of the other detailed information  provided  by
         her regarding the abortion."

 9. Mr Kirk submitted that that finding was a perverse finding because  the
    underlying assumption behind it was  that  nobody  in  the  appellant's
    position would ever  put  themselves  at  risk.  Many  asylum  seekers,
    because of their political activities or their other activities, do run
    such a risk  and  do  so  consciously.   Therefore  he  said  that  the
    statement was wholly illogical, and that it taints  the  whole  of  the
    rest of the determination.  That was the  basis  on  which  the  single
    judge of the Upper Tribunal gave permission to appeal. However, in  our
    judgment there is no perversity in the finding, because the  flaw  that
    Mr Kirk identifies is not even present in paragraph 21.  On our reading
    , the judge is saying no more than that there is an illogicality or  an
    inconsistency between, on the one hand, taking all kinds  of  steps  to
    ensure that one's activities, the abortions themselves, are kept secret
    and to avoid those matters coming to the attention of the  authorities,
    whilst on the other hand, and at the  same  time,  allegedly  providing
    such substantial details of what was going on, including  names,  dates
    and so forth, to a friend for the express purposes of publication.  The
    two do not sit well together.  The judge might equally well  have  said
    that the whole of the story  in  relation  to  the  provision  of  that
    information to the friend for publication was  manifestly  implausible.
    That would not have been a perverse finding, given that if she did have
    the objectives she had stated, it would have always been  open  to  the
    appellant to have anonymised the  names  of  the  people  on  whom  she
    performed these abortions, and it would not have been necessary for the
    purposes for which the information was allegedly required to have given
    such detail, even to a trusted friend.  Be that as it may, the findings
    that the judge made as to the inconsistencies and  implausibilities  in
    the appellant's story are well within the range of findings  that  were
    open to him on the evidence before him, and there really is nothing  to
    say that there is an error of law, let alone a  material  one,  in  his
    fact-findings in that particular regard.

10. Ground 2 relates to a finding by the judge that it was inconsistent and
    implausible that the appellant would have been granted an extension  to
    her leave by the health centre where she worked at a time when she  had
    been sent a letter by the General Medical  Council  requesting  her  to
    attend their offices.  That finding appears  in  paragraph  22  of  the
    determination, and we accept that it appears to be based upon a factual
    premise which was not necessarily made out, namely that those who  were
    working at the government health centre were aware of the fact that the
    letter  required  her  to  report  to  the  General   Medical   Council
    headquarters when on her own evidence  it  appeared  to  be  a  routine
    letter from the General Medical Council and it was not in fact  opened.
    However, this is just one of many adverse findings that were made. Even
    if some criticism could be levelled at the judge in  relation  to  that
    matter, as well as the matter which is criticised in ground 3 to  which
    we will come, they are minor aspects of what is otherwise  a  carefully
    reasoned decision, which even absent those findings would be  justified
    in terms of the appellant's credibility.

11. The third ground relates to a sentence at the end of the same paragraph
    in  which  there  is  said  to  be  an  inconsistency  which  was   not
    satisfactorily explained by the appellant between what she said in  her
    asylum interview (which was that she had been living alone since  2008)
    and what she said in her witness statement  about  whether  anyone  had
    been to "our" house, which suggested that she was not living  alone  at
    that time.  It said that it was procedurally unfair for the  judge  not
    to have asked the appellant about  this  inconsistency,  before  making
    adverse findings on the back  of  it.  However,  she  was  representing
    herself at the time, and again it is not something which is  really  at
    the heart of the findings against her in terms of the  plausibility  of
    her account.  Whether she was living alone or living with somebody else
    at a relevant time does not really have very much impact one way or the
    other on whether or not she had a reasonable fear that she was going to
    be subject  to  persecution  on  account  of  the  activities  she  was
    allegedly carrying on in the clinic and the information  she  allegedly
    supplied to her friend.

12. Although Mr Kirk focused on paragraph 21 of the determination, the real
    heart of the findings made against the appellant is  in  paragraph  24,
    and that relates to the two letters from the General Medical Council to
    which reference has already been made and the fact that they  were  not
    produced in evidence at the hearing.  Ground 4 of the grounds of appeal
    challenged  these  findings  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge.   In
    particular it is said that the judge was  simply  making  a  subjective
    evaluation of what he would normally  expect  to  happen,  rather  than
    proper findings about what can objectively be ruled  out  as  unlikely.
    We reject that criticism.  The way in which the judge expresses himself
    is impeccable.  He states that:

         "It is also surprising that the two letters sent to  the  appellant
         by the General Medical  Council  and  received  at  the  government
         health centre were not adduced as evidence at  the  hearing.   They
         would have provided good independent evidence that the  authorities
         were interested in her, and the second letter in  particular  would
         have provided important evidence that she was  required  to  attend
         the disciplinary branch of the General  Medical  Council.   At  the
         hearing it was said that the letters  could  not  be  sent  to  the
         United Kingdom because all post from Iran was checked.  However, at
         the hearing the appellant said that the statements  of  her  father
         and her cousin had been scanned and sent to the United  Kingdom  by
         email, and it is reasonable to conclude that the letters, which  it
         is also reasonable to conclude that the authorities would wish  the
         appellant to see, could have been sent in  the  same  manner.   The
         absence of this independent evidence undermines the credibility  of
         the appellant's account."

13. Mr Kirk submitted that that reasoning did not adequately explain why it
    was that  the  judge  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant's
    explanation should be rejected.   He  pointed  to  the  fact  that  the
    letters would have at least borne some kind of crest or symbol to  show
    that they had been sent by the General  Medical  Council,  but  as  the
    Tribunal pointed out in response to that submission, the way  in  which
    they would be sent would be by way of attachment to an email and it was
    only if those attachments were opened that one would see any such crest
    or symbol.  In any event, the general point that is made by  the  judge
    is one that has considerable force and obviously is  not  one  that  is
    open to criticism.  The grounds in this regard really amount to  little
    more than a disagreement with the  way  in  which  a  point  was  found
    against the appellant.

14. The fifth ground relates to a finding tagged onto the end of  paragraph
    24 of the determination, that it was implausible and inconsistent  with
    the  appellant's  claim  to  fear  criminal  prosecution  in  Iran  for
    performing illegal abortions that although it is claimed that  security
    officers have harassed her parents, no warrant has been issued  or  any
    criminal proceedings started against her in  that  regard.   We  accept
    that there is some force in the criticism made by Mr Kirk, in that  the
    finding assumes that a warrant would be issued against  the  appellant,
    whereas there was objective empirical evidence that in Iran very little
    respect is given to the legal requirements for the issue  of  warrants,
    and that the Iranian authorities in general fail to comply with  proper
    procedures and simply send people around to pick  up  suspects  and  to
    take them away to  prison  or  for  interrogation,  frequently  without
    informing  them  of  what  the  charges  are,  and  certainly   without
    necessarily doing the relevant paperwork.

15. However, even though that point may not have been  a  justified  ground
    for criticism of the appellant's case, it is  described  as  the  final
    point in the determination, and in our  judgment  there  is  more  than
    sufficient material in its absence to warrant the adverse  findings  on
    credibility. Mr Kirk submitted that we  should  be  very  careful  when
    speculating as to the extent to which particular points would have  had
    a bearing on the outcome, and what difference it would  make  if  those
    findings had not been made. However we are satisfied, looking  at  this
    overall very careful determination, that the small points in  which  it
    can be said with justification that the  Immigration  Judge  fell  into
    error on findings that were adverse to the appellant made  no  material
    difference, and could have made no material difference to  the  outcome
    of his determination, which was that she was unable to satisfy the  low
    threshold either for asylum or humanitarian protection, or to show that
    there is a real risk that Articles 2 or 3 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights would be engaged on her return.

16. For all the above reasons, and despite the way in which the matter  was
    attractively presented before us by Mr Kirk, we dismiss this appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date


Mrs Justice Andrews


