

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09916/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 22nd May 2013                            |On: 3 June 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                          sathish martin silvestar

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Philip Mangion of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Mr Silvestar claimed asylum immediately upon arrival here in  September
    2012, but was refused leave to enter the United Kingdom on 16th October
    2012, as his asylum claim had been refused.  An appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was dismissed after a hearing before Judge Sacks on  29th
    January 2013, but permission to appeal against  that  decision  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge Froom, who was concerned  that  the
    judge had apparently considered a medical report by Dr Sykes only after
    making up his mind about the appellant's credibility.  Such an approach
    was held to be erroneous by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367.

2.    When the matter came before me today, there was no  appearance  by  or
    on behalf  of  the  appellant.   A  telephone  call  was  made  to  TTS
    Solicitors of Walthamstow, who represent the appellant, and  they  said
    that they had made no plans  to  attend  the  hearing.   There  was  no
    attendance by the appellant either, although notice of the hearing  was
    posted to his home address in Stockton-on-Tees on 25th April 2013.   In
    those circumstances I exercised my discretion under the Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules  to  proceed  in  the  appellant's  absence.   I  heard
    submissions from a  Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Mangion,  after  which  I
    decided that there had been no error of law on the part of Judge Sacks.
     I give my reasons below.

3.   Although he only identified 'the  Mibanga  point'  as  arguable,  Judge
    Froom gave permission on all the grounds submitted by  TTS  Solicitors.
    Those other grounds have no merit.  They assert that the judge gave no,
    or no adequate, reasons for his findings, but  that  is  not  so.   For
    example, they say that Judge Sacks  make  no  finding  on  whether  the
    appellant's brothers are members of the LTTE, but in fact  Judge  Sacks
    writes "I can find no evidence to satisfy me that  this  Appellant  has
    relatives namely his brothers who are members of the LTTE."

4.   The Mibanga point, on the other hand,  looks  a  strong  one  at  first
    blush.  After giving many reasons, at paragraph 18(a) and 18(b) of  his
    determination, for not finding the appellant's  account  credible,  the
    judge turns at 18(c) to deal with the medical report.   Having  already
    found the appellant not to be credible "in respect of  his  association
    with the LTTE in Sri Lanka,  his  claimed  detention  and  escape  from
    detention, and as to how he eventually leaves Sri Lanka and as  to  his
    living in South America",  he  cannot  rely  on  Dr  Sykes'  report  as
    supporting the appellant's account.  Such an approach  would,  in  most
    cases, be erroneous.  But in the instant case, it is not.

5.   As Judge Sacks correctly records, Dr Sykes describes a pattern of  some
    14  burn  marks  on  the  appellant's  back,  which  must   have   been
    deliberately inflicted at or around the same time.  They could not have
    been caused by accident or disease.  Dr Sykes acknowledges that  it  is
    impossible to age these scars accurately, but thinks they are likely to
    be more than two years old but less than five years old.  The  physical
    examination took place on 11th January 2013.  The appellant  says  that
    he was burnt with a heated iron implement while he was detained by  the
    Sri Lankan Army between May and December  2009.   But  the  time  frame
    offered by Dr Sykes means that the scars could date back to before  the
    period of the appellant's detention.  They could equally  date  to  the
    period after the appellant says that he escaped from detention and  was
    living in Vavuniya and  Colombo.   In  August  or  September  2010  the
    appellant says that he went to South America, so the scars  might  have
    been inflicted there (albeit there is absolutely nothing to corroborate
    the appellant's account that he was ever in South America).

6.   At all events, while a pattern of deliberately inflicted burn marks  is
    consistent with the appellant's account of detention by the Army,  they
    would be equally consistent with being inflicted at another  place,  at
    another time and for another reason.  With all the other reasons  which
    the judge had for rejecting the entirety of the appellant's account, it
    cannot be said that the point in his determination at which  the  judge
    dealt with the medical report  made  any  material  difference  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.  The judge went on to give  cogent  reasons  why
    the appellant would not be at risk on return as a failed asylum seeker,
    and indeed those reasons have not been  challenged.   Accordingly,  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination must stand.




     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               22nd May 2013



