

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09469/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 29th July 2014                             |On 25th November 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     S F
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr O'Ceallaigh instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors.

For the Respondent: Mr K Hibbs - Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. On 23rd May 2014 the  Upper  Tribunal  heard  a  challenge  to  the
         determination of the First-tier Tribunal in this matter and found a
         material error of law had been made such that  the  merits  of  the
         appeal needed  to  be  re-considered.  A  number  of  findings  are
         preserved as follows:


         i.   The Appellant's wife submitted a false document in support  of
             an application for a visit visa.


         ii.  The Appellants wife was living at [  ]  Lahore  prior  to  her
             arrival in the United Kingdom in 2006.


         iii. The Appellant's wife's problems with her parents, her in-laws,
             brother in law and Gogi's gang are all made up.


         iv.  The Appellants wife made a false claim in  a  false  name  and
             date of birth and had delayed her application for asylum.


         v.   The Appellants  wife  has  made  up  a  story  which  she  has
             memorised.


         vi.  The Appellants wife's claim is a fabrication designed to  gain
             entry to the United Kingdom.


         vii. In relation to correspondence from Mr Anjum - the evidence  is
             not  significant  and  it  could  have  been  produced  before
             Immigration Judge Britton. The evidence is not new but  merely
             purported corroboration of matters upon  which  the  Appellant
             has already been disbelieved.


     2. It was accepted by the advocates that as the date of the hearing is
        after 28th July 2014 the provisions of section 19  Immigration  Act
        2014 apply to the case.


     3. The Appellant seeks protection on the basis of an alleged breach of
        his rights under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR if returned.



Background


     4. The Appellant was born in Pakistan on 13th March 1977.  He  arrived
        in the United Kingdom with a valid visit visa on 12th May 2006  and
        was later joined by his wife and daughter in  September  2006.  The
        Appellant was a dependant in his wife's asylum claim  which  failed
        as the account was not accepted as being credible,  as  illustrated
        above. On 13th June 2011 the Appellant claimed asylum  in  his  own
        right, which was  refused,  and  his  appeal  against  the  refusal
        dismissed. Further  submissions  followed  supported  by  a  report
        written by Ms Uzma Moeen which were  refused.  An  application  for
        judicial review resulted in the need for the Respondent to consider
        the submissions further, resulting in an appealable decision  being
        made.


     5. The core of the claim is that the Appellant married out  of  choice
        and contrary to the wishes of his wife's parents. They believed she
        had been kidnapped and went to the  Appellant's  home  looking  for
        her. When he showed them the marriage certificate they became angry
        and had to be forced to leave as a result of neighbours being woken
        by the commotion.  The  Appellant's  wife's  parents  attended  the
        following morning with the police and again were shown the marriage
        certificate after which her father threatened  to  kill  the  whole
        family. Neither the Appellant nor his wife were  in  the  house  at
        that time and claimed to have  been  warned  by  relatives  not  to
        return to the family home. The couple went to live with friends and
        the Appellant claims he went into hiding as his wife's  father  had
        obtained a fatwa that the marriage was illegal which the  Appellant
        claims was published  in  a  religious  magazine,  along  with  his
        photograph and details of the case. During Eid 2000 the  Appellants
        wife's parent's wanted reconciliation and so he  dropped  his  wife
        off at her parent's house. When he returned  three  days  later  he
        claims the family would not let him see her and  a  friend  advised
        him that armed men were sitting in the  room  of  her  house.   The
        Appellant claims that he was kidnapped and held for 4-5 days to try
        and force him to end the relationship.  The Appellant  also  claims
        he agreed to their demands in order  to  be  released.  His  wife's
        family pressurised her into divorcing him  but  at  the  court  she
        testified against her parents and the judge made an order to  allow
        the couple to live together.


     6. Religious figures were notified that the marriage was  illegal  and
        pressurised the Appellant's parents  who  asked  the  Appellant  to
        leave. He claims his brother had links with a known gangster  named
        Gogi Butt. The couple left Lahore and moved to Peshawar where  they
        stayed for approximately 18 months and where his wife gave birth to
        their child. The Appellant  claims  that  during  this  period  the
        situation became worse as a result of which in 2003 he filed a case
        to obtain a  protection  order  from  the  court.  He  claims  this
        resulted in the Islamic extremists who had issued the earlier fatwa
        becoming angry.  In  November  2003  the  Appellant  and  his  wife
        returned to Lahore and whilst his wife was in a  car  his  brother,
        the gangster, and members of the latter's gang fired  at  the  car.
        His wife escaped and was taken to safety  but  was  again  approach
        when the same men tried to grab her daughter. The couple then  fled
        to Multan where they lived for a further 18 -24  months  and  where
        they experienced no problems.  The visit visa's were obtained after
        which the family came to the United Kingdom.


     7. The Appellant relies on his witness statement dated 8 November 2013
        in which he states he corrects various alleged  errors  arising  in
        the reasons for refusal letter.


     8. In his oral evidence he stated his wife had only  returned  to  her
        parents once after the offer of reconciliation and when asked where
        this was and at what address, other than stating it was the address
        his wife lived at prior to the marriage, he claimed  not  to  know.
        The Appellant was questioned about the address his wife is said  to
        have lived at in Lahore which was stated to be the one she lived at
        in 2006.  The Appellant denied this but thereafter was referred  to
        a document on page N9 of the Respondents bundle which is a copy  of
        an order of the Family Court in Lahore, which  is  described  as  a
        Suit for Maintenance, and which shows his wife's address as being [
        ] M Road, Lahore. At page N1 is a copy of an affidavit sworn by his
        wife giving her address as [  ]  A  Road,  Lahore.   The  Appellant
        denied going to this address and claimed the Court  had  taken  the
        address from the registration card. The Appellant was asked how  he
        received correspondence from the Court if he had not lived there to
        which he claims he went to the court to obtain a  protection  order
        and that the court had given him that in the protection  order.  It
        was the Appellant evidence that he and his wife only visited her in-
        laws once whereas the document at N16 indicates that the  Appellant
        and his wife were allowed  to  visit  the  house  'in  an  ordinary
        manner' and that the Appellant and his wife had been  visiting  her
        parents  frequently.  This  was  denied  by   the   Appellant.   No
        satisfactory explanation could  be  offered  by  the  Appellant  in
        relation to this contradiction.


     9. The Appellant was asked about  the  court  order  obtained  in  the
        proceedings between him and his wife, and what  the  terms  of  the
        order were which led to his wife returning  to  him,  to  which  he
        claimed that his in-laws had submitted against  him  and  his  wife
        came to  court  and  said  things  were  not  as  they  have  said.
        Initially she was questioned and the family  wanted  the  court  to
        take his wife from him although his wife came to court and told the
        court that she lived with him happily and so  the  court  gave  her
        permission to live with her husband and they left  court  together.
        The Appellant was asked whether he had paid any money to  his  wife
        which he denied. When  asked  whether  as  a  result  of  his  wife
        returning he had to pay money to his wife or in-laws he claimed any
        money to pay was  maintenance/spending  money.  The  Appellant  was
        asked whether the court ordered him to  pay  his  wife  2000RS  per
        calendar month which he claimed to have no recollection of  despite
        the fact that the terms of the order to be found at page  N17  show
        that compromise was affected between the parties  as  a  result  of
        which the  sum  of  2000RS  per  month  was  fixed  as  maintenance
        allowance for the Petitioner (the Appellant's  wife)  and  she  re-
        establish herself in her husband's household.


    10. The Appellants own affidavit at page N3 also alleges that when  the
        Appellant's wife went to her parents she took with her all the gold
        ornaments which does not appear to be the actions of a person  just
        visiting after an indication of a desire to reconcile made  by  her
        parents.


    11. The Appellant was asked about the periods of  separation  from  his
        wife but claimed he could not recall how long such period  was.  He
        was therefore referred to document at page N3  of  the  Respondents
        bundle in which it is stated in an  affidavit  that  the  cause  of
        action arose in the month of March 2000 when the  Appellant's  wife
        left him and he requested her to return and to the fact she  agreed
        to return a week before the date of the document which was sworn on
        18th December  2000.  The  Appellant  claimed  confusion  over  the
        document and that his mind would  not  shed  light  on  the  matter
        although he agreed that he had signed the document, which  was  his
        affidavit, for the use of the court.  It therefore appears  at  the
        document is genuine, there being no suggestion it is false  or  has
        been falsified, and is evidence of a  separation  for  nine  months
        much longer than of the Appellant suggested in his core  claim.  It
        was put to the Appellant that his claim his wife had been away  for
        less than a month is affected  by  such  a  significant  difference
        between the claims but he was not able to recall this or remember.


    12. The Appellant was asked about the medical  report  which  does  not
        claim he has any problems recalling evidence, although he stated as
        a result of his problems sometimes his brain does not work and  his
        memory was not the same.


    13. The Appellant was asked when he was detained which he stated was by
        Islamic people at the same time as he went to the 'in  laws'.  When
        asked how long for he claimed it was 2 to 3  days  and  when  asked
        whether he was sure if he could recall this he stated  he  was  not
        saying it is true but that he was in a  dark  room  with  his  eyes
        covered but it could have been less and could have been  more.  The
        Appellant was asked  why  he  had  not  provided  this  information
        previously and again claimed not to be able to recall.  It was  put
        to the Appellant that in his answer at interview to question 64, in
        relation to his claim to be detained, he did not state  it  was  by
        Islamic people even though he now claims to  have  known  who  they
        were.  The Appellant accepted he did not report the matter  to  the
        police but instead went to court.


    14. The Appellant claimed to no longer own his estate  agency  business
        in Lahore yet also claiming not to have sold it  although  he  also
        claimed not to know who was running it. He claims  not  to  receive
        income from it and not to receive any money from agricultural land,
        although when asked whether he owns land in his name he claimed not
        to know although it was in his name in the past.  When  pressed  on
        the point the Appellant's response was to state  that  he  did  not
        know anything about land if it is in his name as he has nothing  to
        do with it and has no income from it.


    15. The Appellant was asked whether he worked at his estate  agency  to
        the point of leaving Pakistan, which he claimed he did not from the
        time he got married to the time of coming to the United Kingdom  as
        he had been in hiding; although  when  he  was  asked  how  he  was
        therefore able  to  provide  evidence  of  payslips  for  his  visa
        application he claimed his agent dealt with this and  that  he  did
        not himself know what documentation had been used. This response is
        contradicted by evidence given in his appeal against the refusal of
        visit visas (VV/*****/2005 and VV/*****/2005) by the Appellant  and
        his wife against the refusal of  entry  clearance  dated  the  14th
        January 2005 where the judge  who  heard  and  allowed  the  appeal
        noticed a number of documents confirming substantial  assets  being
        available to the Appellant in Pakistan and the fact that the  first
        appellant is a businessman who  has  a  monthly  income  of  82,000
        rupees, who owns agricultural land, and who is paying the  cost  of
        the trip.  It is noted in paragraph 10 of  the  determination  that
        the grounds of appeal claim the Appellant is running a business  as
        a property investor in which he is a very  successful  businessman.
        The Appellant is said to belong to an  agriculturalist  family  and
        has agricultural  land  worth  14  million  rupees  from  which  he
        receives a handsome income. There is no evidence of the disposal of
        such assets which casts further doubt on  the  credibility  of  the
        Appellants account.


    16. The Appellant was also asked  about  the  timing  of  some  of  the
        documentary evidence relied upon in newspaper articles.


    17. The Appellant confirmed that prior to coming to the United  Kingdom
        his daughter had asthma for which she  received  treatment  in  the
        United Kingdom by way of a spray. The Appellant claims  not  to  be
        able to recall the exact period of his current separation from  his
        wife and claimed to have last had the children  the  day  prior  to
        coming to court.  There are three children born in  November  2003,
        March 2008 and September 2009.  The  eldest  child  is  at  primary
        school. The Appellant claimed that he collected the  children  from
        the school but there was no evidence of that  from  the  school  or
        their mother. He gave evidence of travelling by bus to the school.


    18. The Appellant also relies upon  a number of documents which are  to
        be found in his appeal bundle. The basis of the  challenge  to  the
        determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  an  assertion  such
        evidence had not been properly taken into account.  These include a
        witness statement from a third-party indicating the Appellant  sees
        his children, but who did not attend to give oral evidence, letters
        from the children's school and school  reports  and  two  items  of
        correspondence from a Dr L, the Appellant's psychiatrist.


    19. The medical report dated 6th July 2012, in the  form  of  a  letter
        from Dr L to the Appellant's solicitors indicates the Appellant has
        been diagnosed as suffering from a severe  depressive  illness  and
        PTSD based upon the account he relies upon in support of his asylum
        claim.  The Appellant is  stated  to  be  attending  an  outpatient
        clinic, on  a  four  monthly  basis  for  review,  and  receives  a
        prescription antidepressant. It is stated his symptoms are unlikely
        to improve unless the threat of  repatriation  is  removed.   Dr  L
        states that current symptoms would worsen if the Appellant were  to
        discontinue his current treatment, which could result  in  feelings
        of hopelessness and despair and the risk of suicide could increase.
         A second letter  from  Dr  L,  dated  November  2013,  states  the
        Appellant's presentation has changed very little  since  that  time
        and that his treatment continues as before. It is stated the S.  W.
        C. C. Mental Health Team do not seem to be able  to  help  him  any
        more medically and refer to the possibility of improvement  if  the
        threat of repatriation was removed.


    20. In addition to the court documents referred to above  there  is  at
        pages B27 to 28 of the Appellants bundle the document stated to  be
        a First Information Report  (FIR)  although  it  appears  from  the
        bundle that B27 is an un-translated document and B28  further  copy
        of an order from the High  Court  in  Lahore  in  relation  to  the
        proceedings issued by the  Appellant's  wife.  The  Appellant  also
        relies on a report written by Ms Uzma Moeen. One of the matters the
        expert was instructed to deal with is to verify the authenticity of
        documents provided by the Appellant in support  of  his  claim  and
        what, if the documents were genuine,  would  be  the  risk  to  the
        Appellant, his wife, or children, if returned to Pakistan.


    21. A newspaper article dated 3rd January 2012  is  the  first  of  the
        documents considered which was verified  by  a  request  through  a
        named individual in Pakistan as having been a notice  published  in
        the named newspaper and  stated  to  have  been  published  at  the
        request of the  Appellant's  brother,  claiming  the  Appellant  is
        missing or that his whereabouts are not know for the last six years
        and asking for information of him.


    22. In relation to the documents originating from  the  High  Court  in
        Lahore, the experts states she asked an assistant  in  Pakistan  to
        verify the writ petition and obtain the names of the parties, which
        he confirmed to be genuine, in addition  to  being  told  that  the
        Appellant's  wife's  father  and  a  local  police   officer   were
        reprimanded by the High Court for interfering in the personal lives
        of the  Petitioner  and  her  husband  (Appellants  wife  and  this
        Appellant).


    23. In relation to the FIR the procedure for such documents is set  out
        in the report and it is said that the FIR provided  corresponds  to
        genuine FIR's but that the FIR is highly likely to be a copy of the
        original FIR filed into  the  concerned  local  police  station  in
        Pakistan. Ms Moeen states the document appears to be genuine to the
        civil standard.


    24. A statement by a High Court lawyer, Mr A,  dated  January  2012  is
        noted and considered as are the content which is said to repeat the
        content of the FIR dated  3  January  2012  filed  by  him  in  the
        relevant police station.  The author of the letter is a  registered
        member of the  Lahore  High  Court  Bar  Association.   It  is  the
        expert's opinion that it is "equally possible that the contents  of
        this document would have been true".


    25. The documents the expert was asked to  verify  were  filed  by  the
        Appellant in support of his claim to show the couple were  harassed
        by their family and threatened by the police after they  contracted
        a love marriage.  His expert's view is  that  in  Pakistan  Society
        couples are often harassed and tracked down by  their  families  in
        connivance with the police to restore  the  honour  of  the  family
        because such couples are  seen  as  rebellious  and  adulterous  in
        Muslim society.  The  expert  says  that  in  Pakistan  it  is  not
        considered acceptable to enter into a love marriage without  family
        approval and she refers  to  various  examples  in  the  report  of
        couples  who  have  experienced  difficulties  as   a   result   of
        contracting a love marriage.


    26. The experts view is that the Appellant, his wife, and children have
        every reason to  fear  for  their  safety  whilst  they  reside  in
        Pakistan. The High Court documents referred to in cross-examination
        are stated to corroborate the claim of harassment  being  exercised
        by the Appellant's wife's family and that the Appellant's  family's
        quest to locate his whereabouts is evidenced by the missing persons
        enquiry as was the targeting of the  couple  by  the  police  while
        living as a married couple in Pakistan.


    27. Ms Moeen asserts that due to country conditions it would be  highly
        unlikely the family could settled secretly anywhere in Pakistan and
        that the family's could get information about their whereabouts  in
        Pakistan by winning the favour of the police or by making checks on
        the national database which could be secured by a bribe. Ms Moeen's
        view is that if returned to Pakistan the risk posed by the  missing
        persons report, relocation to other parts of Pakistan, poses a risk
        with the major cities seeing a brutal  wave  of  targeted  killings
        which is politically motivated, used  to  kill  rivals  and  settle
        personal debts. The  reasonableness  of  such  an  arrangement  is,
        however a matter for the Tribunal and not a country expert.


    28. Ms Moeen also opines that the authorities do not  provide  adequate
        protection to love marriage couples against risk of harm  by  their
        families and paints a jaded view of police corruption in Pakistan.



Discussion



    29. The starting point in this appeal has been the  preserved  findings
        and the application of the Devaseelan principles. It  is,  however,
        settled law that previous determinations are  not  binding  if  the
        evidence provides good reason for departing from them. In this case
        it does not.  In  addition  to  the  adverse  credibility  findings
        already made, this tribunal is also  aware  of  inconsistencies  in
        accounts given earlier and of the fact that the Appellant  and  his
        family made a false Visa application upon which they secured  entry
        to the United Kingdom, which now appears to have  been  used  as  a
        vehicle to secure entry unlawfully after which they claimed asylum.


    30. Whilst additional material has been made  available  that  was  not
        before earlier tribunal's that in itself does not warrant automatic
        departure from the previous findings, as such material  has  to  be
        taken into account with all the available evidence.


    31. The medical evidence has been considered and, as  noted  in  cross-
        examination, provides no credible explanation for  the  Appellant's
        apparent  inability  to  recollect  details  when   responding   to
        questions put to him, although it does  indicate  that  he  suffers
        from depression and PTSD. The submission that the existence of PTSD
        indicates he has  suffered  trauma  which  is  at  the  very  least
        consistent with the account given  is  not  determinative  of  this
        issue as the medical expert fails to  examine  any  other  possible
        causes of his presentation or to set out the diagnostic basis  upon
        which such a finding is made.


    32. There are various additional articles and documents upon which  the
        expert has been asked to comment three of which,  the  civil  court
        suits, the High Court order dated 10th March 2003 and the newspaper
        articles were not considered by the judge who dismissed the  wife's
        appeal. The documents  were  rejected  in  September  2011  in  the
        Appellants own appeal due to suspicions as to their provenance.


    33. It is not disputed that the parties married  in  Pakistan  but  his
        claim that his wife's family turned against him and  prevented  him
        having contact with them and his wife  is  undermined  by  his  own
        evidence. The Appellant was asked questions  about  the  period  of
        separation and I find his answer not supported by the evidence when
        considered as a whole. In reply to a factual question regarding how
        long he and his wife lived apart, he claimed it was less  than  one
        month when the reality appears to be that it was in the  region  of
        nine months. The High Court documents  indicate  that  despite  the
        Appellant's best efforts to get his wife to return to  him  it  was
        she who refused, having possibly left him as a result  of  domestic
        issues not connected with matters the Appellant relies upon as  the
        basis of his claim.


    34. The same court documents record that the  Appellant  and  his  wife
        visited her parent's 'ordinarily' on a number  of  occasions  which
        undermines the Appellant's claim that he was never welcome  at  the
        property.


    35. The evidence indicates that as a result of court proceedings it was
        accepted there was some degree  of  interference  from  the  wife's
        parents after his wife left him but that after  the  Appellant  and
        his wife became reconciled the court ordered that  they  should  be
        able to continue to live  together  as  husband  and  wife  without
        external interference,  as  a  result  of  the  comprise  agreement
        reached which included the Appellant paying 2000RS per month to his
        wife. When asked about this in cross-examination the lack of proper
        answer strengthens the impression the Appellant was avoiding giving
        correct details, especially as some of the evidence  he  was  asked
        about was in an affidavit/witness statement  that  he  himself  had
        signed as being true. The fact the High Court intervened and  ruled
        in favour of the Appellant and his wife, chastising her parents and
        a police officer, also undermines the claim of Ms  Moeen  that  the
        authorities will not intervene or provide assistance.  In this case
        no such assertion can be accepted as the Appellant admitted he  had
        not referred his alleged difficulties to the police in any event.


    36. The newspaper article may be genuine  as  may  other  documents  Ms
        Moeen has read and was asked to comment upon, but her report cannot
        be considered in  isolation.  An  advocate  is  likely  to  file  a
        document if  instructed  to  do  so  by  their  client  based  upon
        instructions and information provided. A missing persons notice  in
        a newspaper may have been placed there but whether it is because an
        individual is genuinely looking for the person named  or  for  some
        other reason has to be considered. It is for these reasons that  it
        is necessary to consider all the evidence in  the  round  including
        the fact two previous experienced judges have found the account  of
        the Appellant and his wife to lack credibility, albeit on different
        evidence.


    37. It is accepted that marital relationships in Pakistan for those who
        enter love marriages do not, in all cases, run as smoothly as  they
        would in relation to arranged marriages approved by family  groups.
        This may be the case for some  but  the  question  is  whether  the
        Appellant, if returned, has substantiated he  is  at  risk  of  ill
        treatment or persecution. I do not find a claim all love  marriages
        place the parties to the same at risk to be  substantiated  on  the
        evidence.


    38. In relation to specific issues raised, it is also noted that  there
        appears to have been periods where the  Appellant  and  his  family
        were able to live in Pakistan  without  experiencing  difficulties,
        including prior to obtaining the  visit  visas  to  travel  to  the
        United Kingdom. I do not find the submission in Ms  Moeen's  report
        that there is no available internal flight option available to  the
        Appellant that it is reasonable to expect him to avail himself  of,
        has been substantiated. It is clear that they were able to live  in
        Pakistan without being traced at a time  he  claims  the  risk  was
        imminent and was able to engage in public  proceedings  before  the
        High Court and continue with his business.  This  last  finding  is
        made based upon the evidence given to the court hearing the  appeal
        against the visit visa refusal  who  examined  the  nature  of  the
        financial and  other  documentary  evidence  made  available  which
        supported a finding that the  Appellant  continued  with  his  very
        successful business ventures earning a considerable income by local
        standards, which enabled him to accumulate savings and land assets.
        There is no evidence of the disposal of such  commercial  interests
        in Pakistan and  the  Appellant's  evidence  with  regard  to  this
        element was, again, vague.


    39. Ms Moeen indicates that family members may be able  to  locate  the
        Appellant if they really wanted to on return  to  Pakistan  but  if
        they do not know where he is and there is no reason to believe  the
        family will know he has returned or to which part of the country he
        chooses to relocate himself if he does not wish to  return  to  his
        home area, risk throughout all Pakistan is not substantiated.   The
        Appellants evidence is that he  settled  in  other  cities  without
        difficulty in the past in Pakistan which is a  vast  and  populated
        country. He has not substantiated a claim it is not  reasonable  in
        all the circumstances for him to make use of such an option.


    40. Even if even if a FIR has been lodged this is not a conviction  but
        a first report. If arrested bail may be available and the basis  of
        the charge is disputed as being false.  In  SA  (Fair  Trial-Prison
        Conditions) Pakistan CG (2002) UKIAT 05631 the appellant claimed to
        have had political problems and said, amongst  other  things,  that
        false charges had been brought against him in relation to fraud and
        possible embezzlement affecting the  Railway  Lahore  Co.,  charges
        having been made by the Deputy Director of that company. There were
        two arrest warrants against him.  The Tribunal took the view  that,
        despite a certain amount  of  government  interference  the  higher
        level of judiciary in Pakistan was considered to be 'competent  and
        generally honest' although there were reports of  corruption  at  a
        lower level of magistrates courts and minor court  officials.   The
        judiciary had demonstrated its capacity to act  independently,  for
        example by  ordering  amendments  to  the  National  Accountability
        Bureau of Ordinance and by ordering the acquittal of ten  political
        activists charged with murder and arson, including the murder of  a
        policeman.  The Appellant appeared to have the necessary  resources
        in order to ensure that he  would  be  properly  represented  by  a
        competent lawyer if  the  charge  against  him  was  pursued.   The
        Tribunal concluded that he would receive a fair trial and since the
         charges were false, he had every opportunity to  make  a  plea  to
        that effect to the judiciary.


    41. It has not been shown the Appellant will not receive a  fair  trial
        if proceedings are  commenced,  and  nor  has  it  been  shown  the
        Appellant will suffer any form of ill-treatment during the  interim
        period sufficient to  entitle  him  to  a  grant  of  international
        protection.


    42. In relation to medical matters, there is no valid claim based  upon
        a breach of Articles 3 and 8 in  relation  to  the  same  with  any
        prospect of success.  The Appellant has not substantiated his claim
        to show  that  adequate  medical  services  are  not  available  in
        Pakistan if required or that such services would not  be  available
        to him from the point of removal, in transit, or when back  in  his
        home state that would not meet his immediate and future needs.


    43. No convention reason is engaged and it has not been shown that  the
        Appellant is able to succeed with his refugee claim.   In  relation
        to the claim under Article 3 ECHR, the burden is upon the Appellant
        to corroborate his claim and in light of the evidence considered as
        a whole, including the adverse credibility  findings,  the  current
        oral evidence and up-to-date documentary material, it has not  been
        established that the Appellant has substantiate his claim  to  show
        that the core account he relies upon is credible/true. As the  core
        account fails the claim there will be breach of Article 3 on return
        is dismissed as are all related protection elements.


    44. Article 8 ECHR and other elements of the case have to be considered
        in relation to the  situation  appertaining  at  the  date  of  the
        hearing. In relation to Article 8 matters the Appellant accepted he
        cannot meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in
        relation to the proportionality of the decision he  relies  heavily
        on the psychiatric care he received in the United Kingdom  but,  as
        stated, this is not been shown to warrant a granted of leave on any
        basis.


    45. The Appellant also claims he has a subsisting relationship with his
        children, the eldest of which has been in the  United  Kingdom  for
        seven years.  Although some of the older case law relating  to  the
        nature of  integration  refers  to  the  passage  of  time,  it  is
        important to note that seven years in isolation is not  the  United
        Kingdom government's view of such issues which requires a period of
        seven years and a finding it is unreasonable for the children to be
        returned to their home state.


    46. There is no evidence that the children, who are said to  live  with
        their mother following the separation of their parents, have  leave
        to remain in the United Kingdom and so will no doubt be the subject
        of a direction for their removal with their mother to Pakistan.


    47. The case law relied upon by the Appellant in relation to Article  8
        was  decided  prior  to  not  only  the  introduction  of  the  new
        Immigration Rules but  also  prior  to  the  incorporation  of  the
        Article 8 criteria into statute in the Immigration Act 2014,  which
        has the effect of rendering a  lot  of  the  earlier  jurisprudence
        outdated.


    48. The Appellant's wife did not attend the Upper Tribunal  to  support
        her husband. She provided no reliable documents in relation to  her
        case and issues such  as  her  address  in  Pakistan  and  findings
        relating to the lack of credibility in that account are relevant.


    49. The Appellant has contact with the children, according to his  oral
        evidence,  but  this  is  not  corroborated  or  supported  by  any
        statement from their mother or  the  school  and  the  witness  who
        prepared the written statement failed to attend and  to  be  cross-
        examined. In light of the discrepancies in the Appellant's evidence
        little weight can be placed upon this additional witness statement.


    50. It was accepted before the Upper Tribunal that the  best  interests
        of the children will be to remain with  their  mother  although  as
        they have no status the Secretary of State's position is that it is
        reasonable for them to return to Pakistan  where  their  lives  can
        continue.


    51. In relation to the provisions of the 2014 Act there is no  evidence
        of parental relationship between the Appellant and his children and
        no exceptional circumstances proved in this case.  I  accept  there
        are a number of factors that may assist the Appellant if he is able
        to prove the same, such as language issues if he is able  to  speak
        English and available financial resources, but the children are not
        qualifying children even if he does maintain the contact he  claims
        to have with them.


    52. His private life has been formed at a  time  he  has  no  leave  to
        remain and so the weight to be given to this element is reduced.


    53. Having considered all the available material, and  when  addressing
        the fifth of the Razgar questions, I find the  Secretary  of  State
        has discharged the  burden  of  proof  upon  her  to  the  required
        standard to show the  decision  is  proportionate.  Any  period  of
        separation if the Appellant is moved ahead of his wife and children
        has not been shown to be unreasonable on the evidence  provided  or
        consequences such that the decision is  not  proportionate  to  the
        legitimate public interest considerations relied upon.

Decision

    54. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  materially  erred  in  law.  That
        decision was set aside. I remake  the  decision  as  follows.  This
        appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    55. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18th November 2014




