
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09489/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th April 2016                   |On 23rd May 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR RAMESH PERUMAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Ashika Fijiwala (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Davey, promulgated on 18th November 2015 following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 14th  July  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant on refugee grounds  and  Article  8
    ECHR, whereupon the Respondent Secretary of State, subsequently applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was  born  on  4th
    August 1972.   He  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State,  dated  23rd  September   2014,   rejecting   the
    Appellant's claim for asylum on the  basis  that  if  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka, he would face mistreatment due to his imputed political opinion,
    as he has been accused of being an LTTE supporter  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities, and rejecting his claim for  humanitarian  protection  for
    the same reasons.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge had before him a  situation  whereby  there  was  a  Document
    Verification Report ("DVR"),  which  did  not  bear  the  name  of  the
    Appellant, but bore the name of someone else.  This  raised  the  issue
    before the Tribunal of a person,  other  than  the  Appellant  himself,
    having been identified as having submitted a false  claim.   The  judge
    held that the Secretary of State had previously given an undertaking to
    make a  fresh  decision  with  respect  to  the  Appellant,  given  the
    circumstances of this case, by 13th October 2015, and that if this  was
    not done by the specified date, then the judge would allow  the  appeal
    "on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent  was  no  longer  interested  in
    maintaining the decision of 23rd September 2014".  At  the  hearing  of
    14th July 2015, the judge went on  to  observe  that,  "no  new  asylum
    decision has been made or served.  This was confirmed by the Specialist
    Appeals Team by e-mail  dated  19th  October  2015  to  the  IAC"  (see
    paragraph 1).

 4. In the circumstances, the judge went on to say that, "as set out  above
    there being no decision I am  satisfied,  on  the  errors  of  law  and
    failures by the Respondent (noted in the ROP for 14th July 2015),  that
    the Grounds of Refusal are not maintained by the Respondent" (paragraph
    2).

 5. Given that this was the case, the judge ended  the  determination  with
    the words that, "the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds and Article 3
    ECHR grounds is allowed" (see paragraph 2).

Grounds of Application

 6.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to allow the Respondent to  withdraw  the  decision  on  a
    conditional basis (by consent),  the  conditions  being  that  a  fresh
    decision would be made by the immigration authorities by  13th  October
    2015, and that if the Respondent failed to make a fresh decision,  that
    the appeal would be allowed on the basis  of  the  Respondent  "was  no
    longer interested in maintaining the decision of 23rd September 2015".

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on 8th December 2015 on the basis that
    it was arguable that "despite those errors  and  failures  Judge  Davey
    should have made substantive findings  on  the  asylum  and  Article  3
    issues and that without doing so, the basis on  which  he  allowed  the
    appeal is unclear" (paragraph 4).



Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 13th April 2016, Ms Fijiwala, appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,
    handed up a typed note from the Home Office Presenting Officer  on  the
    day  in  question  before  Judge  Davey.   This  note  stated  that  an
    adjournment request had been made by  Mr  Ayodele  before  Judge  Davey
    after the Appellant's representative, Mr Kumudusena of Liyon Legal, had
    come into court  and  claimed  that  the  verification  report  had  an
    incorrect name on it.

 9. The judge had refused the adjournment  request  but  advised  that  the
    decision could be withdrawn and a new decision made  in  the  light  of
    court  documents  which  were  provided  after  the   interview.    The
    Presenting Officer, Mr Ayodele, after taking instructions, informed the
    judge that a fresh decision would be made, with the  decision  of  23rd
    September 2014, being withdrawn.  The judge, according  to  this  note,
    proceeded to direct that he "would not allow the  Respondent  authority
    to withdraw the decision until  13th  October  2015,  which  was  three
    months after the date of this hearing, by which time  he  would  expect
    that they file and serve a fresh decision, otherwise he would allow the
    appeal outright".

10. Mr Ayodele states in this note that he had questioned the  judge  about
    the propriety of such a course of action because it  resulted  in  both
    the refusal of an adjournment request by the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State, as well  as  a  decision  whereby  the  judge  would  "hold  the
    withdrawal" for three months.  Mr Ayodele maintains in the note that he
    did not agree that a fresh decision would be made by 13th October 2015.
     He also did not agree that if a new decision had not  been  filed  and
    served, then the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  would  no
    longer be interested in maintaining  the  decision  of  23rd  September
    2015.

11. On the basis of this note, Ms Fijiwala submitted  before  me  that  the
    position was as it had always been, namely, that the decision  of  23rd
    September 2014 was no longer being relied upon, and  the  Secretary  of
    State would be making a fresh decision.

12. For his part, Mr Jafar submitted that he could not disagree  with  this
    proposition,  and  not  least  because  the   judge   had   ended   his
    determination with the words, "the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds
    and Article 3 ECHR grounds is allowed"  (paragraph  2)  without  making
    findings of fact in relation to why the  appeal  was  allowed  in  this
    manner.  On the other hand, it remained  the  case  that  the  DVR  was
    flawed and could not be relied upon, and  this  rendered  nugatory  the
    decision of 23rd September 2015, which had already been accepted by the
    Respondent Secretary of State as a decision that could not presently be
    relied upon, and so the decision before the  Secretary  of  State  must
    remain outstanding.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should allow this appeal.  The  reason  is  that  the
    appeal could not have been allowed on Refugee  Convention  grounds  and
    Article 8 ECHR grounds without proper findings of fact  being  made  in
    relation to both these heads of claim.

Re-making the Decision

14.  I  re-make  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  the  original   judge's
    determination, the evidence before the judge, and the submissions  that
    I have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent  that  the
    decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  23rd  September  2014  is
    withdrawn, and a new decision remains  outstanding,  because  as  Judge
    Davey made clear, "as set out above there being no new decision, on the
    errors of law and the failures by the Respondent (noted in the ROP  for
    14th July 2015), that the Grounds of Refusal " cannot be sustained.

15. There is an error of law in the Grounds of Refusal insofar as  reliance
    is placed upon a DVR that does not carry the name of the Appellant.   I
    direct that a fresh decision be made in a fair and  timeous  manner  as
    possible.  This appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  decision  by
    the Secretary of State remains outstanding.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  This appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  this
    matter is remitted back to the Secretary of State for a  decision  with
    respect  to  this  Appellant's  claim  because  the  decision  of  23rd
    September 2014, was not in accordance with the law.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    21st May 2016
