


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09571/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Columbus House, Newport|Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 1 August 2016                  |On: 15 August 2016                |
|                                   |                                  |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     ME
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Latimer, Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M M Thomas in which she dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  a
    citizen of Libya, against the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse
    asylum and set removal directions.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  7  February  2015  and
    claimed asylum the following day. His application was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 12 June 2015. The Appellant exercised his right of appeal
    against this decision and this is the  appeal  that  was  heard  before
    Judge Thomas  on  19  November  2015  and  dismissed.  The  Appellant's
    application for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision was granted on 10 February 2016 by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Cruthers in the following terms

       Realistically, the grounds on which the appellant seeks permission to
       appeal do not seek  to  resurrect/pursue  arguments  in  relation  to
       asylum, Article 3 of the ECHR, Article 8  of  the  ECHR  or  anything
       other than Article 15(c) of the Asylum Qualification Directive.


       I think it is arguable, as per the grounds, that the  judge  did  not
       express any final reasoned conclusion on the  test  provided  for  in
       Article 15(c) (and in paragraph 339C of the immigration rules). But I
       think the judge did come very close to that-amongst other things, she
       set out the paragraph 339C test in her paragraph 35 and  referred  to
       case  law  concerning  the  application  of  Article  15(c)  in   her
       paragraphs 61, 62, 63 and 64 (the  last  being  a  reference  to  the
       current country guidance case for Libya - AT  and  Others  CG  [2014]
       UKUT 00318). By reference to the  report  of  a  country  expert,  Dr
       George, the judge rejected the appellant's account that  he  faced  a
       real risk of serious harm on account of originating from  Bani  Walid
       and/or on account of  his  membership  of  the  Warfalla  tribe  (the
       judge's paragraph 75).


       In light of the above, it may be arguable (for the  respondent)  that
       the judge did effectively decide the Article 15(c)  question  -  even
       though she may not have said so in terms. In deciding  that  a  grant
       permission is only just appropriate here, I also  take  into  account
       that paragraphs 11 and 12 of the appellant's  skeleton  argument  for
       the hearing on 19 November 2015 all but concede (by reference  to  Dr
       George's report) that the evidence was unlikely to be  sufficient  to
       make good the appellant's Article 15(c) arguments.






 3. By a rule 24 response dated 23 February 2016 the Respondent opposed the
    appeal.


 4. At the hearing before me Mr Richards  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of
    State and Ms Latimer represented the Appellant. No  skeleton  arguments
    were submitted.


Background

 5. The Appellant is a 33-year-old Libyan citizen who claims to  have  been
    born in Bani Walid and to belong to the Warfalla tribe.  The  Appellant
    claimed to have served as a member of  the  Green  Revolutionary  Guard
    until the fall of the  Gaddafi  regime  and  as  such  to  be  seen  as
    associated with the regime. His home in Tripoli was  searched  in  2011
    whilst he was away and his family were told that he should contact  the
    authorities. The appellant left Libya travelling to  Tunisia  and  then
    Malta where he got married and remained  for  2  years.  In  Malta  the
    Appellant was attacked and beaten on 2 occasions by officials from  the
    Libyan Embassy. Having been refused a UK visa in May 2014 the Appellant
    went to Libya to visit his mother remaining there for  40  days  before
    returning to Malta. Whilst there a warrant was issued  for  his  arrest
    but he was able to escape the attentions of the authorities.




 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  find  the  Appellant's  account
    credible (paragraph 59). In dealing with the Appellant's claim to  fear
    persecution or serious harm due to his origins the Judge did not accept
    that he faced such persecution or harm (paragraph 75). Accordingly, the
    appeal was dismissed.



Submissions

 7. For the Appellant Ms Latimer relied on the grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. There was only one ground  being  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to give any or adequate consideration to  whether
    the Appellant was at risk of indiscriminate violence for  the  purposes
    of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. Ms Latimer referred to
    paragraph 35 of the decision showing  that  judge  had  properly  self-
    directed to paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules and  to  paragraphs
    69 and 70 showing that it was accepted that  the  Appellant  came  from
    Bani Walid and that the  issue  was  whether  this  combined  with  his
    membership of the Warfalla tribe caused a heightened risk.  Ms  Latimer
    said that the Judge should have examined  these  factors  further.  The
    Judge does not identify what evidence she has  taken  into  account  in
    this respect and despite accepting that the Appellant  came  from  Bani
    Walid does not consider risk on return other than to Tripoli.




 8. For the Respondent Mr Richards said that there was no material error of
    law. The report of Dr George, extensively quoted in the decision, is  a
    key item in the decision made. It was written shortly before  the  date
    of the hearing. The Judge takes it fully into account. The Judge  deals
    adequately with the issue of Article 15(c). She sets  out  the  law  in
    detail. At paragraphs 75 and 76  the  Judge  quotes  from  Dr  George's
    report and she draws her findings at paragraph 81. The Judge  does  all
    that she was required to do and  all  that  she  could  have  done.  No
    material error of law is identified.




 9. Ms Latimer did not respond and I reserved my decision.


Error of law

10. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya who claims to fear persecution  due
    to  his  association  with  the  former  Gaddafi  regime  through   his
    membership of the Green  Revolutionary  Guard  and  to  otherwise  fear
    serious harm due his tribe and his origins in Bani  Walid.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge found the Appellant's account  of  his  involvement
    with the Green Revolutionary Guard not to be credible. This finding  is
    not challenged.




11. The error of law asserted in the grounds of appeal and expanded upon by
    Mr Latimer  relates  solely  to  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive (paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules). It  is  said  that
    the Judge failed to give any or adequate consideration to  whether  the
    Appellant was at risk serious harm due to indiscriminate violence.  The
    grounds assert that a substantial quantity of high quality evidence was
    submitted demonstrating a significant deterioration in  the  conditions
    in Libya since the Country Guidance case of AT and others (Article 15c;
    risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC).




12. In granting permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cruthers was equivocal concluding that there  was  "just
    sufficient in the grounds to make a grant appropriate this  stage".  In
    my judgement even with  this  reservation  Judge  Cruthers  was  overly
    generous. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  shows  very  clearly
    that Article 15(c) was not only in the mind of Judge  Thomas  but  also
    fully considered. Having made an adverse credibility finding in respect
    of the Appellant's account and his claimed reasons to fear  persecution
    the Judge went on to separately consider his claim to fear harm because
    of his origins. The Judge's consideration in  this  respect  begins  at
    paragraph 60 and concludes at paragraph 76. The Judge properly,  indeed
    comprehensively, self-directed  to  the  appropriate  authorities.  She
    accepts that the Appellant comes from Bani Walid and is a member of the
    Warfalla tribe. She considers Dr George's report. Crucially  the  Judge
    accepts the Appellant's assertion that he lived in Tripoli for a number
    of years where he had a car business since 2003. The Judge accepts that
    the Appellant's family still live in Tripoli.  In  these  circumstances
    the Judge was correct to identify Tripoli as the appropriate  place  of
    return and to find (at paragraph 76) that internal relocation  was  not
    in issue. Reciting Dr George's report  at  paragraphs  74  and  75  and
    noting that the Appellant's family live in Tripoli and have  not  faced
    any difficulties because  of  their  links  with  Bani  Walid  and  the
    Warfalla tribe it  was  inevitable  that  the  judge  would  reach  the
    conclusion that the Appellant did not face an  Article  15(c)  risk  on
    return to Tripoli. Contrary to what is said in the grant of  permission
    the Judge did clearly reach that conclusion (at paragraph 75).




13. There is in my judgment  no  error  of  law  material  to  the  Judge's
    decision to dismiss this appeal.




Conclusion

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law for the reasons set out above.


15. This appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.










Signed:                                            Date: 15/08/2017

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
