


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/09533/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at North Shields                                   Determination
Promulgated
On 30 April 2015                                               On 11 May
2015
Prepared on 1 May 2015



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    M. D.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rasoul, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
                    Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran who said that he had  entered
           the United Kingdom illegally the same day that he claimed asylum
           on 29 November 2013. That application was refused on 27  October
           2014, and in consequence a removal decision was made in relation
           to him.
        2. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal against those immigration
           decisions and his appeal was heard  on  22  December  2014,  and
           dismissed by decision of Judge Doyle, promulgated on  5  January
           2015.
        3. The Appellant's application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal, as drafted, raised a number of complaints,
           although they failed to identify clearly whether  the  Appellant
           asserted that the Judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for
           the decision he had made, or, whether it was asserted  that  the
           Judge had failed to take  material  evidence  into  account.  Ms
           Rasoul confirmed that she only sought to  advance  the  argument
           that the  Judge  had  failed  to  take  material  evidence  into
           account,  namely  the  documents  produced  to  the   Judge   to
           corroborate the Appellant's claim to have  been  employed  as  a
           teacher in Iran. She was in my judgement right  to  do  so,  the
           Judge's reasoning, and findings of primary  fact,  are  set  out
           perfectly clearly in the decision; MK  (Duty  to  give  reasons)
           Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641.
        4. The application for permission was granted by Judge  Osborne  on
           12 February 2015.
        5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice of  19  February  2015  in
           which she formally opposed the grant of permission.
        6. The Appellant formally applied 29 April 2015 for  permission  to
           rely upon further evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the  Upper
           Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008  relating  to  her  conversion  to
           Christianity and baptism on 15 February 2015.
        7. Thus the matter comes before me.


      The evidence concerning the Appellant's employment as a teacher
        8. The bundle of documentary evidence placed before the  Judge  ran
           to 198 pages. Within it, at  pages  71-79  were  documents,  and
           their translations, which the Appellant relied upon to show that
           he was qualified to teach metallurgy and welding,  and  that  he
           had been employed in Iran to do so in August 2011, October 2011,
           June 2012, and between May and June 2013.
        9. In his witness statement [ApB p18-] the Appellant had claimed to
           have worked as a teacher in Iran between 1992 and the date  upon
           which he left Iran, having originally graduated with a degree in
           metallurgy, and having  undertaken  a  masters  degree  in  that
           subject between 2008 and 2011. He said that  both  degrees  were
           issued to him by Universities in Tehran.  Whilst  the  documents
           produced  did  corroborate  that  element  of  the   Appellant's
           account, as Ms Rasoul accepted, this was not an element  of  his
           account  that  the  Judge  had  rejected  as  untrue.   In   the
           circumstances there was no substance to the assertion  that  the
           Judge had failed to have regard to the documents in question.
       10. As is clear from the decision, the Judge considered that if  the
           Appellant had genuinely acted in the way that he had claimed  to
           have done during his lessons, then he would have  been  able  to
           answer the questions that were put to him by the  Respondent  at
           interview about Kurdish issues, and politics. He  could  not  do
           so. That is an entirely different  credibility  point,  and  the
           documents concerning  his  qualification  and  employment  as  a
           teacher do not assist upon it, one way or the other.
       11. Ms Rasoul accepted this, but  then  sought  to  argue  that  all
           teachers in Iran  were  at  risk  of  harm.  That  was  not  the
           Appellant's case before the First Tier Tribunal:  his  case  was
           that he had acted individually in a  way  that  had  created  an
           adverse political profile, which in turn had caused him to  face
           a real risk of harm. He did not suggest that any  other  teacher
           at his place of work faced a similar risk. No complaint is  made
           in the grounds to the effect that this assertion  of  a  generic
           risk of harm was part of the Appellant's case, and overlooked by
           the Judge.
       12. The Judge made no reference to  the  Appellant's  conversion  to
           Christianity in the course of his decision. Ms  Rasoul  accepted
           that he made no error of law in so doing, because he was  simply
           never told of it.
       13. I note however the evidence that is now offered under a Rule  15
           Notice which purports to suggest that the Appellant was baptised
           after the decision of Judge Doyle was promulgated, and, that  he
           had been attending the Stockton Baptist Tabernacle and  pursuing
           an "Alpha course" to baptism for  eleven  weeks  prior  to  that
           event, which must have  commenced  before  the  hearing  of  his
           appeal. It is difficult to see how he could have  failed  to  be
           aware  of  that  course,  his  conversion,  or  the  forthcoming
           ceremony at the hearing of his appeal. As  Ms  Rasoul  accepted,
           the Appellant has, as yet, offered no explanation as to  why  he
           failed to disclose to Judge Doyle his claim  to  have  become  a
           convert to Christianity. It is not for me in the course of these
           proceedings, and without hearing evidence, to determine  whether
           that claim is genuine or not,  but  it  is  plain  that  in  the
           context of this chronology the Appellant will have something  of
           a struggle to convince anyone that this is the case.


      Conclusions
       14. Despite the terms of the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  the
           decision discloses no material  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
           approach to the evidence that was placed before him.



   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      5 January 2015 contains no error of law in the decision to dismiss the
      Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be  set  aside  and
      remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.





   Signed







     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

     Dated 1 May 2015



   Direction  regarding  anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008


   Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise the Appellant is  granted
   anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report  of  these  proceedings
   shall directly or indirectly identify her. This direction applies both to
   the Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
   direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed








      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

      Dated 1 May 2015



