
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09266/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 10 March 2015                              |On 27 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                          Mr Satvir Singh Tharadack
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo (Counsel instructed by Reiss Edwards Ltd.)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India.  He  appeals  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Keane) promulgated on 17 December  2014,  in
    which the  Tribunal  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse asylum and to make removal directions.

Background

2.   The appellant was born on 5 October 1979, he arrived in the  UK  on  26
    June 2003 and claimed asylum.  It was ascertained  that  he  previously
    claimed asylum in Austria.  The basis of his  claim  was  that  he  was
    harassed by members of a gang, having been  singled out for persecution
    by the gang and that he suffered a  physical  attack.   The  respondent
    considered his claim and did not find it to be credible.   She  was  of
    the view that there was a sufficiency of protection in India and/or the
    appellant would be able to relocate to  another  area  in  India.   The
    respondent considered the requirements under Appendix FM and  paragraph
    276ADE  and  concluded  that  the  appellant   did   not   meet   those
    requirements.

3.   The Tribunal proceeded to hear  the  appeal  notwithstanding  that  the
    appellant did not appear at the hearing, and heard submissions from the
    Home Office Presenting Officer.  The Tribunal  took  into  account  the
    witness statement produced by the appellant at page 20  of  his  bundle
    and also noted that he did not place any reliance on his  screening  or
    asylum interview.  In  a  clear  and  thorough  decision  the  Tribunal
    considered all aspects of the appellant's claim and concluded  that  it
    was not a credible  account.   In  particular,  weight  was  placed  on
    matters arising under Section 8 of the 2004 Act at [14].  The  Tribunal
    went on to consider Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules with  reference
    to the available evidence, namely at paragraph  7  of  the  appellant's
    witness statement.  He stated that he lived in the UK for 11 years  and
    that he had relatives who helped him. The Tribunal  concluded  that  he
    did not meet the requirements of Article 8 under the Rules  or  outside
    of the Rules.

Grounds of Application

4.   In grounds applying for permission to appeal, the  appellant  contended
    that through no  fault  of  the  Tribunal,  the  decision  reached  was
    procedurally unfair because  the  appellant  was  not  present  at  the
    hearing.  He contended that his former solicitors  had  been  negligent
    and  that  he  had  made  a  detailed  complaint  via  his  new   legal
    representatives.  In short, he  asserted  that  his  former  solicitors
    advised him not to attend the hearing of his appeal.

Permission to Appeal

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Landes.
    He concluded (in detailed reasons at paragraph 2)  that  overall  there
    was little merit in the challenge to the credibility findings  made  by
    the Tribunal.  Further he found no error in  the  contention  that  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8 had not been considered.  They  were
    dealt with at paragraph  15.   The  only  issue  considered  to  be  an
    arguable point was that of procedural unfairness. Judge  Landes  stated
    :"It is evident from case law (see MM  (unfairness)  [2014]  UKUT  105)
    that the test is whether a party has been deprived of the  right  to  a
    fair hearing.  Of course the former solicitors have not  yet  responded
    to the complaint against them, but at this stage I cannot say it is not
    arguable that the reason for the appellant's absence from  the  hearing
    was that he was not properly advised rather than he could not afford to
    pay for legal representation at the hearing and had requested that  the
    case proceed on paper in his absence.


         I have carefully considered whether I should simply  say  that  the
         decision would not have been any different even  if  the  appellant
         had been present at the hearing.  The judge  decided  the  case  on
         credibility  only  but  aside  from  issues  about  sufficiency  of
         protection in India, the respondent's case  was  clearly  that  the
         appellant would be able to relocate to avoid his problems and  when
         the appellant was asked about relocation in interview he said  only
         that he would not have been able to buy another farm with the money
         he sold his land for rather than indicating that the gang would  be
         able to reach him.  It is difficult  to  see  how  the  appellant's
         asylum or humanitarian protection claim could succeed.  Even so far
         as the appellant's Article 8 claim is concerned, it  is  not  said,
         for  example,  that  anything  material  was   omitted   from   the
         appellant's witness statement  or  that  there  were  any  relevant
         witnesses available to give evidence or similar.


         However, the case has emphasised that it is not easy to  know  what
         might happen if an appellant has an opportunity to explain his case
         in person and that important rights such as the right to be present
         at the hearing of an asylum/human rights claim are not likely to be
         denied and it is on that basis that I grant permission, although  I
         do not restrict the grounds which may be argued."

Error of Law Hearing

6.   I heard submissions from Mr  Yeo  and  Mr  Tarlow  responded.   Mr  Yeo
    placed significant weight on  the  decision  of  MM  cited  above.   He
    produced a copy of the written complaint lodged by  the  appellant  and
    made on his behalf by his new legal representatives.  It was understood
    that the complaint would be pursued by  the  appellant  via  the  legal
    ombudsman in due course.

7.   Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response and in  particular  emphasised
    that there would be no difference to the outcome having regard  to  the
    issue of relocation within India and it could  not  be  said  that  the
    conclusion would  have  been  any  different  in  the  event  that  the
    appellant had attended to give evidence.

Discussion and Decision

8.   I have decided that there was a procedural irregularity such  that  the
    decision made should be set aside.  I endorse entirely the observations
    made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Landes  in  particular   as   to
    materiality.  However I  have  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  now
    formally made a complaint against his former  solicitors.  No  response
    has been received  as  yet.   Mr  Yeo  confirmed  that  the  complaints
    procedure was such that the appellant was now in a position to be  able
    to pursue his complaint with the legal ombudsman and proposed to do so.
     I also took into account that there was evidence in the file  to  show
    that the appellant had paid for an oral  hearing  at  the  First  -tier
    Tribunal.  I was satisfied that the circumstances  were  in  accordance
    with the guidance in MM in which emphasis was placed on the fact that a
    Tribunal should be slow to conclude that the outcome would be otherwise
    where a person has effectively been deprived of a fair hearing.

9.   In this instance I proceed on the basis that there is evidence to  show
    that the appellant received poor legal  advice  and  it  was  for  that
    reason that he did not attend the hearing.  I do note, however, that he
    has been served with the notice of hearing requesting him to attend  on
    the day.  The onus is on him to pursue his appeal, but I accept that he
    would be influenced by any legal advice from his representatives.

10.  I am persuaded that the Tribunal  should  indeed  exercise  a  cautious
    approach in concluding that the outcome would have been the same if the
    procedural irregularity or impropriety had not occurred.

11.  As it stands, I find that  the  decision  made  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was sound having regard to the evidence  before  it.   However
    the Tribunal did not know the reasons why the appellant had  failed  to
    attend and it is not known what he would have stated in evidence.

Decision

12.  I find a material error of law in the Tribunal decision.  I  allow  the
    appeal and  I set aside the decision promulgated on 17 December 2014.

13.  I remit the matter for hearing afresh at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Taylor House (excluding Judge Keane) on a date to be fixed with a  time
    estimate of two hours and an interpreter in the Hindi language.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 26.4.2015

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 26.4.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

