

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/09259/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 March 2016                         |On 29 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                                    A N A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr M Schwenk (Paragon Law)
For the Respondent:        Ms S Sreeraman (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of ANA, a  citizen  of  Iraq  born  1  June  1998,
       against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on 27 January 2016 to
       dismiss his appeal against the making  of  removal  directions  under
       paragraph 2 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971  following  the
       refusal of his asylum claim on 5 June 2015.


    2. His case as put before the First-tier Tribunal was that he was  born
       in Qasri in the Kurdistan Region.  His  brothers  had  been  in  the
       Peshmerga there. His family had moved to Jalawla, a town  in  Diyala
       Governorate. His brother had told him that this was due to a  family
       dispute. In October 2014 ISIS attached their  town  and  his  father
       told him to hide. They began shooting; he was not sure how long  the
       insurgents stayed in the house, but shortly thereafter his  maternal
       uncle entered the building, located the Appellant  and  covered  his
       eyes before taking him to a ruined house outside the village,  where
       he stayed in the cellar overnight. His uncle returned and  told  him
       that his family had been killed, and that  he  would  need  to  make
       arrangements for him to leave the country. The Home  Office  refused
       his asylum claim because it did  not  accept  that  his  account  of
       moving to Jalawla was true: he had  variously  stated  that  he  had
       moved there two years ago and at  the  age  of  two,  and  that  his
       knowledge of the locality seemed was vague; there were  additionally
       inconsistencies in his account of the attack on the family home.


    3. The First-tier Tribunal found that, whilst the benefit of  the  doubt
       should be applied more generously when  dealing  with  a  child,  his
       statements were not coherent and plausible, in  particular  regarding
       his move from Qasra to Jalawla, and his failure to  claim  asylum  in
       Greece and France additionally damaged his claim. Much of  his  claim
       was potentially undermined by his age assessment interview  at  which
       he had proffered an account which was at odds  with  the  fundamental
       tenets of his asylum claim: in particular he had  not  mentioned  the
       family move from Erbil to Diyala. Noting that the age assessment took
       place at a police station which she agreed was not ideal,  the  Judge
       went on to find that the Appellant had said that  he  understood  the
       interpreter at that interview notwithstanding his current claim  that
       there  had  been  difficulties  in  comprehension  because   of   the
       difference between their dialects; the assessment was also impressive
       in that it included a wide range of areas of  enquiry,  and  he  said
       that he was sufficiently  rested  to  participate  in  the  interview
       notwithstanding that he had only recently arrived and had a few hours
       sleep; he was to be presumed as intelligent and articulate given  his
       stated ambition of being a doctor, and that his  statement  that  the
       agent had told history to lie did not sit comfortably with his  self-
       evident objective of putting across  a  coherent  asylum  claim.  She
       accordingly found that the  age  assessment  was  the  most  reliable
       history  against  which  his  asylum  claim   should   be   assessed.
       Furthermore, he had given scant evidence as  to  the  tribal  dispute
       that led to the move from Qasra to Jalawla. In  these  circumstances,
       his asylum claim was undermined, so that the  events  he  claimed  to
       have suffered from ISIS could not have  taken  place  in  Jalawla,  a
       place where she did not accept that he had ever resided.


    4. As to his mental health, she summarised aspects of the expert report,
       and in her findings stated that she accepted that  he  was  suffering
       from a moderate depressive disorder,  generalised  anxiety  disorder,
       moderately severe PTSD and an obsessional compulsive disorder. He had
       two brothers remaining in Iraq and she did not accept that  they  had
       been killed by ISIS: they were to be presumed  as  remaining  in  the
       family's original home area where he should have been able to contact
       them; his failure to assist the Respondent  in  tracing  them  was  a
       matter for which he was culpable. In conclusion it was  not  accepted
       that the Appellant came from a contested part of Iraq, and  he  could
       reasonably be expected to return safely to the Kurdish north.


    5. As he was born and raised in Iraq he presumably had social,  cultural
       or family ties there, spoke Kurdish and studied  Arabic,  was  nearly
       aged 18, and had had an opportunity to further his education here; in
       Iraq he would be able to assert his citizenship rights. It was in his
       best interests to remain in the United Kingdom but not overwhelmingly
       so. He would be able to integrate on a return to  Iraq.  Outside  the
       Rules, the adverse factors such as the costs of  his  education  here
       and his precarious immigration status,  and  the  lack  of  any  real
       likelihood that he would become  self  sufficient,  and  his  limited
       English proficiency, outweighed his private life interests  including
       the fact that his best interests pointed towards him remaining here.


    6. Miss Pargeter's report of January 2016 set out that she was a  Fellow
       at the Royal United Services Institute and that mental health care in
       Iraq was particularly  underdeveloped,  and  the  provision  existing
       there made it unlikely he would be able to access  the  treatment  he
       required.  Dr  Winton's  report  concluded   that   the   Appellant's
       presentation was consistent with that of someone  who  had  lost  his
       family and with someone suffering PTSD; on a return his mental health
       would significantly deteriorate. He stated that


           "It is also my opinion that he will be vulnerable when giving
           evidence in the Tribunal ... The psychological research shows
           that people with depression, anxiety and Post Traumatic Stress
           Disorder have impaired concentration and impaired memory ...
           this will impair his ability to answer questions put to him and
           would increase the risk of giving inconsistent answers. The
           danger here is that the Tribunal would see this as undermining
           his credibility whereas in fact it is merely an effect of his
           anxiety and depression."


    7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  without  any  limitation  on  the
       available grounds though with particular regard to these factors:


         (a)  As to the protection aspect of the appeal, by Judge Holmes
            for the First-tier Tribunal on 10 February 2016 because the
            Appellant's age had not been taken into account in the
            assessment of any discrepancies in his account;
         (b)  As to the Article 8 dimension, by Judge Smith for the Upper
            Tribunal on 4 March 2016, because of the arguable failure to
            adequately address the Appellant's age and the availability of
            reception arrangements in Iraq following his return.


    8. In a response of 29 February 2016 the Secretary of State argued  that
       the findings were ones which the First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to
       have made.


    9. Before me Mr Schwenk maintained that there had been a misdirection as
       to the standard of proof and the role for corroboration and that  the
       impact of the medical evidence on the approach to credibility had not
       been properly assessed. Ms Sreeraman maintained that the approach  to
       the evidence was lawful.






  Findings and reasons


   10. The principal issue in this appeal is the adequacy of  the  treatment
       of the medical report.  In  JL  (medical  reports-credibility)  China
       [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC) the Tribunal ruled that "judges should be aware
       that, whilst the overall  assessment  of  credibility  is  for  them,
       medical reports may well involve assessments of the compatibility  of
       the appellant's account with physical marks or  symptoms,  or  mental
       condition."


   11. In this case the question was whether the Appellant's evidence  might
       be affected by the difficulties  that  his  mental  health  could  be
       expected to cause him. As I  raised  at  the  hearing,  no  attention
       appears to have been given by the First-tier Tribunal  to  the  Joint
       Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 addressing Child,  vulnerable
       adult and sensitive appellant[s]:


           "2. Although  some  individuals  are  by  definition  vulnerable
           others are less easily identifiable. Factors to  be  taken  into
           account include:
           mental health problems ...
           14. Consider  the  evidence,  allowing  for  possible  different
           degrees of understanding by witnesses and appellant compared  to
           those are not vulnerable, in the context of evidence from others
           associated with the appellant and the background evidence before
           you. Where there were clear discrepancies in the oral  evidence,
           consider  the  extent  to  which  the  age,   vulnerability   or
           sensitivity of the witness was an element of that discrepancy or
           lack of clarity."


   12. Although the First-tier Tribunal referred  to  the  medical  evidence
       before it, it did so only in the sense of  summarising  its  contents
       and  without  engaging  with  the  report's  conclusions  as  to  the
       Appellant's likely presentation as a witness, which bore on the  very
       basis of the Tribunal's assessment of the  Appellant's  evidence,  in
       which it held the presence of discrepancies against his  credibility.
       That  was  a  serious  failure  to  take  account   of   a   relevant
       consideration which on the facts of this appeal amounts to a material
       error of law. Given that that error infects all the factual  findings
       including those as to the location and availability of family members
       to support him on art, the consequence  is  that  the  assessment  of
       Article 8 ECHR is also flawed.


          Decision:

    The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law.  Given  that  that  error  infects  all  of  the
    findings of fact upon which the appeal falls to be  determined,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  both
    asylum and human rights grounds to be considered afresh.





ANONYMITY ORDER

As the Appellant's claim to be  a  Convention  refugee  remains  unresolved,
unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]
Signed:                                             Date:  Date:  27   April
2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
