
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09549/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 December 2016                 |On 12 December 2016                |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                          F N
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer of Broudie Jackson and Cantor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup promulgated on 21 March 201  which  purported  to
    allow the Appellants appeal against a refusal of asylum to the  limited
    extent that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law  and  the
    Respondents decision remained outstanding.

Background

 4. The Appellant was born on  25  December  1992  and  is  a  national  of
    Eritrea.

 5. On 23 December 2014, the Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that
    he absconded from military service on  27  June  2014  and  exited  the
    country illegally.

 6. On 12 June  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

    (a)    The Appellants nationality was accepted.

    (b)    It was accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  in  active  military
    service when he left the country.

    (c)    The Appellants account of his  escape  from  detention  was  not
    accepted as it was found to be implausible.

    (d)    It was not accepted that simply leaving  the  country  illegally
    would put the Appellant at  risk  on  return  relying  on  the  Country
    Information and Guidance Eritrea National Service March  2015  and  the
    Country Information on Illegal Exit.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pickup ("the Judge) allowed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision to the limited extent set out above. The Judge found

    (a)    The account given by the Appellant of escaping military  service
    was not believable.

    (b)    The Respondents assessment of risk on return failed to  consider
    MO (illegal exit-risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT  00190  and  MA
    (Draft Evaders; illegal departures; risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 0059.

    (c)    The decision of the Respondent was not in  accordance  with  the
    law having failed to consider country guidance.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge acted ultra  vires
    in that he failed to take into account  the  grounds  of  appeal  under
    section 84 of the Immigration Act 2014 and he had no power to find that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law ; the Judge misdirected
    himself in law and was required to determine the  case  on  its  merits
    taking into the CG cases referred to and  given  the  concessions  made
    that the Appellant was performing military service  and  would  at  the
    very least be viewed as having exited illegally he should have  allowed
    the appeal.

 9. On 11 April 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pedro  gave  permission  to
    appeal.

10. At the hearing Mr Greer relied on the grounds of appeal and Mr Harrison
    relied on the Rule 24 Notice.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made a material error of law. I am satisfied that the decision
    in issue fell for consideration under section 844  of  the  Immigration
    Act 2014. In relation to an asylum decision an appeal must  be  brought
    on the grounds specified which no longer include that the decision  was
    not in accordance with the law.

12. Therefore I accept that the Judge was obliged to consider  whether  the
    Appellant was at risk on return to Eritrea on the  factual  basis  that
    was before him which  was  that  the  Respondent  made  an  unequivocal
    concession that the Appellant had absconded from military  service  and
    he should have made a finding as to whether the  Appellant  did,  as  a
    fact exit illegally or might  be  viewed  as  someone  who  had  exited
    illegally.

13. I therefore set aside the decision which the parties were  content  for
    me to remake.

Remaking the decision

14. The Appellant is clearly by reference to the background material of  an
    age where he would be subject to military service.  The  Respondent  in
    the refusal letter conceded  that  he  performed  such  service  albeit
    finding that his account of his escape was implausible. I am  satisfied
    that in MO whilst it remains the position that failed asylum seekers as
    such are not generally at real risk of persecution or serious  harm  on
    return, on present evidence the great  majority  of  such  persons  are
    likely to be perceived as having left illegally and this fact, save for
    very limited exceptions, will mean that on return they face a real risk
    of persecution or serious harm. I am satisfied that the Appellant  does
    not come within the category of anyone who would  be  allowed  to  exit
    legally and indeed Mr Harrison did not seek to argue this.

15. Therefore I find that the Appellant has evaded military service and has
    exited illegally. There was no argument placed before me that there was
    a basis to go behind  the  CG  case  given  that  the  'Danish  Report'
    previously relied on by the Respondent has been discredited.

Decision

16. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal such that the decision is set aside

17. I remake the appeal.

18. I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof on him  to
    show that he has a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  reason
    recognised by  the  Geneva  Convention.  Accordingly,  the  Appellant's
    removal would cause the UK to be in breach of its obligations under the
    Geneva Convention.

Conclusions on ECHR

19. On the facts as established  in  this  appeal,  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that the  Appellant's  removal  would  result  in
    treatment in breach of ECHR.

Decision

20. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

21. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

22. No anonymity direction is made



Signed                                                                  Date
9.12.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
