
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/09530/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 October 2018                      |On 20 December 2018                 |
|Prepared 31 October 2018                |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                            mrs Razia Umer Farooq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Azmi, counsel instructed by French & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  Appellant,  a  national  of  Pakistan,   appealed   against   the
    Respondent's decision dated 10  June  2015  to  refuse  an  asylum  and
    protection claim.  The appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pacey (the Judge) who on 26 March 2018 dismissed the appeal on  asylum,
    protection grounds and  human  rights  based  grounds.   Permission  to
    appeal was given on 6 September 2018 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird.



2.   No Rule 24 response  was  served  but  Mr  Mills  fairly  and  properly
    indicated that he accepted there was a material error of  law  in  that
    the Judge had failed to address background information  and  an  expert
    report relating  to  potential  issues  on  safety  on  return.   Those
    failings were compounded, to a degree, by a series of adverse  findings
    based on a somewhat subjective  view  of  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
    claim.

3.   Given the  concession  made  by  Mr  Mills  was  perfectly  sensible  I
    concluded the Original Tribunal's decision could not stand.  It further
    seemed to me that the problem was that really it was very difficult  to
    try and cherry pick the findings,  bearing  in  mind  other  and  wider
    issues that were not addressed at all, in order to re-determine this in
    the Upper Tribunal.  Fairness therefore indicated to me that the proper
    and just disposal of this appeal required that it  be  returned  to  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

4.   The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter must be  considered
    at a further hearing in the First-tier Tribunal (IAC).

DIRECTIONS

1.    Return  to  First-tier  Tribunal  in  Birmingham.   Urdu   interpreter
    required.
2.   Time estimate two and a half hours.
3.   No findings of fact to stand unless the parties agree them  and  notify
    the Tribunal in writing of which findings they wish to be retained.
4.   List for hearing not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey  or  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bird.
5.   No anonymity order was previously made nor is one  sought  and  in  the
    circumstances, that is sufficient.

Signed                                  Date 12 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
