
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09815/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Promulgated:                  |
|On 14 November 2014                          |On 17 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE  ZUCKER


                                   Between

                       MR SAYADEEPAN SACHCHITHANANTHAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muqit, Counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth is recorded
    as 29 March 1976.  On 11  September  2012  he  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom and immediately thereafter contacted the Asylum Screening  Unit
    in order to make application for international protection as a refugee.
     On 11 October 2013 a decision was made to refuse the  application  and
    to remove him to Sri Lanka.  He appealed.  His appeal was heard  on  27
    November 2013 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Youngerwood  sitting
    at Taylor House.   Judge  Youngerwood  found  the  Appellant  in  every
    material particular to be credible in his account of what  happened  to
    him but nevertheless found that the authorities would not now  have  an
    interest in him were he to be  returned  and  therefore  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 2. Not content with that determination, by Notice lodged with  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 30 December 2013, the Appellant made  application  for
    permission to appeal.  That application was refused in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but a renewed application made to the Upper Tribunal led to  a
    grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge  McGeachy  on  12  February
    2014.

 3. In granting permission Judge McGeachy stated:-

     1) The grounds of appeal refer to the fact that the Judge of the First-
        tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant, having been a long  time
        voluntary member of the LTTE had been tortured and detained.

     2) They refer to the grant of  permission  granted  to  the  Court  of
        Appeal in MP and NT (C5/2013/2603) and state that the Judge of  the
        First Tier Tribunal was wrong to conclude that the Appellant  would
        not be at risk.

     3) Given the decision in MP and NT (C5/2013/2603 I consider  that  the
        grounds of appeal are arguable.

 4. The matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Wilson, in the Upper
    Tribunal on 8 May 2014.  He found having regard to the guidance in  the
    case of GJ and Others (Post Civil War - Returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]
    UK UT00319 that there had been a material error of law.   Judge  Wilson
    said as follows:

         "6   The judge clearly was aware of the sur  place  activities  and
             records the Respondent's assertion that he was not on a  watch
             list, he was not a Tamil activist working to  destabilise  the
             unitary Sri Lankan state, those matters being fairly  set  out
             in consideration in  both  the  refusal  letter  and  in  sub-
             paragraph  9  of  the  summary  of  the  Appellant's   witness
             statement.  The risk assessments however within GJ and  Others
             clearly include in paragraph 8 the observation  that  the  Sri
             Lankan  authority's  approach  is   based   on   sophisticated
             intelligence.

         7    In a post conflict Sri Lanka an individuals past history would
             be relevant only  to  the  extent  that  it  is  perceived  as
             indicating a present risk to the unitary state.   Within  that
             context the argument given his past historical involvement  in
             the LTTE and an argued current sur place activities  would  be
             sufficient to place him at a significant risk  of  questioning
             after passing through the airport.  This would of course  have
             to be heightened  in  its  scrutiny  by  reason  of  the  past
             historical abuse the Appellant suffered.

         8    Overall despite the caretaking in the First-tier Tribunal I am
             satisfied that this aspect of the  Appellant's  case  has  not
             been adequately considered.  This is a material error of law.

         9    Given the clear  comprehensive  findings  in  the  Appellant's
             favour at the First-tier Tribunal which were challenged by the
             Respondent, I am satisfied this  should  continue  by  way  of
             further  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  such   short
             appropriate oral evidence from the Appellant  and  submissions
             on risk on return.

         10   Given the nature of the asserted  risk  I  therefore  make  an
             interim anonymity order in relation to  the  Appellant.   This
             matter will of course require  further  consideration  at  the
             conclusion of the appeal."

 5. The findings which were not in dispute made by Judge Youngerwood at the
    initial hearing were to the effect that in May 1997, the Appellant  had
    joined the LTTE voluntarily.  He underwent some basic training.   About
    two months after beginning his work he was injured  in  an  attack  and
    sustained injuries to his head and stomach.  He spent ten months in  an
    LTTE hospital in recovery.  Thereafter  the  Appellant  worked  in  the
    administrative section of the medical  wing.   The  Appellant  remained
    with the LTTE from 1997 until 19 April 2002.  In 2008 he was invited to
    rejoin,  which  he  did,  working  administratively  in   the   medical
    department.  On 17 May 2009 the Appellant in  common  with  others  was
    rounded up and remained in detention for just short of two  years.   He
    was not released until  23  April  2011.   On  his  release  it  was  a
    condition that he should attend a  military  controlled  area  and  was
    required to report every two weeks.  Despite reporting, on 29 June 2011
    he was taken to a room where he was beaten up  and  then  detained  for
    eleven months during which time  he  sustained  severe  ill  treatment,
    including  beatings  with  sticks,  and  burns  with  iron  rods.   The
    Appellant was located by a cousin and upon the payment of a  bribe  the
    Appellant was released but told to leave the country within  six  days.
    He left Sri Lanka on a false passport.

 6. The Appellant's  account  was  supported  by  photographs  and  medical
    evidence.  The second period of detention was brought about because the
    Appellant, it was said,  had  not  disclosed  the  extent  of  his  own
    activities and those of his wife who was also involved with the LTTE.

 7. At paragraph 29 of the determination Judge Youngerwood said:-

         "Having considered all the above  evidence,  I  conclude  that  the
         Appellant has established the likelihood that his core  account  is
         truthful and  accurate,  and  I  proceed,  therefore,  to  consider
         current risk on that basis."

 8. One other material part of the evidence was that the Appellant had been
    told by members of his  family  that  the  authorities  were  regularly
    looking for him, though it would seem to ensure, on Judge Youngerwood's
    findings, that the Appellant had in fact left the country (I  refer  to
    paragraph 38 of the determination).

 9. The  Appellant  gave  evidence  before  me.   He  adopted  his  witness
    statement of 14 October 2014 and  exhibited  a  number  of  photographs
    showing his presence at demonstrations  in  May  and  July  2014.   The
    photographs appear on internet websites including Ethiri.com;  TamilWin
    web news; and Mullivaikkaal web news.

10. The Appellant told me that the first demonstration he attended was  May
    2013, consistent with what he had said in the First-tier Tribunal.   In
    the witness statement reference was made to having attended a rally  in
    November  2013.   The  Appellant  told  me   that   he   had   attended
    demonstrations which had been organised by  the  British  Tamil  Forum,
    though he was not a member of it and indeed was not  a  member  of  any
    Tamil based group in the United Kingdom but rather simply attended  the
    events.  In all he has attended six demonstrations and he  would  learn
    of  them  from  friends.   His  primary  motivation  in  attending  the
    demonstrations is in order to inform the wider British  public  of  the
    events  happening  in  his  country,  namely  abductions,  torture  and
    disappearances.  The Appellant said that wants to be able  to  live  in
    Sri Lanka in a state of freedom.  He has never spoken  at  any  of  the
    rallies but has shouted out slogans and would explain  to  people  what
    the demonstrations were about were he approached.

11. It was put to the Appellant in  cross-examination  that  there  was  no
    reference in any of his previous statements to him  having  friends  in
    the British Tamil Forum.  The Appellant however was insistent  that  he
    was invited to demonstrations by telephone and he not  understand  what
    reference he might make in his witness statement.   He  said  that  the
    usual number of people attending  a  demonstration  was  about  400-500
    although at one there were about 1,000 participants.

12. The Appellant  went  on  to  tell  me  that  he  became  aware  of  the
    photographs on the internet websites from watching Tamil News.  He  did
    not know how long the photographs would be retained on the website  but
    he said that he found them about two days after the various events.  He
    had not returned to the websites more  recently.   The  Appellant  said
    that he is not involved in funding raising activities and when asked if
    he advocated a separate Tamil state he said  that  all  he  wanted  was
    freedom just like the people in the United Kingdom.  He said he did not
    mind whether that was to be enjoyed insider or outside a separate Tamil
    state.

13. The Appellant produced a  letter  from  the  International  Centre  for
    Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide dated 4 October 2014,  to  which
    no exception  was  taken,  describing  the  Appellant  as  having  been
    actively  participating  in  human  rights  issues  and   at   genocide
    meetings/events exposing the government of Sri  Lanka.   The  Appellant
    was said to be part  of  the  volunteer  team  actively  promoting  the
    importance of submitting evidence to the UNHCR.   Additionally  it  was
    said that the Appellant  had  provided  written  evidence  under  oath.
    Asked about that letter, the Appellant said that he had been invited to
    make a statement which he  had  done  though  he  did  not  attend  any
    meetings.  As to being a member of the volunteer team, he said that  he
    did that through friends and insofar as the letter referred  to  active
    participation, he said that he did whatever was asked of him.   He  had
    attended two meetings but  never  as  a  member  though  he  had  given
    evidence.  He said that he had given evidence in writing  and  that  he
    expected to be called again by the organisation.

14. The Appellant was asked whether to his  knowledge  there  had  been  an
    arrest warrant issued against him since he left Sri Lanka and  he  said
    yes.  He said that he learned that from his cousin's sister when he was
    phoned in October.  He explained that  although  when  giving  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal his evidence had  been  that  there  had
    been no contact until three months  after  his  arrival  and  that  the
    family had expressed a desire to make no further contact,  it  was  his
    evidence now that she was scared at that time but what she had done was
    to go to another house and make contact from there.  He  said  that  he
    did not speak to family directly but through fiends.

15. There was no re-examination.

16. Ms Sreeraman accepted that the Appellant had been told that  he  should
    not return.  Her focus was on the guidance in the case of GJ.

17. Before dealing however with the submissions that were made,  I  should,
    to the lower standard make findings.  The Appellant  has  already  been
    found to be  a  truthful  witness.   There  was  in  fact  no  material
    challenge to the Appellant's evidence concerning his attendance at  the
    various  demonstrations  merely  an  exploration  on  behalf   of   the
    Respondent to ascertain the extent of his involvement. The  Appellant's
    evidence was given before me in a measured why and I found without  any
    attempt to exaggerate or embellish his account.  I therefore accept  to
    the lower standard and find as a fact that  the  Appellant  did  attend
    each of the demonstrations  which  he  said.   I  accept  that  he  was
    prominent in holding a placard at the demonstrations  which  appear  in
    the Appellant's bundle and I accept and  find  as  a  fact  that  those
    photographs appeared on the internet for at least two days.   I  accept
    and find  as  a  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  c-operated  with  the
    International Centre for Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide  and  I
    accept and find as a fact that members of the British Tamil Forum  have
    made contact with the Appellant to inform him  of  demonstrations.   It
    follows that the Appellant has friends in the British Tamil  Forum  and
    by implication could, if asked, at least give  some  information  which
    might assist others in identifying them.

18. Returning to the submissions made  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  Ms
    Sreeraman pointed to the country guidance but invited me to  find  that
    the activities in London were not such that the Appellant would come to
    the attention of  the  authorities  and  in  any  event  there  was  no
    sufficient basis, given to his level of involvement,  for  saying  that
    the authorities would be at all interested in him.

19. The relevant aspects of the country guidance  in  CG  are  set  out  at
    paragraph 34 of the determination of Judge Youngerwood.  I observe that
    the Court of  Appeal  had  the  opportunity  to  consider  the  country
    guidance in MP and NT v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829.  The Court of Appeal did not find any error of law
    in the country guidance or in the approach taken to its preparation but
    Lord  Justice  Underhill  made  what  I  consider  to  be  a   material
    observation:

         "I would, however, like to emphasise one point.  The clear  message
         of the Upper Tribunal's guidance is that  a  record  of  past  LTTE
         activism does not as such  constitute  a  risk  factor  for  Tamils
         returning to Sri Lanka, because the  government's  concern  is  now
         only with current or future threats to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka
         as a unitary state; and that is so even if the returnees past links
         with the LTTE were of the kind  characterised  by  UNHCR  as  "more
         elaborate." I respectfully agree with the Vice President that  that
         is a conclusion which it was entitled to reach.  It is  also  clear
         that the Tribunal believed  that  "diaspora  activism,"  actual  or
         perceived is the principal basis on which  the  government  of  Sri
         Lanka is likely to treat returning Tamils as posing  a  current  or
         future threat; and I agree that that too was a conclusion which  it
         was entitled to reach.  But I do not read  para  356(7)(a)  of  its
         determination as prescribing that diaspora  activism  is  the  only
         basis on which a returning Tamil might be regarded as posing such a
         threat and thus of being at risk on return.  Even apart from  cases
         falling under heads "(b)-(d) in  para.  356(7)  there  may,  though
         untypically, be other cases (of which NT may be an  example)  where
         the evidence shows  particular  grounds  for  concluding  that  the
         government might regard the applicant as posing a current threat to
         the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence of
         evidence that he or she has been involved in diaspora activism."

20. The submissions made on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  highlight  certain
    aspects of the country guidance.

         "The government's present objective is to identify Tamil  activists
         in  the  diaspora  while  working  for  Tamil  separatism  and   to
         destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state  enshrined  in  amendment
         6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983  which  prohibits  the
         "Violation of territorial integrity of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is  on
         preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any similar Tamil
         separatist organisation and the revival of the civil war within Sri
         Lanka...

         4.   If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
             there remains a real risk of ill treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection...

         7(a).    Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
             or are perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
             post conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka...

         8.    The  Sri  Lankan's   authorities   approach   is   based   on
             sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities  within  Sri
             Lanka and in the diaspora.  The Sri  Lankan  authorities  know
             that many Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as  economic
             migrants and also that everyone in the Northern  province  had
             some level of involvement with the LTTE during the civil  war.
             In post conflict Sri Lanka, an individuals past  history  will
             be relevant only to the extent that he is perceived by the Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the Unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government."

21. It seems to me that the  history  of  the  Appellant,  he  having  been
    detained on  two  occasions  and  tortured,  taken  together  with  the
    continuing interest by the authorities in knowing that he is no  longer
    in the country, which I accept is the current position in  relation  to
    the  Appellant  in  Sri  Lanka,  taken  together  with  his  sur  place
    activities would at the very least lead to him being questioned  (which
    itself places the Appellant at risk).   It  seems  to  me  against  the
    background information and  the  sophisticated  intelligence  that  the
    authorities  would  be  aware  of   the   Appellant's   attendance   at
    demonstrations and given his past  would  be  interested  to  know  the
    extent to which he has been involved and indeed the extent to which  he
    might be able to  provide  them  with  information  leading  to  others
    looking to separatism.

22. To be fair to Ms Sreeraman she did say at the outset that her position,
    "on instructions" was to maintain the Respondent's position but it  was
    clear to me that she understood  the  difficulty  of  the  Respondent's
    position and  she  quite  properly  did  not  overlabour  those  points
    favourable to the Respondent; there were very few.

23. I was not invited to maintain the anonymity order and as the appeal has
    been allowed, I see no basis for its continuation.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  and  is  remade.
The appeal in the First-tier Tribunal is allowed both on  asylum  and  human
rights grounds.


Signed                              Date

Judge Zucker
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



