

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/09326/2012
                                                               AA/08293/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 23rd December 2014               |On 23rd March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     MM
                                     SH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Blundell, Counsel instructed by Malik and Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellants are both nationals of Iran. They  are  respectively  a
       mother and her adult daughter. This is the remaking of  the  decision
       in their asylum and human rights appeals[1].

       Background and Matters in Issue

    2. The basis of both claims is that the Appellants face  persecution  in
       Iran for reasons of their membership of a  particular  social  group.
       The First Appellant stated that she could not return to Iran  because
       her violent and abusive husband had made an  accusation  of  adultery
       against her. Because she is a woman she feared that the Iranian state
       would fail to protect  her  from  her  husband,  and  would  in  fact
       participate in the persecution against her. The Second Appellant came
       to the UK as a student in 2007. Since arriving here she  has  adopted
       customs and behaviours not  considered  compatible  with  the  strict
       socio-religious expectations placed on women  in  Iran.  Specifically
       she has entered into  a  sexual  relationship  and  become  pregnant.
       Although that pregnancy was terminated she fears that if returned  to
       Iran she will be forced into marriage by her violent and  controlling
       father and the fact that she  is  not  a  virgin  will  be  revealed.
       There was also a risk that even outwith marriage he would  force  her
       to undergo a "virginity test" as he had done in the past.

    3. The Respondent rejected both claims for want of  credibility  and  in
       May 2014 the linked appeals came before Judge W. Grant of the  First-
       tier Tribunal. In a detailed and lengthy determination[2] the appeals
       were dismissed.  Permission was granted to the Upper Tribunal[3]  and
       in a written decision, appended to this determination,  I  found  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal to contain  errors  of  law  such
       that it should be set aside. In summary  those  errors  were  in  the
       approach taken to the credibility of the witnesses. I found that  the
       First-tier Tribunal had failed  to  assess  the  Appellants'  account
       against the background of the  expert  evidence  and  information  on
       Iran. In respect of the Second Appellant there had been a failure  to
       consider whether her personal development,  sexual  relationship  and
       pregnancy in the UK placed her at risk if  returned  to  Iran  today.
       Unfortunately it was not possible to preserve any of the findings  of
       the First-tier Tribunal and this determination is therefore a de novo
       remaking of the decisions in the appeals, where the  Appellants  rely
       upon asylum and human rights grounds.

       The Hearing and the Evidence

    4. At the outset of the hearing Mr Tufan for the Respondent applied  for
       an adjournment.  The Presenting Officer who had conduct of  the  case
       had been unable to  attend  court  due  to  a  family  emergency  and
       although the case  had  been  passed  to  him,  he  had  not  had  an
       opportunity to prepare the  case.  I  refused  the  adjournment.    I
       indicated that I would give Mr Tufan as much time  as  he  needed  to
       prepare the case. There were, in addition to the two Appellants,  two
       witnesses at court; one of these has restricted mobility and had made
       a special effort to get to the hearing. In light of this I considered
       an  adjournment  would  be  undesirable.  Mr  Tufan  agreed  in   the
       circumstances to take some time -  just  short  of  two  hours  -  to
       prepare the case. I am very grateful to him for so doing and for  his
       very able cross-examination and submissions.  The  hearing  proceeded
       and I heard live evidence from four witnesses:  in  addition  to  the
       Appellants I heard the testimony of Ms Evalena Styf, and that  of  Mr
       Sheptim Gurra.  A full transcript of their evidence can be  found  in
       the Record of Proceedings and where relevant I  summarise  it  in  my
       findings.

    5. I have taken all of that evidence into account, including that  which
       is not specifically mentioned herein.

       Burden and Standard of Proof

    6. The burden of proof lies on the Appellants who must show there to  be
       a reasonable likelihood that they are at risk in Iran for reasons  of
       their membership  of  a  particular  social  group/imputed  political
       opinion.

       My Findings

    7. At the centre of this case is the claim that the Appellants are  both
       at risk of serious harm at the hands of Mr H, husband  to  the  First
       Appellant and father to the Second Appellant.   It is agreed that the
       shared factual  matrix  means  that  the  appeals  'stand  and  fall'
       together.   That   said,   I   have   to   start   somewhere.   Since
       chronologically the claimed persecution started against mother before
       daughter, I begin by setting out the matters arising  in  respect  of
       the First Appellant. I emphasise that this is  simply  for  clarity's
       sake: I have considered all of the evidence about each  Appellant  in
       the round.

    8. In the course of her asylum claim the First  Appellant  claimed  that
       her husband was a violent and controlling man who had  subjected  her
       to serious domestic violence over three decades of marriage.  In  her
       interviews with the Respondent she asserted  that  her  marriage  had
       been arranged by her family, as was the norm in Iran. It had been  an
       "old fashioned"[4] relationship and he would  regularly  "discipline"
       her with violence. In her evidence before me the First Appellant said
       that she had not previously  considered  divorce  because  this  was,
       simply, "her life". It had not occurred to her to leave  him  because
       there was no room  for  doing  so  within  Iranian  society.  People,
       including her own family, would judge  her:  "they  do  not  trust  a
       divorced woman. She does not have a good reputation in  my  country".
       So she had put up with it. It is her case that all  of  that  changed
       after she came to the UK. Her daughter her come here to study and she
       had been permitted to come here to "look after" their  daughter.  She
       herself was taking classes here and it was  only  after  her  husband
       accused her of adultery with an unidentified fellow student that  she
       felt she had no option but to leave him and to seek asylum.

    9. The Respondent's refusal letter in respect of the First Appellant  is
       dated the 29th June 2014.  It is accepted that violence against women
       is a "common and widespread problem" in Iran and that  the  law  does
       not specifically  prohibit  domestic  violence.  The  Respondent  has
       nevertheless  given  several  reasons  for  finding  that  the  First
       Appellant's  evidence  cannot  be  believed[5],  even  to  the  lower
       standard  of  proof.   In  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Respondent
       submitted further reasons, set out in the written  submissions  dated
       10th June 2014[6].  These reasons, adopted and amplified by Mr  Tufan
       in his submissions, are:

       i) The First Appellant has been inconsistent in that she claimed that
          her family did confront her husband about his  treatment  of  her,
          and at the same time asserts that they would  not  have  supported
          her should she have chosen to leave him;

      ii) The First Appellant claimed to have stayed with  her  husband  for
          the sake of their children, but did not try  and  leave  him  even
          after her children were both grown adults who had left home;

     iii) Her evidence that Iranian law would obstruct any attempt by her to
          divorce her husband is not supported  by  the  country  background
          material which indicates that divorce  is  possible  in  Iran  and
          indeed is "skyrocketing";

      iv) The country background  evidence  indicates  that  women  in  Iran
          require their husband's permission to work or travel  abroad.  The
          Respondent finds it to be "simply inconceivable"  that  a  violent
          and controlling man would give permission for his wife/daughter to
          work, study or to leave Iran;

       v) Similarly the evidence that the First Appellant had her own income
          from rental property is at odds with her claim  to  be  under  her
          husband's control;

      vi)  The  chronology  in  respect  of  the  adultery   accusation   is
          inconsistent. The Appellant relies on a letter from  a  lawyer  in
          Iran  which  describes  Mr  H  accusing  his  wife  of  having   a
          relationship with another man during 2012,  "especially  in  May".
          Her passport shows that she was in the  UK  at  that  time  so  it
          cannot have been possible for her husband to  have  witnessed  any
          adultery;

     vii) The First Appellant's behaviour, in remaining  with  her  husband,
          and  in  2012  making  a  trip  back  from  the  UK  to  Iran,  is
          inconsistent with her claim to have been in fear of him.

   10. I have taken all of these points into account.  They  fall  into  two
       parts. There are  criticisms  of  the  First  Appellant's  individual
       evidence, which I deal with below, but it is further the Respondent's
       case that  the  account  overall  is  implausible:  I  consider  that
       submission in my overall evaluation of the evidence.

   11. In respect of the First Appellant's evidence I accept that she has an
       unfortunate tendency  towards  exaggeration,  for  instance  claiming
       before the First-tier Tribunal that her "eyes were bruised all of the
       time", that her husband was "constantly calling her" and that she was
       required in the UK to contact him "every day" via the  internet.  The
       two Presenting Officers  who  have  scrutinised  this  case  for  the
       Respondent have very effectively highlighted this use of such  florid
       language in their cross-examination and submissions. I  am  satisfied
       that the First Appellant cannot plausibly have had bruised  eyes  for
       each and every day of her marriage - were that the case she would not
       doubt have sustained some long term damage to her eyes. Equally I  am
       satisfied that she and her  daughter  did  give  discrepant  evidence
       about how often they were required to speak to Mr H via Skype. I have
       given due weight to such difficulties in the evidence. Nevertheless I
       am satisfied that the core of the  account  has  remained  consistent
       across  the  witness  statements,  lengthy  interviews   and   appeal
       hearings.  I have given considerable weight to that consistency.

   12. I had an opportunity  to  hear  directly  from  the  First  Appellant
       myself. I found her to be a straightforward, and as I set out  below,
       compelling witness.  Perhaps wiser after  the  hearing  before  Judge
       Grant she was careful before me not  to  embellish  her  account  and
       appeared more restrained in her use of language.  She  was  calm  and
       dignified as she tried to explain to Mr Tufan why she  remained  with
       her husband for all those years. Although he was regularly abusive he
       saw it as his right - it did not occur to him that she would ever try
       and stand up to him.  For a long time it did not occur to her either.
        You just had to deal with it; that was  how  it  was.   Divorce  for
       women in her position is so difficult - people  would  look  down  on
       you.  In respect of the adultery accusation her case is that she  was
       in London and he was in Tehran. He called her  and  overheard  a  man
       coughing in the classroom behind her. That was what sent him  into  a
       rage.

   13. Having heard the oral evidence I realised that very little  had  been
       said about the Appellant's son. The written evidence  suggested  that
       he has been largely supportive of his father and has taken "his side"
       in the dispute with his mother and sister. I enquired about this  and
       in doing so provoked an instantaneous and violent emotional  reaction
       in the First Appellant. She began to tell me that "he  has  the  same
       character as his father" but barely got past that first sentence.  At
       that point the First Appellant started crying uncontrollably and  had
       to be taken out of the hearing room. She  appeared  completely  grief
       stricken, and my written note reads that she could be heard "wailing"
       from the corridor.   Her breakdown necessitated a 30 minute break  in
       proceedings. I have no doubt that her reaction was not contrived. She
       had previously answered  questions  put  to  her  in  a  careful  and
       controlled manner.  When asked about her son, she crumbled.  I  found
       this to be compelling and genuine evidence. I have no  difficulty  in
       accepting that a woman may have learned to cope  with  rejection  and
       abuse from a partner, but that betrayal by her own son would  be  too
       much to bear.

   14. I also had the benefit, in assessing the First Appellant's  evidence,
       of live testimony from a Ms Evalena Styf.  Ms Styf met the Appellants
       in the summer of 2009. She was at the time the Quality Assurance  Co-
       ordinator for the London School of Management where  the  women  were
       studying.  At the time of the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal
       she had written a letter[7] setting out her  contact,  in  particular
       with the First Appellant.   She explained therein that they had first
       come into contact after another student had made  a  complaint  about
       the First Appellant's use of her mobile phone during lessons.  It was
       Ms Styf's role at the college to deal with such matters.   The  First
       Appellant had told her that she had to keep the phone on in case  her
       husband called. They had resolved the matter  by  agreeing  that  she
       would keep the phone on silent.  Ms Styf thereafter had a  number  of
       other dealings with the Appellant in her professional capacity and by
       February 2010 was in regular contact with her.  Ms Styf describes the
       Appellant's phone as being a "constant problem":

          "Although she would have it on silent, she was forever checking it
          as if she was afraid of losing it, and it was actually annoying to
          me. I tried to talk to her about it, but all she said was that  if
          her husband called she had to answer. I asked her if  her  husband
          was abusive, but she did not want to talk about it.  Without  [the
          First Appellant]'s knowledge or consent I asked her daughter,  who
          was still taking her mother to our meetings,  if  her  father  was
          abusive and the look on her face told me more than any words could
          have conveyed".

       Ms Styf's letter goes on to explain that she ended up becoming  close
       to the First Appellant - they shared a lot in common. They  both  had
       the same interests in craft  and  literature  and  were  both  single
       mothers of grown up girls. Ms Styf is also the survivor of an abusive
       relationship.    Perhaps  it  was  this  background  that  made   her
       suspicious about the First Appellant's behaviour around her phone and
       in respect of her husband.   She tried to give her  opportunities  to
       discuss the matter but the First Appellant would just smile and  keep
       it to herself.  Their friendship grew so that  when  Ms  Styf  became
       increasingly disabled by arthritis the First  Appellant  would  visit
       her at home. Her disclosure  about  her  home  life  was  limited  to
       describing her husband as "stupid" and "foolish". In 2012  the  First
       Appellant returned to Iran in order to visit her mother and  Ms  Styf
       took the opportunity to do further investigation:

          "While she was away I spoke to her daughter again. I lied and told
          her that I already knew about her father and was worried  for  her
          mother's  safety.  Thinking  her  mother  had  already   told   me
          everything, [the Second Appellant] opened up to me and spoke of  a
          lifetime of mental and physical abuse.  She mentioned how she  had
          often feared for her mother's life and how she had even  tried  to
          provoke her father herself to take his attention  away  from  [her
          mother]. She said it was only his pride and vanity that  had  made
          him agree to let her come to England to study accountancy. It made
          him look good in their community that he could afford to send  his
          daughter off to get a good education"

       The letter explains that when the First Appellant returned from  Iran
       in early summer of 2012 she was "upset and incoherent"  and  that  it
       was at that point that she opened up to Ms Styf  about  her  husband,
       and his abusive behaviour.

   15. This very detailed and lengthy letter  had  been  placed  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal, but Ms Styf was not able to attend that hearing.
       Judge Grant had therefore placed "no weight" on the letter, going  so
       far as to say "it is quite possible that she did not write  it".  The
       determination  goes  on  to  find,  in  the  alternative,  that   the
       Appellants have exploited their friendship with Ms Styf to get her to
       write it, and that this shows the  extent  to  which  the  Appellants
       would go to bolster their false claims.

   16. I set out that background because it was these comments that prompted
       Ms Styf to come to the hearing before me. She  suffers  from  serious
       arthritis and attended the hearing in a wheelchair. She told me  that
       it was very difficult for her to come but she considered it important
       that she do so because she wanted to rebut the  suggestion  by  Judge
       Grant that she had somehow been exploited by the Appellants. She said
       that wished it recorded that she was extremely offended by the First-
       tier Tribunal determination. She said "he made me feel like because I
       am disabled I cannot make my own decisions".  She  pointed  out  that
       she had known the Appellants over a long period,  and  that  for  the
       first three years (2009-2012) the First Appellant had never  directly
       told her that she was married to an abusive man. It was Ms  Styf  who
       pieced it together, and  drew  her  own  inferences  from  the  First
       Appellant's behaviour, for instance her  obsession  with  her  phone.
       Ms Styf stressed that as a professional working at a college attended
       almost exclusively by foreign students she is well aware of the  fact
       that some people might seek to put forward false asylum claims.   She
       wished to stress however that the information about Mr H had  emerged
       in a natural and gradual way and that it was in fact Ms Styf  who  in
       the end suggested that the women take advice about  claiming  asylum.
       Having known the Appellants since 2009 Ms Styf is in  no  doubt  that
       the basis of their claim - fleeing abuse by Mr H - is entirely true.

   17. I found Ms Styf  to  be  a  very  impressive  witness.  Although  she
       describes herself as now being a good friend to the First Appellant I
       am quite satisfied as to her objectivity and the truthfulness of  her
       evidence.   Her  evidence  serves   to   directly   corroborate   the
       Appellants' evidence that Mr H was frequently calling his  wife  from
       Iran and that she was expected to have her phone on at all times.  It
       also supports the claim more generally, in that  she  knew  that  the
       women were experiencing a  problem  as  long  ago  as  2009.  I  have
       attached considerable weight to Ms Styf's evidence.

   18. I now turn to the Second Appellant's evidence.   She has been in  the
       UK since October 2007 when she was given leave to enter as a student.
         She has returned to Iran only once since then, for a ten day period
       in July 2008. The basis of her claim is  that  if  returned  to  Iran
       today her father will force her to marry her cousin; if  she  refused
       she will be subject to serious harm. There is a danger  that  whether
       the marriage proceeds or not, her father will discover that she is no
       longer a virgin and that this too will  place  her  in  danger.   The
       background to this fear is that she too was  subject  to  controlling
       and violent behaviour by Mr H which led to  her  making  two  suicide
       attempts as a teenager.

   19. In a letter dated the 7th June  2013  the  Respondent  sets  out  her
       reasons  for  refusal,  subsequently  amplified  by  the   Presenting
       Officers who have dealt with the case:

       i) The Appellant's evidence is found to be inconsistent in  that  she
          originally  described  herself  as  "Iranian"  and  then  at   the
          substantive interview claimed that her father was Kurdish;

      ii) Her evidence  that  her  father  was  strict  and  controlling  is
          revealed not to be true by the fact that he allowed her to come to
          the UK to study;

     iii) Further inconsistency is found in the evidence  that  in  2012  he
          told her he hoped she would  die,  whilst  at  the  same  time  he
          continued to fund her studies in the UK;

      iv) Her claim not to have a good  relationship  with  her  brother  is
          inconsistent with the document purporting to be from him,  warning
          her about what their father will do to her if she returns to Iran;

       v) The claim of historical abuse is tainted  for  inconsistency,  the
          Appellant variously claiming her earliest memory of assault was at
          the age of 5, then at the age of 3 or 4;

   20. The Second Appellant is, like her mother, prone to hyperbole. In  the
       written  submissions  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   PO  Mr  Kotas
       highlighted how she claimed  that  her  mother  was  suffering  abuse
       "every minute" and that it would go  on  "forever".    Although  this
       kind of language is not helpful to  a  tribunal  attempting  to  make
       particular findings of fact I do not find it irreparably damaging  to
       her case. Obviously her mother was not being beaten  "every  minute",
       but I accept that for the Second  Appellant  it  may  feel  that  her
       mother was  constantly  suffering  abuse:  if  her  mother  was,  for
       instance, in constant fear of  physical  assault,  it  would  not  be
       inaccurate to say that she was, "every minute" suffering the  effects
       of that.

   21. I have read the  Second  Appellant's  witness  statements,  interview
       records and transcript of  her  oral  testimony.    There  are  minor
       discrepancies  but  none  such  that  the  core  of  the  account  is
       afflicted. I attach no weight, for instance,  to her inability to say
       with certainty how old she was the first time she witnessed  domestic
       violence.  Nor am I concerned by her failing to mention  any  Kurdish
       heritage in her screening interview. Whether or  not  her  father  is
       Kurdish is a matter which appeared to assume some importance  in  the
       First-tier Tribunal  hearing  because  an  expert  opinion  had  been
       obtained from  Sheri  Laizer,  who  had  drawn  heavily  on  her  own
       experiences of being married to a Kurd. Before me  Mr  Tufan  and  Mr
       Blundell quite sensibly agreed that  little  turns  on  this:   these
       accounts could be equally plausible if Mr H is ethnically Iranian and
       there would be little to gain by pretending he was  Kurdish.   Having
       had regard to her written and oral evidence I am satisfied  that  the
       Second Appellant has given a largely consistent account.

   22. I heard oral evidence from Sheptim Gurra.  Mr Gurra  is  an  Albanian
       national who met the Second Appellant  whilst  she  was  studying  in
       London. They started a  relationship.  In  November  2009  they  were
       "secretly married", in an Islamic ceremony. Mr  Gurra  was,  like  Ms
       Styf, called to give evidence about when and  how  he  came  to  know
       about Mr H.   Mr  Gurra,  like  Ms  Styf,  gave  straightforward  and
       credible evidence about this matter.  He  said  that  when  he  first
       started dating the Second Appellant she would always leave very early
       and say that she had to be home. He became suspicious and after  this
       had happened on several occasions confronted her and asked her if she
       was married "back home". She then explained for the first  time  that
       she had to be at home so that she could Skype with her Dad. Mr  Gurra
       said that "he couldn't believe it" that she had to do this every day.
         He said that although he now knows some of the details about Mr H's
       behaviour this was not disclosed to him easily. It took  her  a  long
       time to tell him things - although he had realised from the beginning
       that something was wrong "she is a hard woman to break" and  it  took
       her a long time to divulge her history to him. He believes that there
       are a lot of details he does not know because she finds it  difficult
       to talk about it.  He confirmed that when the Second Appellant was in
       hospital in the UK her father called her every day.  There have  been
       times when he has sent her messages in Farsi. Mr Gurra has been  with
       her when she has received those messages and she  has  become  upset-
       she has read them out to Mr Gurra. They say things like he will  kill
       her.  At present the Second Appellant and Mr  Gurra  are  not  living
       together, but they continue to see each other frequently.

   23. There are before me a number of documents said to emanate from  Iran.
       The Respondent asks that I place little to no weight on any of these,
       for instance a letter said to be from a lawyer  relating  to  divorce
       proceedings brought against the First Appellant  on  the  grounds  of
       adultery. Having had regard to the 'COI' report[8] that it is easy to
       purchase such documents in Iran I have acceded  to  the  Respondent's
       request and have placed no weight on these documents.   They  may  be
       perfectly genuine, but because of the  Respondent's  general  concern
       about the provenance of documents of this type I am prepared  to  set
       them to one side.  Of a  different  quality  are  a  series  of  text
       messages contained on the Second Appellant's phone. These  date  from
       April 2013 and are said to be from her father in Iran. I need not set
       them all out but one example is the following  from  the  17th  April
       2013:

          "you bastard girl; the milk you drank from the hyena  led  you  to
          follow the same fate as her. I hope that Almighty  God  kills  you
          with cancer. I will kill you because he dishonoured me.  I  cannot
          see into your cousin's eyes, you honourless"

       These are different from the other documentary evidence in that  they
       are available to be viewed on the phone, and it can be seen that they
       have been sent from a number in Iran.  It is of course possible  that
       these too are "faked", and I have considered the possibility that the
       Second Appellant caused someone  in  Iran  to  send  her  these  text
       messages in order to bolster her claim.  One document that is not  in
       issue is a confirmation that in  August  2010  the  Second  Appellant
       underwent an abortion at a Marie Stopes Clinic in Norwich.   Nor do I
       understand it to be in  issue  that  this  was  a  termination  of  a
       pregnancy which occurred  as  a  result  of  the  Second  Appellant's
       relationship with Mr Gurra.

   24. I have considered the evidence of all four  witnesses  in  the  round
       with the documentary and country background material.  Having done so
       I am satisfied that the core of the claim of these two Appellants  is
       consistent and that such discrepancies that have been  identified  by
       the Respondent  are  peripheral.    The  central  submission  of  the
       Respondent is that, notwithstanding any finding of consistency, these
       accounts  should  be  disregarded  as  implausible.     It   is   the
       Respondent's case that  the  following  propositions  are  inherently
       unlikely to be true:

       i) That a man such as Mr H would  allow  his  daughter  and  wife  to
          travel to the UK/work/study;

      ii) That the Second Appellant would have stayed with him for  as  long
          as she did.

   25. I do not need the expert evidence of Ms Laizer to  say  that  I  find
       neither of these matters implausible.

   26. It was Ms Styf's evidence that she  can  recall  being  told  by  the
       Second Appellant that it was a matter of "kudos" for  Mr  H  that  he
       send his daughter away for education.  I find  that  to  be  entirely
       plausible.  As a middle-class Iranian who could afford it,  having  a
       child educated prior to marriage would be a source of pride for Mr H.
        I also find it to be perfectly natural that he would agree that  her
       mother could come with her to 'keep an eye on her'.   The  Respondent
       submits that a violent and  controlling  man  would  not  allow  such
       freedom. I find that analysis to be overly simplistic. People's lives
       are complex, and such their behaviour rarely "black and white". Mr  H
       may well be a violent and controlling man behind closed doors, but to
       the outside world wish to portray himself as an educated, wealthy and
       even progressive  father.  It  did  not  occur  to  him  that  either
       Appellant would defy him, because having very effectively constructed
       the boundaries within which they were expected to  conform,   he  was
       confident that they  would  do  so.     There  is  therefore  nothing
       implausible in him continuing to pay college fees, or  having  agreed
       to the women leaving Iran in the first place.

   27. As to whether or not the First Appellant would have "put up  with  it
       so long" one only needs to have regard to the  depressing  statistics
       on domestic violence not just in Iran but in the 'liberal' West.   As
       I pointed out to Mr Tufan at hearing, the evidence does  not  support
       the suggestion that it would be anomalous for the First Appellant  to
       have  stayed.   For  instance,  frequently  cited  statistics   about
       domestic violence are that the average British victim is assaulted 35
       times before trying to leave[9], or that the average  American  woman
       subject to domestic violence will leave the home seven  times  before
       she can finally escape[10].  In the context of Iran the  evidence  is
       all the more stark, since women there can have very  little  hope  of
       receiving support or protection by  the  state,  or  even  their  own
       families.  That this is so is not in fact a matter  of  dispute:  see
       paras 23.68-23.74 of the COIR set out in the refusal  letter.   Women
       stay for a multiplicity of reasons: because of their children, out of
       financial necessity, out of hope that  it  will  change,  because  of
       social and religious expectations.  There is therefore nothing in the
       accounts before me that I find to be implausible.

   28. Having considered all of that  evidence  in  the  round  I  am  quite
       satisfied that all four witnesses were witnesses of  truth  and  that
       the First and Second Appellants have  been  victims  of  serious  and
       sustained violence at the hands of Mr H. I accept and  find  as  fact
       that he has made accusations of adultery against his wife,  and  that
       he will want to force his daughter into an "arranged"  marriage  with
       her first cousin. Even if the adultery accusations  are  withdrawn  I
       find, given the past history of this  relationship,  that  the  First
       Appellant will very likely face serious harm  at  the  hands  of  her
       husband.

   29. It is the Respondent's case that even if the Appellants are found  to
       be truthful they are not refugees.  The Respondent submits  that  the
       women are educated and could go and live in one of  the  other  "huge
       cities" in Iran, away from Mr H. Both  Appellants  managed  to  leave
       Iran lawfully and that means that he must have signed an exit  permit
       for them to leave.

   30. I have considered this submission carefully. Iran is  a  big  country
       and as educated women who have each other, the  Appellants  might  be
       said to be well placed to be able to support each other to the extent
       that it would not be risky, or unduly harsh,  for  them  to  relocate
       within Iran.  For the reasons that follow I  am  not  satisfied  that
       internal flight is a safe or reasonable option in this case.

       a) Both women have remained in the UK far longer than their  original
          visas, or the exit permits that accompanied them, intended.    The
          Second Appellant does not even have a valid passport anymore, hers
          having  expired  in  2012.  There  is  a  real  risk   that   such
          irregularities in their documents  will  lead  to  questioning  at
          port.  I find there to be a real risk that during such questioning
          the port authorities would wish  to  contact  Mr  H,  who  is  the
          women's  vali,  their  legal  guardian.   He  would  therefore  be
          immediately alerted to their return to Iran;

       b) It is the credible evidence that Mr H has lodged  a  case  against
          his wife in the Iranian courts.  Such a pending  case  would  also
          give rise to a real risk of harm and/or the alert of Mr H to their
          return should the women be questioned at port, or indeed  anywhere
          in-country about why they are living without a vali;

       c) The fact that two women sought to live separately from a male vali
          would be likely, in the context of conservative  Iranian  society,
          be something likely to draw adverse attention - this  is  all  the
          more so if one of the women (the Second Appellant) is perceived as
          "westernised" or "modern" by her dress  and  modes  of  behaviour.
          Even if they managed to get through the airport without Mr H being
          alerted,  they  would  be  constantly  living  in  fear  of   this
          happening. For instance any official asking to see the Appellants'
          identity cards might take it upon himself to make that call.

   31. The last full Country Background Information Report on Iran is  dated
       December 2013. The position for  women  is  summarised  at  paragraph
       3.16.10:

          Iran  is  a  strongly  patriarchal  society   and   women   remain
          discriminated against both in law and practice. Women who  have  a
          well-founded fear of persecution  as  a  result  of  their  gender
          should be treated as being members of a particular social group as
          they are discriminated against in  matters  of  fundamental  human
          rights and are unlikely  to  be  protected  by  the  state.  Women
          applicants who can demonstrate that they have a well-founded  fear
          of persecution as a result of their gender and that they  have  no
          recourse to state protection  or  internal  relocation  should  be
          granted asylum.

   32. I have found that both Appellants have shown  themselves  to  have  a
       well founded fear of persecution from Mr H,  and  by  extension,  the
       Iranian state. They are persecuted as members of a particular  social
       group.  I do not find there to  be  a  safe  or  reasonable  internal
       flight alternative.

       Decisions

   33. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors  of  law
       and it is set aside.

   34. I make a direction for anonymity having had regard to Rule 14 of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and  the  Presidential
       Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders.   I  do  so  in  the
       following terms:

          "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
          Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
          shall directly or indirectly identify either  Appellant   nor  any
          member  of  her  family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the
          Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
          direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings".

   35. I re-make the decisions in the appeals as follows:

       "The appeal of the First Appellant is allowed  on  asylum  and  human
       rights grounds.  She  is  not  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection
       because she is a refugee.

       The appeal of the Second Appellant is allowed  on  asylum  and  human
       rights grounds.  She  is  not  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection
       because she is a refugee".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             14th March 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1]  Both Appellants made asylum claims. Both were rejected. The decision
appealed by the First Appellant is a refusal to vary her leave to remain
and to remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the
Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. It is dated the 3rd October
2012. The Second Appellant appeals a refusal to vary her leave to enter and
to make directions for her removal under s47. That decision is dated the
11th June 2013.
[2] Promulgated on the 21st July 2014
[3] Permission granted on the 28th August 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
RA Cox
[4] Q50-51 Asylum Interview Record
[5] Paragraphs 51-58
[6] Written submissions by Presenting Officer Mr Stefan Kotas dated 10th
June 2014
[7] Dated 15th May 2014
[8] See for instance section 2.13 Country Information and Guidance Iran:
Background information, including actors of protection, internal relocation
and illegal exit November 2014

[9] http://www.lwa.org.uk/understanding-abuse/statistics.htm
[10] http://www.domesticabuseshelter.org


