
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09635/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7 July 2015                       |On 3 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                          MRS LINDA KAYAYA KABENGA
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Patel, Legal Representative
For the respondent:    Mr Dwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of the Democratic  Republic  of  the  Congo
    born on 26 September 1983. She appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  against
    the determination of first-tier Tribunal Judge Dearden dated 5  January
    2015 refusing her appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 7
    November 2014 refusing her asylum and humanitarian  protection  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. Permission  to  appeal  was  initially  refused  by  Senior  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew on 29 January 2015 but granted by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McWilliam on 12 May 2015.  She  was  of  the  view  that  it  was
    arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  may  have  erred   by
    considering the appellant's evidence that she had been released by  way
    of a bribe in light of the country guidance case relating to Sri  Lanka
    and not the DRC, as he should have done. Moreover, he stated  that  the
    Judge arguably erred because he did not make a  finding  about  whether
    the appellant has been raped. It is arguable that a finding about  this
    is relevant to the credibility and generally risk on return.

 3. The first-tier Tribunal Judge in her determination  did  not  find  the
    appellant credible. She found that the only evidence that  she  accepts
    from the appellant is that she worked at a TV station between 2003  and
    2007. The Judge stated at paragraph 22 (6) "I do not  believe  anything
    that the appellant urged upon me and therefore  this  evidence  was  of
    limited significance and weight".

 4. The Judge did not accept or find the appellant  credible.  He  did  not
    find the appellant's evidence  that  the  reason  why  the  appellant's
    father came to the adverse attention of the authorities in the DRC  was
    because he wrote a report about the Reformation of  the  army  for  the
    President of the DRC, Laurent Kabila in 1998 or 1999. The Judge did not
    find it credible that the report  14  years  earlier  would  bring  the
    appellant's father to the adverse attention  of  the  authorities.  The
    Judge did not find credible that the appellant would be arrested on  27
    July 2013, some 14 years after, the report  had  been  written  by  her
    father. It is not credible that the  appellant's  father  who  was  the
    author of the report, for 13 years prior to his death was not  arrested
    but that the appellant would be after her father died.

 5. The Judge also do not find credible, the appellant's evidence that  the
    appellant's father who was prohibited from leaving the DRC was able  to
    leave for South Africa when he became seriously ill.

 6. The Judge found that there was no cogent evidence that  the  appellant,
    as a daughter, would know anything about the report and did not  accept
    the situation as described. He did not find  the  appellant's  evidence
    credible that she received threatening telephone  calls  prior  to  her
    arrest from what she refers to at the "Presidency". When the  appellant
    decided to return the call and when she got through to  the  person  at
    the other end of the phone, said to her that they did not wish to  talk
    to her. This does  not  make  any  sense.  In  any  event  the  current
    president of the  DRC  is  the  son  of  the  President  for  whom  the
    appellant's father worked and obviously had an affinity. Therefore  the
    Judge found that the appellant's father, would have an affinity towards
    the appellant rather than a hostility.

 7. The Judge did not find  it  credible  that  the  appellant  would  give
    Position of the report to a church to destroy rather  than  destroy  it
    herself.  He  stated  that  the  appellant  did  not  give  a  credible
    explanation, for giving this report to the church to destroy.

 8. The Judge stated that the  appellant  claimed  that  she  escaped  from
    custody by means of  a  friend  paying  a  bribe.  Anyone  released  on
    bribery, his or her release would most likely  have  been  recorded  in
    such a way as to indicate that he was of no further interest, otherwise
    the attention of the authorities may revert to the person who  received
    the bribe. The Judge also did not find it credible that  the  appellant
    having been released by payment of a bribe, having fled from the DRC to
    Congo Brazzaville and that a friend would then return  to  the  DRC  to
    bring the appellant's  eldest  daughter.  The  Judge  stated  that  the
    appellant used a false passport in order to exit the  Congo,  paid  for
    her by her  school  friend,  Joedett  and  this  went  to  her  overall
    credibility. The Judge did not believe that the appellant was  arrested
    and that she escaped.

 9. The Judge stating that having placed all the  various  factors  of  the
    evidence together and having considered them cumulatively, some factors
    being more important than others and giving each piece of evidence  the
    appropriate weight, was of the view that the appellant had not told the
    truth on any aspect of her case. He stated that the matters upon  which
    the appellant failed to tell the truth were  not  minor  or  peripheral
    matters  but  were  matters  which  went  to  the  very  heart  of  her
    credibility. The Judge said that he believes nothing that the appellant
    urged upon him other than the fact that  she  worked  at  a  television
    station. The Judge stated that if the appellant has failed to tell  him
    the truth about matters which go to the very heart of her case that she
    has failed to discharge even the lower burden  of  proof  upon  her  to
    prove that she is of any interest to anyone if returned to the DRC.

10. The Judge relied on the country guidance case of BK v the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA  Civ  1322  and  stated  that
    there was no reason for him to depart from the guidance in the case. He
    stated that he was not minded to depart from the country guidance  case
    despite being invited to do so by the appellant's  representative  Miss
    Patel.

11. The Judge considered the report from Freedom  from  Torture  which  was
    formerly known as the Medical Foundation for the  care  of  victims  of
    torture dated June 2014. He took into account the submissions  made  on
    behalf of the appellant that she would be a single female and is likely
    to be raped in the Congo. However, the Judge stated that the report  is
    only based on the  experiences  of  34  women  who  were  detained  and
    tortured after 2006 and that it is apparent that the majority of  those
    women were targeted for  detention  as  a  result  of  their  political
    profile or that of a member of their family. The Judge stated  "I  have
    found that the appellant has no political profile and has not told  the
    truth about the involvement of her father.  I  simply  regard  this  as
    being too far, too wide to suggest that all women in the DRC face  real
    risk of being raped. The  Judge  added,  "It  is  noteworthy  that  the
    appellant's husband remains in the DRC".

12. The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules,
    under the humanitarian and protection provisions and Article 3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

13. The appellant's grounds of appeals are as follows  which  I  summarise.
    The appellant is a 31-year-old female from the DRC who arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 15 October 2014 and claimed asylum the next  day  for
    herself and her dependent daughter. The Judge failed to  make  findings
    on material matters and to consider  material  matters.  He  failed  to
    assess the risk on return properly.

14. The Judge failed to make any findings as to whether the  appellant  was
    raped or tortured when she was detained by the DRC authorities. It  was
    incumbent upon the Judge to consider the issue and make findings on the
    evidence, since it was a material part of the  appellant's  claim.  The
    Judge further failed  to  consider  whether  it  would  be  inhuman  or
    degrading to return the appellant to the DRC, a country where  she  had
    been  raped.  Rape  in  itself  can  amount  to  persecution.  Rape  is
    propellant throughout the DRC should mean that the Judge does not  have
    to assess the serious possibility of  it  re-occurring  again  for  the
    appellant. The appellant should not be expected  to  put  up  with  the
    serious possibility of being raped again even if this is  part  of  the
    normal country conditions. Lord Justice Buxton in AA Uganda [2008] EWCA
    Civ  579,  considered  forced  prostitution  as  being  normal  country
    conditions in Uganda. The same logic should be applied to rape  in  the
    DRC particularly where the appellant had already been raped  and  being
    made vulnerable thereby.

15. The Judge in not finding the appellant credible failed to consider  the
    appellant's witness statements at paragraph 5 and 9  before  coming  to
    his conclusion about the report. The Judge failed to consider questions
    21 and 62 of the appellant's asylum interview which explained  how  the
    appellant's father was able to leave the  DRC  for  South  Africa.  The
    Judge failed  to  consider  paragraph  9  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statement and her answers to questions 59 to 62 and 64  to  68  of  her
    interview.

16. The Judge stated that the current President of the DRC  would  have  an
    affinity towards the appellant rather than a hostility  and  failed  to
    give a proper reason for this finding. The  Judge  failed  to  consider
    that the appellant has not been given a proper opportunity  to  respond
    to the Judge's assertion that the appellant could have burnt the report
    herself rather than give it to the church.

17. The Judge considered the country guidance case of Sri Lanka and not DRC
    when it came to the issue of escape from prison after the payment of  a
    bribe. The country evidence shows that bribery and corruption  is  rife
    in the DRC at every level. The Judge did not find it credible that  the
    appellant's friend would return to the DRC to bring her eldest daughter
    to her where she fled to Congo Brazzaville. The appellant's friend  did
    not return to the DRC to do this as she came to Congo Brazzaville  from
    DRC with the appellant's eldest daughter who  had  been  found  at  her
    neighbours.

18. The Judge found the appellant's use of a false passport distracts  from
    the appellant's overall credibility. The Judge failed to consider  that
    the use of a false passport whilst being  behaviour  that  attracts  s8
    cannot be determinative and has to be considered in the round with  all
    the other evidence before  him.  The  Judge  failed  to  consider  that
    sometimes the only way a person can flee  persecution  is  by  using  a
    false passport.

19. The Judge failed to take  into  account  that  the  appellant's  cousin
    helped her escape has been killed by  the  authorities,  as  stated  in
    questions 83, 98 and 99 of her asylum interview. The  judge  failed  to
    make any findings on a material aspect of  the  appellant's  case.  The
    Judge's findings on the appellant credibility at paragraph  22  and  23
    are not sustainable. On the basis of the country  material,  the  Judge
    should have departed from the country guidance case of BK. Furthermore,
    the Judge seems, at paragraph 33 to use BK to  argue  against  risk  on
    return to lone females with a young child when it is a country guidance
    case regarding failed  asylum  seekers.  The  Judge  has  not  properly
    addressed the risk on return for the appellant as a lone female with  a
    young child particularly bearing in mind that she has  been  previously
    subjected to sexual violence.

20. At the hearing the senior presenting officer submitted that there is no
    material error of law in the first-tier Tribunal Judge's determination,
    and that she had considered all the evidence properly  and  rationally.
    She submitted that the Judge found the appellant not to be truthful for
    good reasons in his determination.

21. Mr on behalf of  the  appellant.  In  his  submissions  said  that  the
    Immigration Judge had not fallen into error.

    Discussion and findings on whether there is an error of law

22. I have given anxious scrutiny to the determination of Immigration Judge
    Dearden and have taken into account the grounds of appeal, the case law
    and the documents in the appeal. The argument before the Upper Tribunal
    is that the Judge has not  taken  into  account  all  the  evidence  in
    assessing the appellant's credibility. It is also argued that the Judge
    did not make findings on material matters and  did  not  properly  take
    into account the background evidence on the DRC and the  potential  for
    the appellant to be raped on return having already  been  raped  before
    she left the DRC.

23. I completely disagree and I find that the grounds of appeal are a  mere
    disagreement with the Judge's findings. The Judge  is  a  very  careful
    determination analysed all the evidence and was entitled to find on the
    evidence before him  that  the  appellant  and  her  evidence  was  not
    credible. The Judge did not accept  the  appellant's  evidence  in  any
    respect about the basis of her claim and said that the only  fact  that
    he accepts is that the appellant worked for a radio station and nothing
    more. It is implicit therefore that  the  Judge  did  not  believe  the
    appellant's evidence that she was arrested, raped and that she escaped.
    The Judge found that none of these events  occurred.  On  the  evidence
    before him the Judge was entitled to so find. The appellant grounds  of
    appeal are no more than a disagreement with the  Judge's  consideration
    of the evidence and the conclusion that he reached on it.

24. The appellant's asylum claim is based on her father's involvement  with
    the previous government of Laurent Kabila in that he wrote a report for
    the Reformation of the army of the DRC some 14 years  ago  in  1998  or
    1999. The Judge was entitled not to  find  credible  that  this  report
    written some 14 years earlier would bring the appellant's father to the
    adverse attention of the authorities, much less his daughter after  her
    father died. The Judge was entitled  not  to  find  credible  that  the
    appellant would be arrested on 27 July 2013, some 14 years  after,  the
    report had been written by her father. The Judge was  equally  entitled
    to find not credible that the appellant's father who was the author  of
    the report, for 13 years prior to his death would live  safely  in  the
    Congo but instead his daughter, would come to the adverse attention  of
    the authorities and arrested after her father died for  a  report  that
    her father wrote, some 14  years  ago.  Furthermore,  it  was  not  the
    appellant's evidence that she has  herself  a  political  profile.  The
    Judge was entitled to find  that  the  catalyst  for  the  authorities'
    interest in her was not credible.

25. The Judge was entitled to find, the appellant's evidence  not  credible
    that she would give her father's report which she claims was  of  great
    significance and which put her life at risk to a  church  for  them  to
    burn rather than doing it herself. The  Judge  took  into  account  the
    appellant's oral evidence when she said that she does not know why  she
    did this and that she asked herself the same question.  The  Judge  was
    more than entitled to come to the conclusion that this was not credible
    evidence.

26. It is not incumbent on the judge to set out every piece of evidence but
    it is clear from the determination which is cogent and clear  that  the
    Judge did not believe the appellant's evidence in  its  entirety  other
    than the appellant worked at a TV station in the DRC.

27. The Judge was entitled to find  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    current government, who is run by the son of Laurent Kabila, would have
    hostility towards the  appellant  given  that  the  appellant's  father
    worked for the father of the current President.

28. I find that the Judge was entitled not to depart from the case of BK as
    there are no circumstances  in  the  appeal  which  would  mandate  the
    departure. It was urged that the Judge did  not  properly  address  the
    risk on return for the appellant as a lone female with  a  young  child
    particularly bearing in mind that she has been previously subjected  to
    sexual violence. The Judge did not find the appellant credible and  did
    not accept her evidence that she  was  raped.  Furthermore,  The  Judge
    noted that the appellant's husband remains in the DRC.  This  obviously
    meant to the Judge that the appellant would not be a  sole  female  who
    has been arrested and raped being returned to the DRC. The  Judge  took
    into account the background evidence and made sustainable finding  that
    the appellant can be return to the DRC even as a sole female and no one
    in that country has an adverse interest in her.

29. I have taken into account that the Judge took into  account  the  wrong
    country guidance in respect of bribes but I find that  this  is  not  a
    material error. The Judge did not believe the appellant  evidence  that
    she had been arrested at all or released on a bribe.

30. I find that the Judge was entitled and required to reach his conclusion
    based on his consideration and evaluation of the evidence as  a  whole.
    There is nothing to suggest in the determination that the judge did not
    take into account the appellant's explanation,  witness  statement  and
    interview record.

31. I find that the Judge's reasoning is  reasonable,  understandable,  and
    not perverse. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:

         "15.     It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls  used  the
         words "vital" and "critical" as synonyms  of  the  word  "material"
         which we have used  above.  The  whole  of  his  judgment  warrants
         attention, because it reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not
         to overturn a judgment at first instance unless  it  really  cannot
         understand the original judge's thought processes when  he/she  was
         making material findings."

  32. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning in the
      Judge's determination for why he reached his conclusions. I find  that
      the grounds of appeal are no more than a disagreement with the  Judges
      findings of fact and the conclusions that he drew from such findings.

  33. I find that no material error of law has  been  established  in  Judge
      Dearden's determination.  I  find  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
      conclude that the appellant is not entitled  to  be  recognised  as  a
      refugee or to be granted humanitarian protection in  this  country.  I
      uphold his decision.

DECISION

Appeal dismissed


      Dated this 31st day of August 2015
Signed by,



.............................................
Mrs Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
