
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09873/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 11th June 2014                             |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                            Mr Mamadou Aliou Bah

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Brakaj, a solicitor with Iris Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Rackstraw, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Guinea and  he  was  born  on  8th  July,
    1992.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision  of
    the respondent, taken on 16th October, 2013, to  issue  directions  for
    his removal.  His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox  at
    North Shields on 15th January, 2014.

Immigration History

2.   The appellant made application for a student visa  on  8th  May,  2012,
    which was granted on 14th May, 2012, valid from 23rd May,  2012,  until
    23rd April, 2013.  The appellant maintains that he entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 10th June, 2012.   He  attended  at  a  Home  Office  Asylum
    Screening Unit on 23rd April, 2013 and lodged a claim for asylum.

Basis for the Appellant's Claim

3.   The appellant maintains that he was  an  active  member  of  Union  Des
    Force Democratiques  De  Guinee  ("UFDG").   He  claims  to  have  been
    arrested on 16th January, 2012 and held in  detention  for  two  weeks.
    During that time, he claims that he was beaten by police  officers  and
    subsequently released by an army officer who had been paid a  bribe  to
    secure the appellant's release by attending at the police  station  and
    asking for the appellant.  The appellant says that he left Conakry  and
    went to stay in his father's village where his grandmother  lived.   He
    claimed that he remained there for three to  four  months  without  any
    difficulties.  He was not in hiding because it was  a  remote  village.
    He claims that his father arranged for him to obtain a visa and that he
    travelled to Sierra Leone on two occasions to obtain the visa.

4.   The appellant maintains that on 18th April, 2013, whilst he was in  the
    United Kingdom, there  was  a  demonstration  in  Guinea  which  turned
    violent and, as a result, the police attended at his home in search  of
    him, because they believed that the appellant  was  involved  in  those
    demonstrations.  He maintains that he cannot return  to  Guinea  as  he
    will be persecuted by the authorities.

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox found that the  appellant  had  not  been
    the subject of any adverse attention from the authorities in Guinea and
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  In doing so  he  purported  to  have
    examined an expert's report, but failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  had
    examined it before making his findings of fact.  Permission was granted
    because the judge failed to make cogent  findings  about  the  expert's
    evidence and failed to demonstrate that it was examined before he  made
    his findings of fact.

The Hearing on 31st March 2014

6.   The matter came before me briefly on 31st March, 2014, when Mrs  Brakaj
    again represented the appellant and the respondent was  represented  by
    Mr P Mangion,  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.   On  that
    occasion I found an error of law in the determination of Judge Fox  and
    proceeded to hear evidence.  During the  course  of  that  evidence  it
    appeared that the appellant had given contradictory evidence and when I
    pointed that out to the appellant, the interpreter told me that she had
    made a mistake in translation.

7.   I did not feel that I could  continue  hearing  the  appeal  with  this
    interpreter, given that the consequences for  the  appellant  are  such
    that I might have concluded that he was not a truthful witness  and  he
    might, as a result, have been returned to his own country and  suffered
    serious harm.  I abandoned the hearing, having  found  that  Judge  Fox
    erred in his determination by failing to demonstrate that before making
    his findings of fact he had properly considered the expert's report.  I
    set aside Judge Fox's determination.

8.   The matter came for hearing before me next on 11th June.

9    I ensured that I and the representatives all  had  the  same  documents
    before us.  I confirmed that  I  had  an  original  Ordre  De  Mission,
    purporting to be issued by UFDG, an original UFDG Carte De  Membre,  no
    305306 dated 2008 in the  name  of  the  appellant  and  a  Convocation
    written in French.  I also had two copies of a US State Department 2013
    Country Report on human rights practices for Guinea, a  report  of  the
    Office of UNHCR published 11th  February  2014,  a  copy  of  Voice  of
    America News of 16th January  2014,  a  copy  of  the  Immigration  and
    Refugee Board  Canada  Report  on  ethnic  composition  of  police  and
    military forces dated 7th May, 2014, a letter from Iris  Law  addressed
    to Anita Schroven of 4th December  2013,  an  unsigned  certificate  by
    Legal & General Legal Services Ltd dated 20th June 2013 and a  copy  of
    the Convocation with an English  translation.   I  also  had  the  Home
    Office bundle and an appellant's bundle.

10.  I confirm that before considering  the  appellant's  evidence,  I  have
    carefully examined all these documents.

Oral Evidence of the Appellant

11.  I ensured that the  appellant  and  interpreter  both  understood  each
    other.  I cautioned both to listen carefully to the questions, to speak
    in short sentences and to tell me if they encountered any difficulty at
    any stage.  I warned the appellant that it was very difficult  to  give
    evidence through an interpreter  and  that  he  and  I  must  safeguard
    against any possibility of our misunderstanding each  other.   I  asked
    him to speak and tell me how  he  had  travelled  from  his  home  that
    morning after which the interpreter confirmed that she  understood  the
    appellant.  He confirmed that he understood the interpreter.

12.  I explained that this was his asylum appeal and that having applied  to
    the United Kingdom government for recognition as a refugee, the  United
    Kingdom government had stated that he was not entitled to international
    protection.  I also explained that I  was  independent  of  the  United
    Kingdom government and had  nothing  to  do  with  the  United  Kingdom
    government.  I told him that if I had any reason to believe that he was
    at real risk in his home country I would allow his appeal.



Evidence-in-Chief

13.  The Appellant confirmed his full names, his date of birth,  nationality
    and address.  He was shown the signature at page 13 of his  bundle  and
    confirmed that that was his signature.  He confirmed that he had signed
    the statement after it had been read to him in  his  own  language  and
    after he had confirmed that it was true and accurate in all respects.

14.  I warned the appellant  that  he  was  about  to  be  invited,  by  his
    representative, to adopt the statement as  part  of  his  evidence.   I
    explained that if  he  was  happy  to  adopt  the  statement  then  the
    statement would stand as his evidence before the Tribunal.  I explained
    that he was free to adopt anything he  wished  to  adopt  but  that  he
    should only do so if he was entirely satisfied that the contents of the
    document were true and accurate in all respects.  I explained  that  in
    the event that he contradicted something that he had  earlier  said  in
    his statement when he was later cross-examined, that may  cause  me  to
    believe that he was not telling the truth.  I pointed out to  him  that
    if I was of the opinion that he was not telling the  truth  then  there
    was a danger that he may damage his asylum appeal.

15.  The appellant confirmed  that  he  understood  the  warning.   He  also
    confirmed that he wished to adopt his  statement.   The  appellant  was
    then referred to page 14 of the bundle which was a copy of the Ordre De
    Mission.  He told me that he had been given this document by the  party
    in order to represent them at the polling station on polling day.

16.   The  English  translation  indicated  that  the  appellant  had   been
    designated to fulfil the role of alternate delegate of the UFDG at  the
    polling station of GS Alama Traore No Corat 246.   The  position  gives
    the  person  concerned  the  competence  to  substitute  the  incumbent
    delegate in case of absence or unavailability in order  to  ensure  the
    monitoring of the voting process and to receive a copy of  the  minutes
    containing the voting results, in accordance with the applicable  legal
    and regulatory provisions.  It appeared to be dated 6th November,  2010
    and was  signed  by  the  Secretary  General  of  the  section  or  his
    representative.

17.  The appellant explained to me that he was given  the  document  by  the
    person responsible in his sector when he was at the party headquarters.
     It was given to him on 5th November 2010.  They gave him the  document
    on the 5th, because they did not work on Saturdays.  It  was  given  so
    that he could prove that he was the party representative at the polling
    office.  He was due to attend the polling office on Sunday  7th.   When
    he attended he had to show this  document.   He  went  to  the  polling
    office to count how many people voted at the  voting  station  and  how
    many voted for his  party  and  how  many  votes  there  were  for  the
    opponent.  He had to arrive by 7.20am.  The poll started at 8am in  the
    morning.  He was there all day and left at around 8.45 to 8.50  in  the
    evening.  The polling station had closed at 8pm.

18.  The appellant's role was to count  those  voting  and  to  count  which
    party the vote was for.  His role was to  ensure  that  there  were  no
    false votes and to ensure that people  knew  how  to  vote.   When  the
    station was closed the votes were opened and counted.  They then had to
    prepare some minutes with the person responsible for the  vote.   There
    were other people there from other parties.

19.  The appellant was then referred to a document which appeared at B57  of
    the respondent's bundle.  This was the  Convocation  in  French.   That
    document was from the police who left it at his home.  He was not there
    when the police arrived.  It was left at his home on 30th January 2012.
     It had been placed with his other documents.  His parents put it  with
    all the appellant's  other  documents.   The  appellant  knew  of  this
    document when his father told him while he was hiding in  his  father's
    village.  He told the appellant that it had been left at home and  that
    he had to go to the police station the next  day.   The  appellant  was
    then shown a photocopy of the UFDG Carte De Membre.  He told me that it
    was his membership card relating to his membership  of  the  UFDG.   He
    obtained it in 2010.  It is dated 2008, because that was the year  that
    the party produced a lot of these cards.  Since, they have not produced
    any more because they used to use these 2008 cards to use them  up,  he
    explained.  The document was amongst the papers the  appellant  brought
    with him.

20.  The appellant was then referred to the record of his  asylum  interview
    and  to  what  was  recorded  on  page  11  of  the  interview   record
    continuation sheet in answer to question 35.  Question 35  was,  "Where
    is membership?" to which the appellant replied,  "I  left  in  Guinea".
    The appellant explained that he had not seen it amongst his  documents.
    When he later went back to immigration he gave them the card.  He  gave
    them the card less than a week later when he went to sign on.

21.  It was pointed out that at his screening  interview  conducted  on  3rd
    June,  2013,  reference  is  made  to  supporting  documents  which  he
    explained he had handed into the Home Office  in  Central  London,  but
    that he had not managed to obtain translations.  He was  then  referred
    to page B18 of his asylum interview conducted  on  Wednesday  15th  May
    which, on page B18, shows that he handed the  convocation  document  to
    the authorities.

22.  The appellant could not remember when he handed  the  immigration  card
    to the Home Office.  He  had  been  asked  for  a  translation  of  the
    convocation.  It was either before he first reported to the immigration
    authorities following his interview or on the first  occasion  that  he
    reported when he handed the documents in.

23.  In answer to further questions from his solicitor he confirmed that  he
    had nothing to corroborate this.

24.  The appellant explained that he had three siblings.  A sister lives  in
    Guinea with her husband and one brother and one sister are  in  Senegal
    studying.  The appellant's parents live at home.  He last spoke to them
    over a month ago.  It is a long time since he spoke to his siblings.

25.  His parents have not specifically told him that the police have  called
    at home recently but he said that he was aware of what is happening  in
    Guinea.  He cannot speak very much over the  telephone  because  it  is
    expensive and his parents have no access  to  internet.   He  confirmed
    that he was aware of the recent election results and told me  that  the
    risk had not changed because of the political situation.   A  week  ago
    the opposition which had formed an alliance at the assembly decided  to
    withdraw from parliament because the authorities would not  talk  in  a
    democratic manner.  Demonstrations were threatened again and  they  are
    likely to be violent.  The appellant was referred to what he  had  said
    during his visa application interview.  In answer  to  question  85  he
    indicated that at the end of his course he would return to  Guinea  and
    apply for  an  academic  programme  in  business  administration.   The
    appellant said that that was his intention.  He still had two years  of
    his original degree left.

26.  His solicitor referred him to what  he  had  said  at  page  4  of  his
    statement.  He had been arrested at a demonstration  on  16th  January,
    2012 and during his detention he was  seen  by  his  family.   On  18th
    January,  2012  an  army  officer  came  to  the  police  station   and
    intimidated police officers by claiming to be  one  of  his  relatives.
    The officer asked for the appellant and a guard took the  appellant  to
    the army officer inside the police station.  He  was  then  allowed  to
    leave the station with the army officer.  The  army  officer  told  him
    that the appellant's father had sent him to get the  appellant  out  of
    custody.  The appellant said that he did not know whether this  officer
    would be in a position to assist him  in  the  future  were  he  to  be
    arrested.

Questions put by me to clarify the appellant's evidence.

27.  In answer to questions put by me in order to  clarify  the  appellant's
    evidence, he confirmed that between  February,  following  his  release
    from custody, and May 2012 when he left Guinea and travelled by taxi to
    Sierra Leone for an appointment with the British Embassy, he  had  been
    staying at Prefecture De Telimel, where his  ancestors  came  from  and
    where his father was originally from.  He  could  not  stay  in  Sierra
    Leone, because he did not know anybody there and  he  had  never  lived
    alone and it would cost money.  That is why he had  been  staying  with
    his grandmother.  He was terrified at the thought of  being  caught  by
    the Guinea authorities.  He said it was easy to get into Sierra  Leone,
    because he paid money to avoid checkpoints.  I  asked  him  if  it  was
    right that having gone to  Sierra  Leone  on  8th  May,  2012  he  then
    returned to Guinea and then went back again to  Sierra  Leone  on  28th
    May, 2012 to collect his visa only to  return  to  Guinea  again.   The
    appellant confirmed that that was correct.

Cross-Examination

28.  The appellant was referred to page B25 of his asylum interview  and  to
    the answer recorded to question 53.  At question 53 he was asked:-

         "What is your role within UFDG?"

     To which the appellant replied,
         "I don't have a specific post but I was an active member".

29   The appellant agreed that he had been to  monthly  branch  meetings  in
    Lambanye.  He was  asked  why,  when  asked  at  question  151  of  the
    interview if there was anything else he wanted to add he had  not  made
    any mention of having acted as the representative for the party at  the
    polling station in 2010?  It was pointed out to him that there  was  no
    mention of this in his interview or in his written statement.  He  said
    it did not come to his  mind  and  within  the  party  he  had  various
    different roles.  He was referred to paragraph 8 of his statement which
    he had earlier adopted where he had said, "One of the  party  rules  is
    that if you are a  member  you  need  to  give  the  party  100%".   He
    confirmed that he had been committed.  He did not pay a membership fee,
    because at that time he was not actually  in  the  party,  just  taking
    part.  He was committed when he took up his membership.  He joined  the
    party in August 2010.

30.  The appellant said he did not inform  his  party  of  his  arrest.   He
    could not because he was detained.  He  did  not  ask  his  parents  to
    inform the party, because it would have endangered  party  members  who
    visited him.  He did not tell the  party  later  of  his  mistreatment,
    because he was not the only person being arrested and mistreated.   The
    head of the party knew that members were being detained and mistreated.
     The head is always condemning arrests.

31.  The appellant confirmed that after his release from custody he went  to
    his father's village because he wanted to stay in hiding to  avoid  the
    authorities.  He said that the village was a large area, but he was not
    actually in hiding in the village.  The  authorities  would  have  been
    interested in him because they knew very well that he was  involved  in
    demonstrations against the government.  He  was  always  the  first  in
    line.

32.  107 people voted at the polling station.

Further questions put by me in order to clarify the Appellant's Evidence

33.  I asked the appellant what subjects he had studied  at  university  and
    he told me that he was studying mechanical engineering.  It was a  four
    year course and he had done two years but not  actually  completed  his
    second year exam.

34.  I asked the appellant why he thought the party had asked him to  attend
    as a representative at the polling station when  he  had  only  been  a
    member of the party for a matter of weeks?  He said that  he  had  been
    asked by the head of his sector who believed in him.  The head  of  his
    sector had known him for many years.   He  had  not  joined  the  party
    earlier because he was at college and in Guinea people have  to  be  18
    years of age to  be  involved  in  politics.   I  pointed  out  to  the
    appellant that he had claimed that he had been doing work on behalf  of
    the party with "youth" and told me that youths meant  18  and  19  year
    olds.

Re-examination

35.  The appellant confirmed that he did not hide in the  village.   It  was
    remote and he was safe.  He could not stay there permanently.  He could
    not live in the village because there was nothing there and because  he
    was used to cities.  The village is  a  large  spread  out  area.   His
    grandfather had been a farmer who had sold his own cultivated  products
    at market.

Submissions

36.  Mrs Rackstraw relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter and asked me  to
    consider the timing of the appellant's claim.  He did not claim  asylum
    until his visa was about to expire which indicated  that  this  was  an
    opportunist claim.  She suggested that if this was a genuine fear  then
    the appellant would have made a claim at a  much  earlier  opportunity.
    He claims to have been a party activist but in truth was  someone  with
    no great responsibility or authority and was  only  involved  with  the
    party at youth level.  He subsequently claims to have had a  much  more
    involved role.  His claimed role at supervision on behalf of the  party
    at the polling station has simply been bolted on.   It  is  not  likely
    that he would have overlooked this role had he genuinely taken part  in
    the polling station when describing his activities  on  behalf  of  the
    party.

37.  The appellant is  not  credible  and  she  asked  me  to  make  adverse
    findings.  She suggested that his arrest was  not  credible  and  while
    arrests of that type do occur, his  release  is  simply  not  credible.
    People can be released on payment of a bribe, but  this  appellant  was
    not fingerprinted or photographed and  any  records  of  detention  are
    usually destroyed after payment of a bribe.

38.  For the appellant, Mrs Bakaj asked that I find him  credible.   The  US
    State Department Report does not indicate that in the case  of  payment
    of a bribe custody records are always destroyed.   In  any  event,  the
    police  have  a  continuing  interest  in  the  appellant  because  the
    convocation was delivered subsequently and the  fact  that  the  police
    have visited his home again in April 2013.  The appellant has explained
    the apparent error concerning his membership card and he has spoken  of
    not paying any membership fees.  He joined the party shortly after  his
    18th birthday but was well-known to people within the party.  His  role
    was as an assistant or  subordinate  at  the  polling  station  as  the
    document makes clear.

39.  So far as the failure to mention his role in 2010  was  concerned  this
    was  historic  and  it  was  a  one-off  occasion  that  he  acted   as
    representative.  She invited me to allow the appeal and referred me  to
    various parts of the objective evidence.



The Law

40.  In asylum appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant to show  that
    returning him to Guinea would expose him to a real risk of  persecution
    for one of the five grounds recognised by the 1951 Refugee  Convention,
    or to a breach of his protected human rights.  The question of  whether
    a person has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason
    has to  be  look  at  in  the  round  in  the  light  of  all  relevant
    circumstances and be judged against the situation as at the time of the
    appeal.  In human rights appeals, if it is established that there  will
    be an interference with the appellant's human rights and  the  relevant
    article permits, then it is for the respondent to  establish  that  the
    interference is justified.

41.  The standard of proof in asylum appeals as regards both the  likelihood
    of persecution and the establishment of past and  future  risks,  is  a
    real risk.  In Kacaj v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (01/TH/0634*) it was held by the  former  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    that the standard of proof in human rights appeals is the same as  that
    in asylum appeals.

Background Evidence

42.  I first considered the background, evidence in order that I  could  put
    the appellant's account into context and to better inform me as to  the
    risk which might face this appellant, were he to be returned to Guinea.

43.  I first considered the  Freedom  House,  Freedom  in  the  World  2013:
    Guinea paper of 16th January, 2013.  This gave a brief history  of  the
    country since its independence from France in 1958.  The country is not
    an electoral democracy.  The president is said to be elected by popular
    vote for up to two five year terms.  The legislature was  dissolved  in
    2008  and  replaced  in  2010  by  an  appointed  150  member  national
    transitional council.   The  2010  constitution  reinforces  democratic
    rights including explicitly outlining the legal  status  of  the  prime
    minister and establishing a number of bodies such as CENI,  a  national
    human rights body, and a constitutional court.  The two main  political
    parties are said to be RPG and the UFDG but there  are  more  than  130
    registered parties most of which have clear ethnic or  regional  basis.
    Corruption is said to be a serious problem and despite its rich natural
    resources most  of  the  population  lives  in  poverty.   Despite  the
    constitution guaranteeing media freedom there was said to  be  evidence
    that the government had shut down private  radio  stations  and  issued
    warnings to another.  Journalists were  harassed  and  assaulted  while
    covering public demonstrations.

44.  Respect for freedom of assembly is enshrined in  the  constitution  but
    repressed in practice.   The  judicial  system  demonstrated  a  modest
    degree  of  independence  beginning  in  2010.   Social  discrimination
    against women is common.  The Human Watch  World  Report  2013:  Guinea
    spoke of decades of neglect by  the  judiciary  of  successive  regimes
    leading  to  striking  deficiencies  in   the   sector   and   allowing
    perpetrators of abuses  to  enjoy  impunity  for  crimes.   Prison  and
    detention centres are overcrowded and inmates lack adequate  nutrition,
    sanitation and  medical  care.   There  were  numerous  allegations  of
    unprofessional conduct  and  several  of  excessive  use  of  force  by
    security forces.   They  were  said  to  have  killed  at  least  three
    protestors in often violent  demonstrations  and  to  have  arbitrarily
    detained and beaten others.  There were said  to  be  few  attempts  to
    investigate, discipline or prosecute those implicated.  There was  said
    to have been little systematic effort to improve economic governance.

45.  The US State Department Report 2012 Country Reports on Human  Practices
    suggested that there were reports that the  government  or  its  agents
    committed arbitrary or unlawful killings and that UFDG had reported  at
    least  two  politically  motivated  disappearances  during  the   year.
    Security force personnel use violence to quell  demonstrations  and  to
    punish participants and leaders.

46.  I also read the Amnesty  International  Annual  Report  of  2013  which
    confirmed that allegations of torture  and  ill-treatment  by  security
    forces continued.  Restrictions of freedom of  expression  and  of  the
    press as well as the targeting of certain journalists remain cause  for
    concern.

47.  The UNHCR Report of 17th January,  2012  spoke  of  major  shortcomings
    remaining in the follow-up to  human  rights  violations  despite  some
    positive steps.  Human rights were said to have improved since the post-
    electoral crisis at the end of 2010 but there were  reported  cases  of
    arbitrary arrest and  detention  by  security  forces  during  peaceful
    demonstrations.   Impunity  remained  a  serious  problem   in   Guinea
    especially amongst  the  security  forces.   There  appeared  to  be  a
    shortage of trained personnel and resources and a lack of  independence
    and corruption which caused difficulties in the judicial system.

48.  I very carefully read the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
    Guinea: The Union of Guinea's Democratic Forces (UFDG) party, including
    its structure, the name of its president and its main leaders; how  its
    members are treated by the authorities 01 03 2014.  Unfortunately  this
    dealt with events between 2009 and 2012, but it was clear that the UFDG
    were complaining that numerous party members had  been  imprisoned  and
    that others had been killed  during  clashes  between  the  police  and
    demonstrators at a banned opposition rally.  I read  other  reports  of
    police in Guinea clamping down on protestors against voter registration
    software in 2003 and of  police  having  been  involved  in  a  violent
    crackdown on opposition protestors who were demanding free and credible
    legislative elections.

49.  I paid particular attention to the US  State  Department  2013  Country
    Reports  on  Human  Rights  Practices:  Guinea  which  confirmed   that
    government officials continued to employ torture  and  cruel,  inhumane
    and degrading treatment or punishment with impunity  and  continued  to
    use violence  to  quell  demonstrations  and  punish  participants  and
    leaders resulting in deaths and numerous injuries.  Abuse of  prisoners
    was said to be  common.   There  were  said  to  be  reports  that  the
    government or its agents committed arbitrary or unlawful  killings  and
    that the authorities had failed  to  conduct  investigations  into  the
    outbreak of violence leaving  as  many  as  200  dead.   Prison  record
    keeping was said  to  be  inadequate  and  it  was  explained  that  if
    prisoners pay bribes for their releases then records of  their  arrests
    would often be lost.

50.  Whilst the law provided that detainees be charged before  a  magistrate
    within 48 hours many detainees were held for much  longer  periods  and
    despite the fact that the law precluded arrest between the hours of 9pm
    and  6am  night  arrests  continued.   Corruption  remained  widespread
    amongst the police and  security  apparatus  and  the  judicial  system
    lacked independence, was underfunded, inefficient and overtly corrupt.

51.  The Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada  paper  of  7th  May,  2014
    referred to a 2009 UN  Commission  of  Inquiry  which  found  that  the
    president and members of the presidential guard, national  gendarmerie,
    specialised police units, civilian militia and police were  responsible
    for crimes against humanity for actions  taken  against  protestors  on
    28th September, 2009.   A  series  of  opposition  demonstrations  held
    throughout  2013  turned  violent  as  a  result  of  clashes   between
    opposition  demonstrators,  pro-government  supporters   and   security
    forces.  Excessive use  was  said  to  be  used  against  demonstrators
    supporting the opposition and there was systematic use of  torture  and
    ill-treatment against persons in detention, police custody or  held  at
    controlled posts.

52.  I also read the UNHCR Report of 11th February, 2014  which  highlighted
    difficulties adequately explained in other  background  material.   The
    Voice of America News  of  16th  January  referred  to  Guinea's  prime
    minister and cabinet  resigning  following  last  September's  bitterly
    contested parliamentary election.

Expert Evidence

53.  I carefully considered the report of Dr Anita  Schroven.   Dr  Schroven
    is an anthropologist by training and she possesses  a  very  impressive
    curriculum  vitae.   She  is   a   researcher   at   the   Centre   for
    Interdisciplinary Studies Bielefeld University.  She has written widely
    on Guinea and Sierra Leone.  However, she does  not  purport  to  be  a
    forensic document examiner despite, her comments  on  the  Convocation.
    She confirms that the qualities of paper, print and style of  the  pre-
    printed form is typical and that the look, style and quality  of  print
    of the seal are typical for ones used in the  Guinean  public  service.
    She also explained that filling in blanks by hand using a ballpoint pen
    is common practice in the processing of cases like arrest  warrants  or
    convocations which are usually delivered  to  the  designated  person's
    house.  As part of her research on public administration,  she  reports
    having seen a large number of convocations of the same style,  official
    form and seals.  She  concluded  that  she  had  no  doubt  as  to  the
    authenticity of the document.

54.  The expert then examined the Ordre De Mission and said that  this  also
    had a typical look for  the  official  forms  used  in  Guinean  public
    service or other  public  institutions  like  political  parties.   The
    qualities of paper, print  and  style  of  the  pre-printed  form  were
    typical.  She confirmed that the filling in of blanks by hand  using  a
    ballpoint pen was common practice and that the seal and signature  were
    part of the printed document and not  applied  to  paper  individually.
    She confirmed that as part of her research she had seen  a  variety  of
    such documents in the same basic style, official form and  seals.   She
    said that she had no indication  to  doubt  the  authenticity  of  this
    document.

55.  Next she considered the Carte De Membre and said that this was  typical
    of the official forms used in  the  Guinean  public  service  including
    political parties and that the qualities of paper, print and  style  of
    the pre-printed form was typical.  The look, style and quality print of
    the seal were typical for ones used by public  institutions  in  Guinea
    and the serial number of the card was marked on  the  backside  of  the
    document.  She noted that the year of membership  was  shown  as  being
    2008, but the signatures of the party  treasurer  and  cardholder  were
    visible on the  bottom  of  the  card.   She  said  that  weighing  the
    signature of the cardholder (seemingly consistent with other signatures
    of  the  appellant)  higher  than  questions  of  the  membership  year
    (considered separately below, question 2)  "I  have  no  indication  to
    doubt the authenticity of the document".  She then notes that the  year
    2008 is indicated on the membership card and says that political  party
    chapters often offer annual membership cards in  order  to  keep  their
    membership registries more up-to-date and facilitate record keeping  as
    well as collect membership fees.  Office infrastructure  and  financial
    resources for such infrastructure is  generally  very  weak  and  large
    parties such as UFDG often have to rely on paper-based rather than  IT-
    based solutions for office  management.   She  said  that  taking  into
    account the broad political mobilisation process in Guinea in 2010 with
    comparatively free elections taking place for the first time, political
    parties experienced a surge in membership and  thus  it  was  plausible
    that membership cards were under high demand.  She said  that  she  was
    not surprised that a membership card once printed  in  2008  should  be
    used on a later occasion and used for the year 2010.

56.  The expert then referred to arbitrary arrest  by  security  forces  and
    the fact that members of the police  or  army  gain  side  income  from
    family members' bribes  aiming  to  liberate  family  members  who  are
    captured.   Given  the  general  level  of   corruption,   personalised
    alliances and cliques within the Guinean security forces she said  that
    it was possible for individuals by paying bribes to certain officers or
    guards who will either see to the  person's  liberation  personally  or
    have them released by  subordinate  members  of  the  security  forces.
    Accountability, administrative  procedures  and  equipment  for  record
    keeping were said, she said, to  be  lacking  in  Guinean  prisons  and
    concluded that it was very possible that the appellant was  freed  from
    prison during night by family relations and bribes and it was therefore
    likely that the appellant had been  set  free  without  formal  charges
    still issued against him.

57.  I thought it was a very  great  pity  that  the  expert  had  not  read
    carefully the appellant's claims.  He had not claimed to have been held
    in a prison.  It was claimed that an army officer was bribed  to  visit
    the guards at the police station and to intimidate them into  releasing
    the appellant into his custody.  The expert has not commented  on  this
    form of release at all.

58.  The expert suggested that travel across porous borders in  West  Africa
    is not difficult and that the infrastructure at the  airport  is  weak.
    Scanners do not work and identity is checked by  personnel  looking  at
    travel documents.  There  is  no  electronic  reading  or  scanning  of
    passports or checking of travellers against  a  list  of  names  beyond
    those of the airline passenger list.  Convocations were said to be sent
    to the person's house and another copy  to  the  neighbourhood  chief's
    office or house.  Public service including security forces  and  border
    control in Guinea have no  integrated  data  system  to  quickly  share
    information as this would require IT infrastructure  not  available  in
    Guinea.  The information on search warrants, convocations and the  like
    would not reach security personnel at the airport unless a high-profile
    individual was wanted.  The expert believed that it was  possible  that
    the appellant could travel  out  of  Conakry  using  his  own  passport
    without problems of being linked to convocation or other legal matters.

59.  The expert then commented on internal relocation  and  said  that  this
    would be difficult.  Information originating from a village or town  in
    the countryside could reach people of  the  same  regional  and  family
    origin in distant cities directly by mobile phone or  within  weeks  by
    travellers who may travel through the town in question and pass on  the
    information to the people they know who have relatives  or  friends  in
    the region.  Sooner or later, she believed that the appellant would  be
    identified and his whereabouts known to his connections in  Conakry  or
    Telimelle.

Findings

60.  It was against this  background  and  in  the  light  of  the  expert's
    evidence that I considered the appellant's evidence before me and  made
    the following findings of fact:-

    (a)  I believe that the appellant is who he  claims  to  be  and  is  a
         citizen of Guinea.


    (b)  I believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that the appellant
         did begin university in 2010.  He  said  that  he  left  after  his
         second year of studies due to his problems.   His  second  year  of
         studies would have been in 2012.  The appellant  told  me  that  he
         left his studies before he took his second year examinations.  When
         he spoke of  leaving  university  after  the  second  year  of  his
         studies, "due to my problems".


    (c)      I believe that the only problems the  appellant  had  were  in
         completing his studies at university.  I do not believe  that  this
         appellant was ever involved  in  politics  in  Guinea.   I  do  not
         believe that he was ever a member of the UFDG.  I  do  not  believe
         that he was  ever  required  to  attend  a  polling  station  as  a
         representative on behalf of the UFDG in 2010 and I do  not  believe
         that he was ever arrested or detained in Guinea.  I give my reasons
         for those findings as follows:-


         (i)  The appellant told me that he joined the UFDG in  August  2010
             and as evidence of his membership  he  produced  a  membership
             card no 305306, which is  actually  dated  2008.   I  did  not
             believe for one moment that if the appellant  had  joined  the
             UFDG  in  2010,  he  would  have  been  issued  with  a  party
             membership card with a printed date of 2008 on it, without the
             people who were issuing the card having altered  the  date  to
             show its date of issue.  I accept, as the expert  points  out,
             that in the run-up to the 2010 election there was an  increase
             in political activity, but I do not believe that  a  political
             party would issue a membership card dated 2008 if it  was  not
             actually issued until 2010.  Any political party would wish to
             issue a party membership card  to  a  member  as  a  means  of
             identity.   The  holder  of  the  card  could   hardly   prove
             membership by producing a membership card which was two  years
             out of date when it was issued.  Nothing would have  prevented
             the signatories on the card having altered the  date  to  show
             its true date of issue.


             I do not believe that the card was  genuinely  issued  to  the
             appellant.  He was asked for evidence of  membership  when  he
             was interviewed and said that he had left it  in  Guinea.   In
             giving evidence to me he sought to persuade  me  that  he  had
             handed  the  original  membership  card  in   to   immigration
             officials when he subsequently went to sign on, because he had
             found the card amongst his papers.  I do not believe  him.   I
             believe that having attended his  interview  and  having  been
             asked for a membership card, he then contacted his friends  in
             Guinea who posted this document to him.


         (ii) The appellant maintains that he was known by the head  of  his
             sector for many years and that was why he was trusted, so soon
             after having joined the party in August  2010,  to  act  as  a
             delegate at the polling station in November 2010.  I  did  not
             believe the appellant.  I did not believe that someone who was
             so politically na�ve as the appellant and  who,  according  to
             him, had only joined the party in August 2010, would have been
             invited on behalf of the party to  act  as  a  delegate  at  a
             polling station during polling  and  to  oversee  the  polling
             count, even as an alternate delegate.  I appreciate of  course
             that the polling station  was  obviously  a  very  small  one,
             because according to the appellant only 107  people  voted  at
             it.  However I do not believe it to be credible  that  someone
             with such a short connection with the party  would  have  been
             invited to undertake such a role.


         (iii)    I believe that the appellant is politically  na�ve.   When
             asked what he did as an active member, he said that when there
             was a meeting he would deliver leaflets to  inform  people  of
             the meetings, organise meetings and organise musicians to come
             for the youth to make it "lighter for the youth".   I  believe
             that if the appellant had  participated  in  monthly  meetings
             over a two year period he would have been able  to  give  much
             greater detail of his activities and a much better idea of the
             particular policies of UFDG that appealed to  him.   The  only
             thing he mentioned was that he liked the fact that  the  party
             wanted to help the youth find jobs after university.  I do not
             believe that the appellant had any interest at all in politics
             in Guinea while he was there and that  his  only  interest  in
             politics in Guinea now is because he wants to succeed  in  his
             asylum appeal.


         (iv) According to the appellant, he was at the polling station from
             shortly before it opened in the morning, until  after  it  had
             closed in the evening.  This  was  an  unusual  role  for  the
             appellant; he never, according to  him,  performed  this  role
             again on behalf of the party and yet when  asked  to  describe
             his activities on behalf of the party he made  no  mention  at
             all of it.  I felt this  further  undermined  the  appellant's
             credibility.


         (v)  According to the appellant, he used to let  people  know  when
             there were meetings of the party.  The head office or  one  of
             the secretaries would tell him when there was a meeting and he
             would  pass  the  information  on.   One  his  duties  was  to
             distribute flyers.  I  thought  it  curious  that  if  monthly
             meetings of the party were held, members could be  advised  at
             the meeting they attended when the next meeting was  going  to
             be held and there would have been no need for the appellant to
             pass on messages from the  secretary  to  individual  members.
             The appellant said that commune meetings were held in Taouyah,
             but he did not attend these and he did not know how often  the
             meetings took place, and yet he claimed to be an active member
             and said that the party rules demanded  100%.   He  claims  to
             have had direct contact with members of the public as  a  UFDG
             representative.  And yet the only activity he  could  describe
             was delivering leaflets and trying to  encourage  and  attract
             new members.  Given that the  appellant  seemed  incapable  of
             giving any further detail of his  claimed  role,  I  concluded
             that he could not possibly have been involved in  politics  in
             Guinea on behalf of the UFDG.


         (vi) The appellant claimed that he  participated  in  five  or  six
             demonstrations which were organised by party members when  the
             government made decisions which the party disagreed with.   He
             gave an example of when members  of  the  opposition  did  not
             agree with the head of the electoral commission, or  suspected
             that the head of the commission was working for the government
             and that another occasion was when the  party  suspected  that
             materials  used  during  the  election  were   corrupt.    The
             appellant said that these demonstrations always turned violent
             and that he managed to escape.


         (vii)     In  his  statement  the  appellant  claims  that  he  was
             organising UFDG social gatherings which  occurred  once  every
             three months when people talked, ate together and had  a  good
             time.  He said he organised one  of  these  on  16th  January,
             which started at approximately 4pm.  He  believed  that  there
             were 400 people present and after an hour  the  police  raided
             the gathering and threw tear gas and dispersed  them.   I  did
             not believe the appellant.  According to the  appellant,  this
             was a social  gathering,  not  a  demonstration  or  political
             meeting in the sense that speeches were  delivered;  musicians
             were playing and people were talking and eating together.  The
             appellant says he was arrested and taken to a  police  station
             and then put in a cell.  He then says he was transferred to  a
             bigger police station  and  questioned  and  beaten  up.   His
             parents came to see him.  The appellant claims  to  have  been
             beaten on seven occasions and on 28th January an army  officer
             came to the police station, intimidated  the  police  officers
             and secured the appellant's release.  While I accept that  the
             objective material does suggest that  such  release  might  be
             plausible, I thought it curious that the appellant  was  taken
             to Prefecture Tellemille where he remained until 7th May 2012.
              According to him he was living in a remote area  but  not  in
             hiding.  He claims he then went  to  the  British  Embassy  in
             Sierra Leone travelling by taxi.  At the border he  was  taken
             on a motorbike through trees to avoid a formal checkpoint  and
             having secured his safety by reaching Sierra Leone he  decided
             not to remain there because he did not know anybody there,  he
             had never lived alone and it would cost money to  stay  there.
             However, the appellant came to the United Kingdom where he had
             never been before and where  his  parents  supported  him.   I
             accept that the Convocation may very well be a genuine form of
             Convocation, I do not, for  all  the  reasons  given  in  this
             paragraph 60 (c), believe it to have ever been issued  to  the
             appellant or accept that  it  is  a   reliable  document  (See
             Tanveer Ahmed v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2002] UKIAT 00439).


         (viii)   Having arrived in Sierra Leone and attended at the embassy
             making his application for  a  visa  to  come  to  the  United
             Kingdom, he then travelled back to Guinea  the  same  way.   I
             thought it wholly undermined the appellant's credibility  that
             having escaped the country where he claimed he was  living  in
             fear, he then travelled back there.  That did not appear to me
             to be the actions of somebody who was in fear of arrest by the
             authorities.


         (ix) The appellant said that he then returned to  Sierra  Leone  on
             28th May 2012 to collect his visa and again he paid  money  to
             avoid going through the checkpoints.  Having obtained his visa
             he  then  decided  to  return  to  Guinea  again,  this   time
             travelling to his  uncle's  house  in  Kissosso,  Conakry.   I
             thought   this   completely   undermined    the    appellant's
             credibility.  Not only did he return to Guinea on  the  second
             occasion having reached Sierra Leone, but, according  to  him,
             he actually went to Conakry.


         (x)  The appellant left Guinea on 10th June 2012 and  flew  to  the
             United Kingdom.  He then began studying in the United  Kingdom
             and hoped things would calm down at home.  It is  that  reason
             he gives for not having claimed asylum on his arrival.


         (xi) I  quite  accept  that  very  often  it  is  not  possible  or
             practicable for an appellant to claim  asylum  immediately  on
             arrival in the United Kingdom.  There may be many reasons  why
             they would choose to leave it for several weeks,  or  possibly
             even for a month or two before  making  a  claim  for  asylum.
             However, this appellant actually embarked  on  his  course  of
             studies and did nothing at all about claiming asylum  until  a
             matter of days before his visa was  due  to  expire,  when  he
             claims that he read of a large demonstration in  Guinea  which
             turned  very  violent.   This  occurred  in  April  2013,  but
             according to the Freedom House Report of  16th  January  2013,
             there were frequent violent clashes  between  security  forces
             and demonstrators resulting in numerous  injuries,  detentions
             and arrests during 2012.  It must have been  apparent  to  the
             appellant that the situation in Guinea was not improving,  and
             yet he still failed to claim  asylum.   I  believe  that  this
             further undermined the appellant's credibility.


         (xii)    I do not believe that the  police  came  looking  for  the
             appellant at his home in 2013, or that they went to  his  home
             in 2012 with a convocation.  I believe  that  the  appellant's
             claim bears no relationship at all to the truth  and  is  pure
             fiction.


         (xiii)   Dr Schroven is a distinguished expert, but with very great
             respect to her, her expertise  does  not  extend  to  forensic
             document examination.  I fully  accept  that  the  Convocation
             might well be printed on the  correct  paper  in  the  correct
             style form and with the correct seals but  I  am  afraid  that
             applying Tanveer Ahmed I have  concluded  that  it  is  not  a
             document upon which I can place any reliance.  I have  reached
             the same conclusion in respect of the Ordre De Mission and the
             Carte De Membre.  I do not believe there to be  any  truth  in
             the appellant's claims and I do not  believe  that  he  is  of
             remotest interest to the authorities in Guinea.


     (d) Nothing in any of the evidence before me leads me to  believe  that
         the appellant  will  be  in  any  danger  of  being  persecuted  or
         suffering ill-treatment or harm such as to amount to  a  breach  of
         his  Article  3  rights  on  return  to  Guinea.   I  dismiss   the
         appellant's asylum appeal and, because it  is  based  on  the  same
         factual matrix, his humanitarian protection appeal  and  Article  3
         appeal.



Human rights appeal

61.  The appellant's grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  suggest
    that the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would be  unlawful
    under Section 6, Human Rights Act  1998  and  that  his  removal  would
    breach Articles 2 and 3.  I am satisfied that Articles 2  and  3  would
    not be breached by the appellant's removal.  I was not addressed on the
    appellant's Article 8 rights and it was not suggested that his  removal
    would breach them.

62.  I set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox.   My
    decision is that  the  appellant's  asylum  appeal  be  dismissed,  his
    humanitarian protection appeal be dismissed and that his  human  rights
    appeal be dismissed under Articles 2 and 3.

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
