

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09561/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 March 2016                         |On 4 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                    [S T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms J Masons, of Broudie Jckson Canter, solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Iran, has been  granted  permission
      to appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walters
      who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  immigration  decision  that
      accompanied refusal of his asylum and human rights claim. The position
      now is an unusual one. It is common  ground  and  agreed  between  the
      parties that the decision of the judge to dismiss  the  appeal  cannot
      stand, but for different reasons, and so there is a discussion  to  be
      had as to  the  appropriate  disposal  of  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.


   2. The appellant's claim is based upon his account of having converted to
      Christianity in Iran and being baptised as a Christian, as a result of
      which his home was raided by the authorities as they sought to  detain
      him for apostasy. He was not at home but was informed of the  raid  by
      neighbours. With the assistance of an agent  he  left  Iran,  crossing
      into Turkey on a donkey, and then flew to the United Kingdom, claiming
      asylum on arrival at Heathrow airport. Since his arrival in the United
      Kingdom the appellant has attended regularly at a Christian church and
      the Judge received oral evidence from two ministers  of  that  church,
      both of whom said they were confident of the genuineness of his faith.
      They confirmed also that he has been "reaffirmed in his  baptism"  and
      has become "a regular member of their church community".

   3. In dismissing the appeal the Judge did not accept to be true any  part
      of the appellant's account of his experiences in  Iran.  There  is  no
      challenge to that finding. And nor could there be, as  the  judge  has
      given clear and  legally  sufficient  reasons  for  arriving  at  that
      finding of fact. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  pursued  on  the
      basis that the appellant is at risk of return because of  his  illegal
      exit from Iran and because, regardless of the findings of the judge in
      respect of events in Iran, the evidence now clearly  established  that
      the appellant has become a practice Christian in the United Kingdom.

   4. The judge did not accept to  be  true  any  part  of  the  appellant's
      account of his experiences in Iran. The respondent's position is  that
      it is less clear what the judge made of his  evidence  concerning  his
      activities since his arrival in the United Kingdom. On the other hand,
      on behalf of the appellant, Ms Mason submits that it is clear from the
      decision of the judge that he did accept that the appellant is  now  a
      practicing Christian. In her submission, on the basis of that  finding
      of fact, the appeal should have been allowed. Although Mr McVeety  did
      not dissent from that view, this is something I address further below.




   5.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal.  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Chamberlain said this:


           "It is arguable that the judge has failed to  consider  properly
           the respondent's own country guidance and the relevant case law,
           in particular in relation to illegal exit from Iran, given  that
           he accepted that the appellant's passport is with his parents in
           Iran, and therefore that the appellant  left  Iran  without  his
           passport. It  is  also  arguable  that  he  failed  properly  to
           consider  the  respondent's  country  guidance  in  relation  to
           ordinary Christian activities,  when  considering  the  risk  of
           future persecution."


   6. In the response to the grant of permission  to  appeal,  made  by  the
      respondent pursuant to  rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008, the respondent said:


           "In relation to the appellant's sur place activities and illegal
           exit from Iran, it is accepted that the IJ  has  not  adequately
           considered  risk  on  return  to  Iran  in  the  light  of   the
           respondent's country guidance policy and as such this element of
           the grounds are not opposed."

   7. The respondent's own country guidance policy  is  to  be  found  in  a
      document published in December 2014: "Country Information and Guidance-
       Iran: Christians and Christian Converts".


   8. The first question to be addressed, therefore, is whether, as Ms Mason
      submits, there can  be  drawn  from  the  determination  a  clear  and
      unambiguous  finding  or  acceptance  that  the  appellant  is  now  a
      practicing Christian or whether, as Mr McVeety submits, the judge made
      no finding of fact at all, but simply considered the issue of risk  on
      return, albeit erroneously, on the assumption that the appellant was a
      Christian Convert, whether that be in fact the case or not.


   9. I am satisfied, so that I am entirely sure, that Ms Mason  is  correct
      to say that the judge has made a finding of fact that the appellant is
      now actively practicing Christian. I reach that  firm  conclusion  for
      the following reasons.


  10. Having address the appellant's evidence concerning events on Iran, the
      judge said, at paragraph 114:


           "In conclusion, I did not find the Appellant's  evidence  as  to
           the events that he says occurred in Iran to be credible.  I  did
           not believe his evidence about his  conversion  to  Christianity
           there."


      From which it can be seen that this is a rejection only of  the  claim
      to have converted to Christianity while still in Iran.


  11. Addressing next the appellant's evidence of his church  activities  in
      the United Kingdom, the judge said at paragraph 117:


           "As I have disbelieved the  Appellant's  account  of  events  in
           Iran, I do not find that it is reasonably likely that he will be
           considered as a person who wishes to overthrow the regime  based
           on his activities at the Parish of St. Thomas' and St  Lukes  in
           Ashton-in-Makerfield..."


      However that was not because the judge was making any adverse  finding
      in respect of the appellant's association with the church but because,
      although the judge accepted that the appellant's  photograph  appeared
      on the parish's social media publications and he had met the Bishop of
      Liverpool:


           "... I did not accept that  the  Iranians  would  know  anything
           about it."


  12. Further, at paragraph 121 of his decision, the judge said this:


           "I have considered the issue of risk on return on the basis that
           the appellant's conversion to Christianity is genuine  and  took
           place once he had joined St. Thomas' and St Luke's Church."


      Although one view may be that here the judge is testing his assessment
      of risk on return by taking the appellant's  claim  of  his  presently
      held religious beliefs and activity at its  highest,  nowhere  in  the
      decision is to be found anything indicating a finding by the judge  to
      the contrary, which is in stark contrast to his clear and  unambiguous
      rejection of the conversion said to have taken place  in  Iran.  I  am
      reinforced in that conclusion by what the judge said at paragraph  126
      if his decision:


           "I therefore do not find that there is  a  real  risk  that  the
           appellant will be identified on return as being an  apostate  by
           reason  of  his  conversion  to  Christianity.  Considering  his
           character  and  general  circumstances,  I  did  not   find   it
           reasonably likely that he will  proselytise  on  behalf  of  any
           Christian church, nor wear a visible crucifix."


      That was not said, therefore, because  his  religious  conversion  was
      being doubted or rejected but because of the way in  which  the  judge
      believed the appellant would conduct himself. Indeed,  the  judge  had
      accepted earlier, at paragraph 122, that: "...It may well be  that  on
      return the appellant  seeks  to  join  another  Christian  church...",
      although not an evangelical one, seen as a threat to the regime.


  13. Finally, at paragraph 129 the judge said:


           "Having considered all these  matters,  and  in  particular  the
           findings I have  made  as  to  the  personality,  character  and
           background of the appellant, I do not find that there is a  real
           risk  to  him  if  returned  by  reason  of  his  conversion  to
           Christianity."


  14. This leaves us in a somewhat  complicated  position.  Subject  to  any
      further argument suggesting the contrary, I do  not  accept  that  the
      effect of the Home Office Country Information and Guidance  concerning
      Christians and Christian Converts published in December 2014  is  that
      any Iranian citizen, regardless of his profile before leaving Iran  or
      the nature of his religious beliefs and practices  within  the  United
      Kingdom and regardless of the way in which it is  considered  he  will
      conduct  himself  on  return  to  Iran,  is  necessarily  in  need  of
      international protection if he becomes a Christian after  his  arrival
      in the United Kingdom. On the other  hand,  the  country  guidance  in
      place is now of some vintage and needs to be considered in  the  light
      of the country evidence subsequently available and  in  the  light  of
      clear findings of fact  relating  to  the  individual  concerned.  The
      respondent  concedes  that  the  appellant's  claim  must  be  further
      examined in respect of the illegal exit issue. If it were  to  succeed
      on that basis alone then there may be no need to look further  at  the
      other aspects of his claim. If it does not, though, then although  the
      fact that the appellant left Iran without his passport may not prevent
      his return, that may be relevant to the consequence of his conversion,
      given the enhanced risk of coming to attention on return.


  15. For these reasons it is clear  that  further  consideration  of  these
      matters will be required before thus appeal can be finally determined.
      Therefore, the appeal to the upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent
      that the decision of the judge to dismiss the appeal is set aside. The
      appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  determined
      afresh. The starting point for that reconsideration of the appellant's
      claim will be that the following findings are preserved:


        a. The appellant's account of events in Iran before  his  departure
           is rejected as untrue,  save  that  he  left  Iran  irregularly,
           without presenting a passport  at  an  appropriate  or  official
           point of departure from the country;
        b. It is to be accepted that as at the date of  this  decision  the
           appellant has established that he is a practicing Christian.

      Summary of Decision:


  16. The First-tier Tribunal made an error  of  law  and  the  decision  to
      dismiss the appeal is set aside.

  17. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.





  18. Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    16 March 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern



