
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09450/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 May 2017                        |On 5 May 2017                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     HM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as HM.


Introduction

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his international protection claim.


       2. The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq,  of  Qashqai  ethnicity,  who
          arrived in the United Kingdom on  4  February  2011,  and  made  a
          claim for asylum that  same  day.    The  respondent  refused  the
          asylum  claim  and  the  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier
          Tribunal.  In a decision dated 9 August 2011  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge  Osbourne  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
          protection and human rights grounds.  In so doing,  Judge  Osborne
          rejected  aspects  of  the  appellant's  account,   but   accepted
          important  parts  of  it,   including   activities   against   the
          authorities on behalf  of  the  Qashqai  and  participation  in  a
          demonstration in 2009.

       3. In 2013 the appellant made further representations,  in  which  he
          relied  upon  his  conversion  to  Christianity.   The  respondent
          treated this as a fresh claim  but  rejected  it.   The  appellant
          appealed this and in a decision dated 20  April  2015,  First-tier
          Tribunal Simpson dismissed his appeal on asylum  and  humanitarian
          protection grounds.  In short, Judge Simpson did not believe  that
          the appellant  was  a  genuine  convert  to  Christianity.   In  a
          decision dated 20 May 2016, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Southern  found
          that there was  no  material  error  of  law  in  Judge  Simpson's
          finding that the appellant  was  not  a  genuine  convert.   Judge
          Southern however  concluded  that  in  rejecting  the  appellant's
          claim to be at risk as a failed asylum  seeker  who  had  made  an
          illegal exit from Iran, Judge Simpson made an error  of  law,  and
          he allowed the appeal to that limited extent.  Both  parties  were
          directed to provide written submissions upon the  promulgation  of
          a new country guidance case on Iran.

       4. On 29 June 2016 SSH and HR (illegal exit:  failed  asylum  seeker)
          Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) was  promulgated.   In  compliance
          with  directions,  the  appellant   filed   and   served   written
          submissions relying upon this decision and the  positive  findings
          of fact made by Judge Osbourne.

Hearing and issues in dispute

       5. At the beginning of the hearing  before  me  both  representatives
          agreed that the appeal raised the following sole narrow issue:  in
          light of the findings of fact made by  Judge  Osbourne  and  Judge
          Simpson, is it reasonably likely that as a result  of  questioning
          at the point of return in Iran, particular concerns  arising  from
          the appellant's activities are likely to arise, such  that  he  is
          at risk of further questioning?


       6. In SSH the Upper Tribunal accepted that  this  period  of  further
          questioning carried with it a real  risk  of  detention  and  ill-
          treatment, and said this at [23]:

                 "In our view the evidence does not establish that a  failed
                 asylum  seeker  who  had  left  Iran  illegally  would   be
                 subjected on return to a period of detention or questioning
                 such that there is a real risk of Article 3  ill-treatment.
                 The evidence in our view shows no more than that they  will
                 be  questioned,  and  that  if  there  are  any  particular
                 concerns arising from their previous activities  either  in
                 Iran or in the United Kingdom or whichever country they are
                 returned from, then  there  would  be  a  risk  of  further
                 questioning, detention and potential ill-treatment. In this
                 regard, it is relevant to return to Dr Kakhki's evidence in
                 re-examination where he said that the treatment they  would
                 receive would depend on their individual case. If they  co-
                 operated and accepted that they left illegally and  claimed
                 asylum abroad then  there  would  be  no  reason  for  ill-
                 treatment, and questioning would  be  for  a  fairly  brief
                 period. That seems to us to sum up the position  well,  and
                 as a consequence we conclude that a person with no  history
                 other than that of being a failed  asylum  seeker  who  had
                 exited illegally and who could  be  expected  to  tell  the
                 truth when questioned would not face a real  risk  of  ill-
                 treatment during the period of questioning at the airport."

       7. Both representatives agreed that it followed from SSH that:



              i) as an illegal departee from Iran, the  appellant  would  be
                 questioned at the point of return to Iran;

             ii) the initial  questioning  would  be  for  a  "fairly  brief
                 period" (at [12]  of  SSH  the  Internal  Organisation  for
                 Migration considered  that  in  the  context  of  voluntary
                 returnees, questioning might take a few hours);

            iii) if "particular concerns"  arose  from  previous  activities
                 either in Iran or in the United Kingdom, then  there  would
                 be the risk of  further  questioning  accompanied  by  ill-
                 treatment;

             iv) the assessment of whether "particular concerns" are  likely
                 to arise turns upon all the individual factors,  considered
                 cumulatively;

              v) the appellant would be expected  to  tell  the  truth  when
                 questioned;

             vi) the evidence suggests no appetite to prosecute for  illegal
                 exit alone, but if there is another offence,  illegal  exit
                 will be added on, the  cases  where  illegal  exitees  were
                 imprisoned show much more by way of specific  activity,  as
                 opposed to simple imputation - see [31] of SSH;

            vii) this appellant is a failed asylum seeker  who  exited  Iran
                 illegally but there are additional matters relevant to  his
                 history and profile,  which  require  careful  scrutiny  in
                 light of the country guidance;

           viii) there is no need to hear  any  further  evidence  from  the
                 appellant, and the findings of fact made by Judge  Osbourne
                 and Simpson need to be applied to the country guidance.


       8. Following this agreement  by  both  representatives,  the  hearing
          proceeded by way of submissions only.


       9. Mr McVeety invited me to find that the  only  notable  information
          that  would  emerge  during  questioning  would  relate   to   the
          appellant's  activities  on  behalf  of  the   Qashqai   and   his
          attendance at a demonstration in  2009.   He  submitted  that  the
          appellant's Christian activities in the  United  Kingdom  are  now
          irrelevant, given Judge Simpson's findings.  Mr McVeety  submitted
          that the appellant's activities were so long ago  and  of  such  a
          low profile that after brief questioning, the appellant  would  be
          released and no "particular concerns" were  reasonably  likely  to
          arise.


      10. Mr Schwenk invited me to find that  the  Iranian  authorities  are
          reasonably  likely  to  have  "particular  concerns"  about   this
          appellant when the following matters are considered  cumulatively:



             i) He has a known history of agitation on behalf of the Qashqai
                and came to the attention of the authorities in  2001/2  for
                this reason.
            ii) He took part in the anti-regime 2009 demonstrations in Iran;


           iii) Whilst in the United Kingdom for a lengthy  period  of  over
                six years, he has participated in Christian  activities  and
                has Christian friends;
            iv) He has a history of mental health difficulties and finds  it
                challenging to give clear answers when questioned.


      11. At the end of submissions, I reserved my  decision,  which  I  now
          provide with reasons.

Assessment of risk

      12. I must apply the lower standard of proof  when  assessing  whether
          the Iranian authorities will have "particular concerns"  regarding
          the appellant.  In SSH at [26] and [31],  the  country  expert  Dr
          Kakhki accepted there was a difference  between  people  who  were
          activists or protestors on the one hand and people  on  the  other
          hand, such as the appellants in those cases, with no history  save
          that they were failed asylum seekers who departed Iran  illegally.
           Although there was agreement that the appellant  is  not  in  the
          latter "no history" category of returnee,  the  parties  disagreed
          on the likely approach  of  the  authorities  to  the  appellant's
          history.  That assessment involves  nuanced  analysis.   There  is
          little specific  guidance  available  on  the  nature,  level  and
          timing  of  activities  likely  to  give   rise   to   "particular
          concerns".


      13. It is important that the assessment takes place in the context  of
          what is known about the behaviour of the Iranian authorities  more
          generally.   That  is  summarised  in  AB  and  Others   (internet
          activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC)  in  the
          following way:

                 "331.   The US Department of State Report  refers  to  the
                 crackdown on civil  society  intensifying  after  the  2009
                 elections.  There  are  reports  of  disappearances,  cruel
                 inhuman and degrading  punishments,  judicially  sanctioned
                 amputation  and  flogging,  beatings  and  rape  and  other
                 harshness. Although some prison facilities  including  Evin
                 prison in Tehran, are  notorious.  There  was  evidence  of
                 there being unofficial secret prisons where abuse  occurred
                 and prison  conditions  generally  being  harsh  and  life-
                 threatening. The point is  made  that  although  there  are
                 reassuring  constitutional  provisions  in   practice   the
                 authorities  can  and  do  detain   people   incommunicado,
                 sometimes for  weeks  or  even  months,  without  trial  or
                 contact  with  their  families.  The   "offences"   attract
                 attention are often vague by western standards and  include
                 such nebulous activity  as  "antirevolutionary  behaviour",
                 "moral corruption" and "siding with global arrogance".  The
                 point is that offences of this kind make  it  difficult  to
                 predict with any degree  of  accuracy  just  what  kind  of
                 behaviour is going to attract adverse attention."

      14. In AB the following caution was given:


                 "456.   The fact that people who do not seem to be of  any
                 interest to the authorities have no trouble  on  return  is
                 not really significant. Although Iran might be described as
                 exceedingly touchy there is no reason to  assume  that  the
                 state persecutes everyone and the mere fact of being in the
                 United Kingdom for a prolonged  period  does  not  lead  to
                 persecution. It may lead  to  scrutiny  and  this  is  what
                 concerns us most."


      15. I now turn to each of the individual risk  factors  identified  by
          Mr Schwenk.

Anti-regime activities in Iran

      16. Mr McVeety agreed that the  appellant  had  taken  part  in  anti-
          regime  activities  on  behalf  of  the  Qashqai  in  2001/2,   as
          summarised by Judge Osbourne at [15] and  [16]  of  her  decision,
          and accepted by her at [51].  This included  the  appellant  being
          taken to the Sepah offices, where he was warned  and  beaten.   Mr
          McVeety also acknowledged that Judge  Osbourne  accepted  at  [52]
          that "someone of the appellant's political sensitivity"  may  well
          have attended the 2009 demonstration against the election  result,
          and was shot and hospitalised as claimed.


      17. Mr McVeety however invited me  to  find  that  these  events  took
          place a long time ago and  the  authorities  would  no  longer  be
          interested in these historical matters.  I also  note  that  Judge
          Osbourne found at [55] that the  appellant  was  not  interrogated
          about his Qashqai activities in 2009, and rejected his account  of
          continuing interest, as a  result  of  his  participation  in  the
          demonstration.

      18. It is important to note, as the Upper Tribunal did in SSH at  [31]
          that the examples of illegal departees who were imprisoned  showed
          "much more by way of specific activity than a simple  imputation".
           When assessing the appellant's history I bear in  mind  that  the
          specific anti-regime activities  he  has  been  involved  in  took
          place a long time ago, and he has not taken part  in  any  related
          activities whilst in the United Kingdom.

      19. In  my  judgment,  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  upon  initial
          questioning, the  appellant's  past  anti-regime  activities  will
          become known.  As pointed  out  in  AB,  the  Iranian  authorities
          remain    concerned    about    nebulous    activity    such    as
          "antirevolutionary  behaviour",  "moral  corruption"  and  "siding
          with global arrogance" and it is difficult  to  predict  with  any
          degree of accuracy  just  what  kind  of  behaviour  is  going  to
          attract adverse  attention.   The  appellant's  history  of  anti-
          regime activities, even though it is restricted to  two  occasions
          a considerable time ago, together with  the  length  of  time  the
          appellant has been away  from  Iran  in  the  United  Kingdom,  is
          reasonably likely to elicit  suspicion  and  further  questioning.
          I do not accept Mr McVeety's submission that the authorities  will
          not regard  his  history  adversely  and  with  suspicion.    When
          considered together,  the  activities  mark  the  appellant  as  a
          person who has taken part in, what  might  be  considered  in  the
          context of Iran, not insignificant  anti-regime  activity,  albeit
          in the past.

Christian activities in the United Kingdom

      20. Mr McVeety asked me to note that the appellant has lied about  his
          Christian beliefs and that  when  questioned  in  Iran  about  his
          activities in the United Kingdom he would  not  disclose  anything
          to do with his Christian activities because  they  are  all  based
          upon a lie.   The difficulty  with  this  submission  is  that  Mr
          McVeety did not dispute that Judge Simpson accepted  at  [35]  the
          evidence that the appellant attended a weekly  Christian  meeting,
          the Living Waters Christian Fellowship,  with  a  small  group  of
          people.   She  described  this  as  a  social  activity  and   not
          necessarily a religious one.  Judge Simpson acknowledged that  the
          appellant had developed some private life, "particularly based  on
          his weekly attendance at the Living Waters  Christian  Fellowship"
          at [43].


      21. The assessment of risk when  questioned  is  predicated  upon  the
          appellant telling the truth.  The 'truth' as identified  by  Judge
          Simpson is that the appellant has attended weekly meetings  linked
          to  a  Christian  group  and  has  friends  closely  committed  to
          Christianity.   When  asked  straightforward  questions  such  as:
          'What did you do in the UK? What friends did you  associate  with?
          Did you attend any meetings?', the appellant is reasonably  likely
          to truthfully answer in accordance with Judge Simpson's  findings.
           This is reasonably likely to lead the  authorities  to  view  him
          with increased adverse interest.

Behaviour at interview

      22. Mr McVeety acknowledged that the appellant has had  "clear  mental
          health issues". Judge Simpson referred  to  the  appellant  having
          been 'sectioned' at [33].  The representatives  agreed  that  this
          referred to a period between September 2011 and  March  2012  when
          the appellant was detained  under  the  Mental  Health  Acts.   Mr
          McVeety  did  not  dispute  Judge  Osbourne's   summary   of   the
          difficulties encountered by the appellant in  answering  questions
          at interviews at [45] of her decision:


                 "He appears to be unable to answer simple  questions  which
                 are put without launching into explanations which  are  not
                 requested and when attempts are made to bring him  back  to
                 the  point  he  becomes  agitated   and   insistent   about
                 justifying  his  responses.   This  is  evidenced  in   the
                 unusually lengthy screening  interview  which  I  find  was
                 caused by the appellant's convoluted answers with regard to
                 the change of  agent  in  Italy.   When  the  Secretary  of
                 State's representative  commenced  the  substantive  asylum
                 interview it was eventually suspended due to the  behaviour
                 of the appellant ..."

      23. The appellant's own representative  described  him  as  "pendantic
          and  verbose"  and  Judge  Osbourne  accepted   the   Respondent's
          submission that he was "convoluted and evasive".


      24. In my judgment the appellant's past behaviour  at  interviews  and
          when giving evidence, demonstrates a real  risk  that  upon  being
          interviewed initially on arrival in Iran, the  appellant  will  be
          agitated and/or insistent and/or convoluted and/or evasive.   When
          this is placed alongside the appellant's history of activities  in
          the United Kingdom and Iran, it is  reasonably  likely  to  prompt
          "particular concerns" justifying a further period of  questioning.



Conclusion

      25.  When  all  the  evidence  is  considered   in   the   round   and
          cumulatively,  it  is   reasonably   likely   that   the   Iranian
          authorities  will  have  "particular   concerns"   regarding   the
          appellant's activities and profile.


      26. In Iran nebulous activity such as  "anti-revolutionary  behaviour"
          and "siding with global arrogance" are viewed  as  "offences"  and
          worthy of adverse attention.   The  appellant's  past  anti-regime
          activities in Iran, his links to  Christian-based  activities  and
          friends in the  United  Kingdom  and  his  likely  behaviour  when
          interviewed must be considered together.  When  they  are,  it  is
          reasonably likely that the Iranian authorities will be  suspicious
          about the appellant's behaviour, associations and  views.   It  is
          reasonably likely that they  shall  consider  further  questioning
          necessary, in order to elicit more  details  and/or  clarification
          regarding the appellant's activities in  Iran  and/or  the  United
          Kingdom and his current political and/or religious outlook  and/or
          activities.


      27. Mr McVeety accepted, consistent with SSH, that  a  further  period
          of  questioning  is  reasonably  likely  to  be   accompanied   by
          detention and ill-treatment.   This  serious  harm  shall  be  for
          reasons relating to an imputed anti-regime political opinion.

      28.  It  follows  that  the  appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
          persecution  for  reasons  relating  to  his   imputed   political
          opinion.

Decision

      29. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and under Articles  2  and
          3 of the ECHR.




Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
4 May 2017
