
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09905/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th January 2015                         |On 30th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                 MS AWA JOBE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Akindele of AA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Miss Awa Jobe, date of birth  1st  January  1968,  is  a
    citizen of Gambia.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is necessary to make  an  anonymity
    direction  in   these   proceedings.    Having   considered   all   the
    circumstances I do not consider it necessary to make such a  direction.



 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lever promulgated on 26th August 2014  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

 4. By a decision made on 17th September  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer gave leave to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Thus  the  matter
    appears before me to determine in the first  instance  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the determination.

 5. Within the permission Judge Saffer indicates that it is  arguable  that
    the judge has applied the wrong standard of proof. In the grounds it is
    submitted that the judge has applied a test of substantial grounds  for
    believing instead of reasonable  grounds.   In  the  determination  the
    judge has set out the standard of proof to be applied in  paragraph  23
    and refers to it as:-

         "Substantial grounds for believing that she is outside her  country
         of nationality or if applicable her country of  habitual  residence
         by reason of a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  refugee
         Convention reason."

 6. What is sought to be argued is that the test of substantial grounds for
    believing is a higher test than reasonable grounds  or  the  real  risk
    test imposed in Sivakumaran [1988] Immigration Appeal Reports 147.   In
    Sivakumaran several formulations of the standard of proof to be applied
    in asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  Article  2  and  3  ECHR  are
    considered.  Included  in  those  formulations  is  reference  to  Lord
    Diplock from the case of R v The  Governor  of  Pentonville  Prison  ex
    parte Fernandez [1971]  1 Weekly Law Reports 987.  Lord Diplock therein
    gives several formulations all of which  are  the  same,  a  reasonable
    chance, substantial grounds for thinking, serious possibility.

 7. In referring to that formulation it is quite apparent that there was no
    distinction drawn between  the  various  formulations.   I  would  draw
    further attention to McDonald's Eighth Edition page 831 to 832  note  9
    in which consideration is given  to  the  various  formulations.   That
    refers to the case of Ahmad Hussan [2002]  UKIAT  00841  in  which  the
    Tribunal has specifically stated that the real risk test or  a  serious
    possibility or the phrase substantial grounds for believing  constitute
    the same standard.

 8. Accordingly the first ground by the Appellant fails to take account  of
    the case law.  There is therefore no distinction to  be  drawn  between
    terminology used by the  judge  and  the  standard  that  applies  from
    Sivakumaran.

 9. In the circumstances the first Ground of Appeal has no substance.

10. I would note that Judge Saffer in giving leave in this matter does  not
    refer to the other Grounds of Appeal.

11. The other grounds refer to the fact that the judge has failed  to  give
    adequate  reasons  for  findings  of  fact  made  and  made  irrational
    findings.

12. There is then recited a whole series of findings of fact  made  by  the
    judge.  The judge has clearly and  carefully  considered  the  evidence
    that was before him.  He has set  out  valid  reasons  for  making  the
    findings of fact that he has.  Those findings of fact were open to  him
    on the evidence.  The judge has dealt with  the  aspects  of  the  case
    which have caused him to question the credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    account and made findings on the material issues in the case.   He  has
    given valid reasons for making the findings of fact that  he  has.   He
    has identified specific instances where he was satisfied that there was
    no rational explanation and otherwise that the Appellant's  credibility
    was seriously undermined.

13. The judge has clearly set out the basis on which he  has  come  to  his
    decision.  He has given valid reasons for making the findings  of  fact
    that he has.  He has fully assessed all of the evidence.  The  findings
    were open to the judge on  the  evidence.   The  Ground  of  Appeal  is
    nothing more than a disagreement with the judge's findings.

14. In the circumstances those were findings of fact  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to make.  The judge has given adequate and sufficient  reasons
    for his conclusions.

15. I have considered the remaining Grounds of Appeal.  They similarly seem
    to challenge the findings of fact made by the judge.   I  find  in  the
    circumstances that the judge has fully justified the decision made  and
    there is no material error of law within the determination.

16. For the reasons set out I uphold the decision to dismiss this matter on
    all grounds.


Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

