
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09160/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 16 June 2017                     |On 22 June 2017                         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     D S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on [  ]  1992.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom in January 2014.  She  was  pregnant  and
    her daughter was subsequently born on [ ] 2014.

 3. On 6 March 2014, the appellant claimed asylum.   She  claimed  to  fear
    persecution on return to Albania as a victim  of  sex  trafficking  and
    also of domestic violence.

 4. On 4 February 2014, a  referral  was  made  to  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism in order for the  Competent  Authority  to  make  a  decision
    whether  the  appellant  fell  within   the   Trafficking   Convention.
    Subsequently, the Competent Authority concluded that the appellant  did
    not fall within the Trafficking Convention.

 5. As regards the appellant's asylum  claim,  following  a  screening  and
    substantive interview, on 30 April 2015 the Secretary of State  refused
    the appellant's claims for asylum and humanitarian  protection  and  on
    human rights grounds.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 7 November 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fowell) dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The judge found the appellant's
    account not to be credible that she had been trafficked and  there  was
    no real risk of domestic violence from her father if she returned.   In
    addition, the judge found that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection
    available to the appellant and that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for
    her to relocate on return to Albania and live in Tirana.

 7. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    challenging the judge's adverse finding in respect of her international
    protection claim and to dismiss her appeal under Art 8.

 8. On 13 December 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E B  Grant)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.

 9. On 4 January 2017, the Secretary  of  State  filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Discussion

10. Mr Howard, who represented the appellant, relied upon the five  grounds
    of appeal.  I will deal with each ground in turn.

11. Ground 1 contends that the judge applied the wrong  standard  of  proof
    when in para 44 he said this:

         "A further point which strikes me as significant, even  though  not
         relied on particularly in the refusal letter, was the appellant not
         knowing even which city in France she was living for a month.  This
         simply does not seem at all probable." (my emphasis)

12. Mr Howard did not, rightly, place any great reliance upon this  ground.
    It is self-evident and plain on any reading  of  the  judge's  decision
    that he applied the "lower  standard  of  proof",  namely  whether  the
    appellant had established a "real risk" of persecution or ill-treatment
    on return to Albania.  At para 39, the judge explicitly  set  out  that
    standard of proof.  The standard of proof is also set out at paras  5-7
    of the determination in relation to the international protection claims
    and the claim under Art 8.  The judge's reference to it not  being  "at
    all probable" that the appellant would not even know the city in France
    in which she lived for over a month, is no more than a 'turn of phrase'
    and not a misstatement of the standard  of  proof.   There  is,  in  my
    judgment, no merit in ground 1.

13. Mr Howard took grounds 2 and 3 together on the  basis  that  they  both
    contend that the  judge  reached  contradictory  findings.   Mr  Howard
    pointed out that in para 49 the judge had found the appellant's account
    not  to  be  credible.   However,  he  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    inconsistently accepted  the  appellant's  account  concerning  certain
    matters at para 50 where the judge said this:

         "I see no reason to doubt her account  of  her  home  area  or  her
         upbringing and level of schooling, or that her father used to be in
         the Police.  It does not follow however  that  he  would  be  in  a
         position now to influence the authorities or that he would find  it
         easier to trace her as a result."

14. The difficulty with Mr Howard's submission is that the judge was  there
    taking aspects of the appellant's case "at  its  highest"  which  then,
    even on that basis, did not lead the judge to find that  the  appellant
    had established her claim looking at all the  circumstances.   Had  the
    judge simply chosen to approach the appellant's case on the basis  that
    no part of her account could be accepted, she could not have succeeded.
     She was in no better position when he accepted certain aspects of  her
    account and, nevertheless, concluded her claim failed.   In  doing  so,
    the judge did not fall into error.

15. Further, Mr Howard relied on the fact that the judge  had  in  para  49
    stated that:

         "But the appellant arrived in the UK pregnant, has  been  here  for
         the best part of three years, and (I accept) came alone.  Given the
         country guidance it is clear that this  would  make  her  situation
         very difficult at home.  It is  perfectly  understandable,  and  in
         accordance with the country guidance, that  as  a  pregnant  single
         woman she would meet with strong disapproval from her  own  family,
         let alone others, and that this may have been the spur to coming to
         the UK.  Support may or may not have been  available  to  fund  the
         trip from other family members.  It is important not  to  speculate
         too far, but it seems likely that there was at least as much a push
         to her departure, given the position of single mothers in  Albania,
         as there was a pull from the prospects of a better life in the UK."

16. Mr Howard submitted that if she returned her circumstances would  "meet
    with strong approval from her own family", it was inconsistent for  him
    to then find in para 53 that she could "return safely to her home  area
    and to her family."

17. In my judgment, this reads far too much into the judge's observation in
    para 49 about her reception by her family on return.  In particular, it
    fails to take into account the judge's adverse credibility finding  and
    his further consideration of the risk to  her  on  return  of  domestic
    violence from her father as set out in para 51 of his determination  as
    follows:

         "Her claim to be at risk  of  domestic  violence  from  her  father
         relies entirely on her own account.  Although she claimed  to  have
         been beaten by him, her mother intervened and she was able to leave
         the family home the next day without further  difficulty.   I  note
         too that although the accounts given in the  supporting  statements
         from Ms. Sainsbury and Ms. Brown state that she was  subject  to  a
         very strict upbringing and was beaten regularly,  this  was  not  a
         real feature of the appellant's own statements.  She  describes  in
         her first statement a traditional Muslim family,  with  her  mother
         wearing the veil and an expectation that her family would find  her
         a husband, but  she  does  not  claim  that  she  was  beaten.   In
         paragraph 10 she stated that she  was  terrified  of  her  father's
         reaction to the pregnancy because he was always tough  on  her  for
         the simplest of things, and to illustrate  this  recounted  a  time
         when she was 15 and her father threw a mobile phone at her when  he
         found that she had got a tattoo.  It hit her on the lip, causing  a
         scar and he said that he was going to kill her, but she came to  no
         further harm.  This single incident,  in  response  to  a  show  of
         independence in getting  a  tattoo,  illustrates  in  fact  a  less
         harmful environment altogether and so her account, even if accepted
         on these aspects, does not evidence a real risk of death or serious
         harm at the hands of her father.  Accordingly all claims  based  on
         the risk of domestic violence must be dismissed."

18. There is, in my judgment, no inconsistency  between  the  judge's  view
    expressed in para 49 and his conclusion in para 51 and repeated in para
    53 that the appellant could return safely to her home area.

19. Mr Howard also placed reliance on  para  4  of  the  Grounds  which  he
    characterised as a 'reasons challenge' which he accepted placed a  high
    threshold to make good this ground.  Mr Howard, relying upon ground  4,
    contended that the judge had accepted that the appellant would  face  a
    social stigma as a result of having an illegitimate daughter, she would
    be met with strong disapproval from her family members, her father  had
    been in the police and she was a vulnerable person.  In  the  light  of
    that, the judge had failed to give adequate  reason  for  reaching  his
    adverse conclusion in respect of the risk to her on return.

20. I have already set out the judge's reasoning that she would not  be  at
    real risk of persecution as a result of domestic violence  set  out  in
    para 51.  His reasoning  that  she  would  not  be  at  risk  of  being
    trafficked or re-trafficked is set  out  in  para  52  of  the  judge's
    decision and was not challenged before me.

21. In dismissing the appeal, the judge also found that the authorities  in
    Albania would be willing and able to provide her with a sufficiency  of
    protection even if a real risk of domestic  violence  was  established,
    namely by  seeking  the  protection  of  the  police  and  NGO  shelter
    accommodation following the country guidance  decision  of  TD  and  AD
    (trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 0092 (IAC).  The appellant's  grounds
    do not challenge this finding  which  is  fatal  to  her  international
    protection claim.

22. In addition, at paras 56-63, the judge considered in detail whether  it
    would be reasonable and not unduly harsh to  expect  the  appellant  to
    relocate to Tirana and resort to an NGO shelter.  At para 58, the judge
    took into account that the appellant is young and would face  a  social
    stigma of having an illegitimate daughter.  He also took  into  account
    her mental health at para 60.  At paras 61-62, the judge found that the
    appellant could reasonably be expected to live in shelter accommodation
    and, although that might be only temporary, at  para  62  concluded  as
    follows:

         "... it would be possible for a single woman to live on her own  in
         Tirana, and that jobs are advertised in Albanian  newspapers,  even
         for young unskilled women.  The position for the longer term  ought
         therefore to be manageable and this supports my  view  that  return
         would not be unduly harsh."

23. I am satisfied that the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  sufficient  to
    understand why he reached his decision adverse to  the  appellant.   He
    was required to do no more.  It was, in my judgment,  plainly  open  to
    the judge on the evidence before him to reach  those  findings  and  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal.

24. For these reasons, I reject grounds 1, 2, 3 and 4.

25. That, then, leaves ground 5.  That ground,  simply  put,  is  that  the
    judge in dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 failed  to  make
    any finding in respect of whether  she  met  the  requirement  in  para
    276ADE(1)(vi), namely that there "would be very  significant  obstacles
    to the applicant's integration into the country to  which  [she]  would
    have to go if required to leave the UK".

26. Mr Howard pointed out that at paras 64-75 the judge had only considered
    Art 8 outside the Rules.  That was a material error of law.

27. It is clear from the skeleton argument relied upon by  the  appellant's
    legal representative before Judge Fowell that reliance was placed  upon
    para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Rules.   It  is  well  established  that  an
    appellant can  succeed  under  the  so-called  'Art  8  Rules'  without
    consideration of a broader  range  of  issues  under  Art  8.   If  the
    individual cannot succeed under the  Rules,  then  only  if  there  are
    "compelling circumstances" such that "unjustifiably harsh consequences"
    will result will the public interest be outweighed (see R (Agyarko  and
    another) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 at [48]).  It is  unfortunate  that  the
    judge did not expressly deal with para 276ADE but rather moved directly
    to consider whether the appellant could succeed  under  Art  8  on  the
    basis that her removal would  be  disproportionate.   In  my  judgment,
    however, the judge's failure to consider  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  was  not
    material to his decision to dismiss the appeal under Art 8.

28.  It  is  clear  that  the  judge  took  fully  into  account  all   the
    circumstances of the appellant and her child.  At paras 69-71, he dealt
    with  the  'best  interests'  of  the  appellant's  daughter.   He  was
    satisfied that, even having regard to the  medical  evidence  that  the
    child might potentially suffer from epilepsy, her  best  interests  did
    not require, and only provided "modest support" to,  her  remaining  in
    the UK given that she had no independent life from her mother  as  a  2
    year old child.  Further, although the judge does not make  a  repeated
    reference to all the appellant's circumstances, he clearly had in  mind
    all those matters which he had previously set out in  considering  what
    if any risk she faced on  return  to  Albania  and  whether  she  could
    internally relocate.  It is quite impossible to conclude that if he had
    addressed the issue of whether there were "very significant  obstacles"
    to the appellant's integration into Albania,  given  his  findings,  in
    particular in relation to internal relocation and her  daughter's  best
    interests, he could have reached any conclusion  other  than  that  the
    requirements of para 276ADE(1)(vi) were not met.  Whilst the  issue  of
    whether relocation is "unduly harsh" is not necessarily  precisely  the
    same as the test under para 276ADE(1)(vi), I am unable to see  how,  on
    the evidence before him, the judge's findings could have been different
    in respect of those two issues.

29.  As  I  have  already  said,  the  judge  fully  considered   all   the
    circumstances of the appellant and her daughter in applying the 5-stage
    test in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  He fully took into account  the  public
    interest factors set out in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act at paras 74-75.  At para 75 he concluded, having referred to
    the importance of speaking English,  financial  independence  and  that
    little weight should be given to private life while a person is in  the
    UK unlawfully or their status is precarious, as follows:

         "These last three points count heavily against the  appellant,  and
         even a consideration of  the  best  interest  of  [the  appellant's
         daughter] does not bring her close to showing  that  removal  would
         have such an effect on her private or family life as to amount to a
         breach of her human rights.  She has been in the  UK  a  relatively
         short time, awaiting the outcome of this process, and the links she
         has made during that time cannot form  the  basis  of  a  claim  to
         remain further."

30. For these reasons, I also reject ground 5 on the basis that  there  was
    no material error of law in the judge reaching his decision to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8.

Decision

31. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal did not  materially  err  in
    law in dismissing the appellant's appeal on all  grounds.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision stands.

32. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  21 June 2017





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal stands dismissed, no fee award can be made.





                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  21 June 2017


