
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09982/2014
                                                               AA/09985/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 December 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                            N I (fIRST appellant)
                          m J A (sECOND appellant)
                         ANONYMITY HAS BEEN DIRECTED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Butler, Counsel for Z A Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant  was  born  on  1  November  1982  and  the  second
    appellant was born on 9 February 1988.  Both appellants are citizens of
    Pakistan.  The first appellant applied for asylum on 2 April  2014  and
    the second appellant applied to be treated as a dependant on the  first
    appellant's  claim.   The  first  appellant's  asylum  application  was
    refused on 22 May 2014.  The appeals were heard by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal S Aziz on 23 April 2015.  He dismissed the appeals  under
    the Refugee  Convention,  under  Articles  3  and  8  of  ECHR  and  on
    humanitarian protection issues in a determination promulgated on 12 May
    2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cox  on  9  June  2015.
    Further grounds were submitted and  permission  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Archer on 26 August 2015.  The grounds assert  that  the
    judge failed to apply the case of HJ (Iran) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 and wrongly refused to  accept  that
    the appellants are gay men.  The grounds state that  the  judge  should
    have granted an adjournment to enable the appellants to obtain  further
    evidence from Pakistan in relation to marriage and divorce certificates
    and the judge wrongly made adverse credibility  findings.   They  state
    that the judge went on to  make  positive  findings  of  fact  and  the
    permission states that it is arguable that the  judge  failed  to  take
    proper account of those findings of fact, concluding that  it  was  not
    reasonably likely that either appellant is gay or has entered into  gay
    relationships.  The permission states that there is nothing on file  to
    show that an adjournment application was made at the First-tier hearing
    but the judge did note at paragraph 56 that the respondent's bundle was
    served on the  day  of  the  appeal  hearing,  including  the  evidence
    regarding  the  authenticity   of   the   first   appellant's   divorce
    certificate.  The  permission  states  that  procedural  unfairness  is
    arguable.

 3. Counsel for the appellant handed me a bundle  containing  a  number  of
    cases and a report from the British CBT and Counselling  Service  which
    is undated.  She was seeking anonymity and referred to her letter of  9
    September 2015 applying to adduce further evidence.  The  Tribunal  did
    not reply to this letter.

 4. I told her I was prepared to grant anonymity.

 5. The Presenting Officer opposed  the  admission  of  new  evidence.   He
    referred to the report from the British  CBT  and  Counselling  Service
    submitting that in this report it is stated that  the  appellants  were
    referred to the service on 22 July 2015.

 6. I put to Counsel that this is an error of law hearing and what  has  to
    be decided is whether there is  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision, based on what was before  him.   I  did  not
    accept the additional evidence.

 7. Counsel submitted that at paragraph 16 of  her  skeleton  argument  she
    states that the key issue according to the First-tier Tribunal Judge is
    whether the appellants are homosexual and whether on  their  return  to
    Pakistan, they will want to live as openly gay men. She submitted  that
    this is an error of law and I was referred to the said case of HJ Iran.
     She submitted that the key issue is not  whether  the  appellants  are
    homosexual but whether they will  be  treated  as  homosexual  if  they
    return to Pakistan.

 8. She submitted that the judge relied on  immaterial  considerations  and
    did not take into account relevant findings.  She  submitted  that  his
    approach  was  perverse.   She  submitted   that   the   decision   was
    procedurally unfair and an adjournment should have been granted to  the
    appellants.

 9. I asked if an adjournment request was made at the  First-tier  hearing.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that the Presenting  Officer  at  that
    hearing had sought an adjournment for the admission of  a  verification
    document.  The appellant's representative opposed the  adjournment  and
    at no time suggested that the hearing should not go ahead.

10. Counsel then referred to paragraph 18 of her  skeleton  argument  which
    deals with the correct way to assess credibility  and  refugee  status.
    The low standard of proof is referred to. She  submitted  that  a  true
    account is not always detailed or consistent in every detail as per the
    Home Office's policy instruction on assessing credibility  and  refugee
    status dated in January 2015.  She referred  to  the  correct  approach
    being a holistic approach and submitted that  the  judge  in  the  case
    before me nitpicked at the evidence.

11. She submitted that at paragraph 82 of the said  case  of  HJ  Iran  the
    approach to be followed by Tribunals is narrated.  She  submitted  that
    the judge did not believe that the appellants are gay. I asked her  why
    she thinks they will be treated as gay on return and she submitted that
    they  have  entered  into  a  civil  partnership  which  is  a   public
    declaration that they are gay.  I put to  her  that  the  judge  raised
    questions about this and found there to be serious credibility  issues.
    Counsel submitted that the  appellants  have  informed  their  families
    about the civil partnership so there are strong reasons for them  being
    treated as gay on return. I put to her that credibility  is  the  issue
    here;  the  judge  did  not  believe  the  appellant's  evidence.   She
    submitted that although the judge states that he does not believe there
    will be a problem as the appellants are not gay, he has not  given  any
    consideration to them being treated as gay on return and she  submitted
    that this is a clear misdirection. He only looked  at  half  the  test.
    She submitted that this is an error  of  law  as  they  might  well  be
    persecuted on return.

12. I was referred to  paragraph  27  of  the  skeleton  argument  and  the
    positive findings of fact made by the First-tier Judge which  are  that
    the appellants are good friends, they have lived  together  at  various
    addresses since 2012 and they undertook a civil partnership ceremony on
    7 November 2013, attended by  witnesses.  Counsel  submitted  that  the
    United Kingdom  recognises  that  they  are  gay  based  on  the  civil
    partnership agreement. She submitted that the judge did not  raise  any
    inconsistencies against these positive findings and failed to give  the
    appellants credit for the fact that their evidence is  consistent  with
    the COI report on Pakistan.  She  submitted  that  background  evidence
    makes it clear that being gay  in  Pakistan  leads  to  persecution  by
    communities and the State.

13. Counsel then referred to paragraph 33  of  her  skeleton  argument  and
    submitted that the judge  has  taken  a  microscopic  approach  to  the
    evidence.   She  submitted  that  it  is  not  unreasonable  that   the
    appellants cannot remember certain dates  of  events  that  took  place
    years before and that the typographical errors in the marriage document
    are a minor issue.  I  put  to  her  that  all  of  this  goes  to  the
    appellants' credibility and she accepted that the findings are relevant
    to credibility but she submitted the judge used too narrow an approach.



14. With regard to the first appellant's marriage and divorce  certificates
    Counsel referred to paragraphs 127 and 139 of the decision.  The  judge
    states that the concerns which he has raised,  leads  the  Tribunal  to
    attach little  weight  to  these  certificates.   Again  this  goes  to
    credibility.

15. Counsel referred to paragraph 35 of the skeleton argument  which  deals
    with who knows about  the  appellants  being  gay,  in  Pakistan.   She
    submitted that the First-tier Judge put inappropriate weight on alleged
    discrepancies about events which happened years before.   She  referred
    to  the  first  appellant's  relationship  with  B  and  H  before  his
    relationship with his present partner, the  second  appellant  and  she
    submitted that the judge states that the first appellant when asked who
    in Pakistan knows about his sexual identity gave evidence that "was all
    over the place".  This is because he gave different accounts in various
    interviews and statements but she submitted that much of this  evidence
    was about things which the appellant did years ago so it is likely that
    there  will  inconsistencies.    With   regard   to   the   appellant's
    relationships with B and H, Counsel submitted that again the judge  has
    stated that there are discrepancies in  his  evidence.   She  submitted
    that complete consistency is not necessary.

16. With regard to the appellant's present relationship counsel referred me
    to paragraph 38 of the skeleton argument.  The judge  states  that  the
    appellants gave different accounts  of  their  first  date  and  so  he
    rejected their  evidence.   She  submitted  that  this  is  not  highly
    relevant.  She submitted that a holistic approach is what is  required.
     Again at paragraph 150 of the determination the judge goes into minute
    detail about  who  proposed.   The  second  appellant  said  the  first
    appellant proposed and the  first  appellant  said  it  was  by  mutual
    consent.

17. Counsel then went on to deal with delay  on  claiming  asylum  and  she
    submitted that the judge has put too much weight on  this  delay.   She
    submitted that this is not a determinative point.

18. With regard to the second appellant, Counsel referred to  paragraph  40
    of the skeleton argument and the second appellant's claims about  death
    threats.  She submitted that again the judge put  too  much  weight  on
    minor points at paragraph 157 of the determination  and  did  not  give
    enough weight to his positive findings of fact.

19. Counsel submitted that credibility is the issue here.  She referred  me
    to the case of Ilkhani [2005] EWCA Civ 1674 which states that it is not
    necessarily the case that a  truthful  witness  will  be  a  consistent
    witness.  The case states that a mere trivial inconsistency on its  own
    is not sufficient for a lack of  credibility  finding.   She  submitted
    that the judge misdirected himself and put an unduly rigorous  emphasis
    on the parties not being gay because they made some errors about  dates
    and because the judge was not satisfied with the marriage  and  divorce
    certificates of the first appellant.  She referred to paragraph 124  of
    the determination submitting that in this the judge states that  he  is
    detailing his main adverse credibility findings and she submitted  that
    this is an error of  law  he  should  have  detailed  all  his  adverse
    credibility findings.

20. Counsel submitted that when all the points are taken together  and  the
    said case of HJ Iran is taken into account, the judge  took  the  wrong
    approach to the evidence as a whole and  his  decision  is  irrational.
    Paragraph 51 of the skeleton argument again  states  that  the  hearing
    should have been adjourned  because  of  the  late  submission  of  the
    respondent's evidence.

21. The Presenting Officer made his submissions submitting that  the  judge
    has made a very comprehensive determination.   He  submitted  that  the
    appellants have made a big issue of living openly as gay men  but  they
    are now seeking anonymity and he submitted that this  must  go  against
    their evidence.

22. He submitted that the judge did  not  look  at  whether  on  return  to
    Pakistan the appellants will be perceived as gay as this was not in the
    grounds of appeal.  I was referred to paragraphs 2 and 4  of  the  said
    case of HJ Iran and he submitted that this  particular  point  was  not
    actively raised at the First-tier hearing.  What the judge had to  look
    at, based on what was before him, was perceived  gay  activity  in  the
    United Kingdom and Pakistan.

23. The Presenting Officer submitted that what I have to decide is  whether
    the  judge's  decision  is  unlawful,  irrational  or  not   adequately
    reasoned.

24. He submitted that the  judge  restricted  himself  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He  submitted  that  the  grant  of  permission  is  extremely
    generous.  He  referred  me  to  paragraph  148  of  the  determination
    relating  to  the  appellants'  relationship.  The  judge  finds  their
    relationship is not genuine  although  he  also  finds  they  are  good
    friends, have lived together and have undertaken a  civil  partnership.
    He explains that the reason he does not find  the  relationship  to  be
    genuine is because of the adverse findings which he has set out in  his
    determination. At paragraph 123 of the determination the judge makes  a
    list of his findings of fact and what he accepts and he makes it  clear
    at paragraph 124 onwards that he  wholly  disbelieves  the  appellants'
    claims.

25. The Presenting Officer referred me to paragraph  117  of  HJ  Iran  and
    submitted that these appellants on  return  to  Pakistan  will  not  be
    perceived as gay because they are not gay and they will not be  treated
    as gay because the people in Pakistan, who they know, will  be  unaware
    of the civil partnership agreement.

26. He submitted that at paragraph  118  of  the  determination  the  judge
    refers to the illegal status of homosexuality in Pakistan and the  ill-
    treatment of gays so it is clear that he is aware of this.

27. He submitted that Counsel states  that  a  more  broad  brush  approach
    should have been applied by the judge  but  at  paragraph  122  of  the
    determination  the  judge  refers  to  the  cross-examination  by   the
    Presenting Officer stating that the appellants should not be  subjected
    to a memory test and noting that they were asked  to  recollect  events
    which took place many years ago.  The judge  states  that  he  will  be
    factoring this into his decision.

28. The Presenting Officer submitted that credibility goes to the  core  of
    this appeal.  He submitted that the criticisms by  the  judge  are  not
    peripheral.  The fact that he finds the appellants to be  good  friends
    is not enough for the decision to be overturned.  The judge also refers
    to  the  appellant's   representative   accepting   that   there   were
    inconsistencies before the First-tier  Judge,  (paragraph  125  of  the
    decision).  At paragraph 126 the judge  states  that  if  the  Tribunal
    finds that the first appellant has told untruths  in  relation  to  his
    marriage and divorce (which the judge does), this will  impact  on  his
    credibility as a witness of truth and in turn will affect  whether  the
    Tribunal can accept anything else that  he  says.   He  refers  to  the
    divorce and marriage not being able to be disassociated  with  the  key
    issue in this appeal.  As the Tribunal  has  serious  doubts  over  his
    claimed marriage and divorce, this has a knock on effect and undermines
    the first Appellant's specific problems which he states he  encountered
    in  Pakistan  due  to  his  sexual  orientation.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraphs 128 and 129 relating to the first appellant's  marriage  and
    the discrepancies in the first appellant's evidence and I was  referred
    to paragraphs 131, 132 and 134 of the decision, all of which deal  with
    adverse credibility.  The judge goes on to refer to his concerns  about
    the divorce certificate and the fact that as the First appellant's wife
    initiated the divorce it would be called  a  khula  but  the  appellant
    refers to it as a talak which is the name given when a man initiates  a
    divorce.  The judge also refers to spelling issues.

29. He submitted that the judge finds that  all  of  these  matters  go  to
    whether the First appellant is gay or not.

30. He submitted that the evidence about who knows  about  the  appellants'
    sexuality in Pakistan (paragraph 140)  is  all  over  the  place.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that because the core of the  evidence  is
    contradictory this goes to the core of the appellants' identity.

31. The Presenting Officer referred to the first appellant being caught  by
    his aunt in the house with another man. He submitted that this  is  not
    credible and the judge finds it not to be  credible  and  gives  proper
    reasons for this finding.  He submitted that it  was  not  unreasonable
    for the judge to find it strange that  the  both  the  appellants  gave
    different answers when they were asked about their first date with each
    other.  He  submitted  that  there  are  also  inconsistencies  in  the
    Appellants' evidence about the civil partnership.

32. The Presenting Officer accepted that the  delay  is  not  determinative
    (paragraph 151 of the determination).

33. The Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  with  regard  to  the  second
    appellant stating that he received threats from his family in  Pakistan
    the judge found that his evidence was  highly  contradictory  and  gave
    reasons for this finding.  He submitted that the judge looks at all the
    evidence in the round, does not accept that the appellants are gay  and
    does not believe that there  will  be  problems  when  they  return  to
    Pakistan.  He submitted that  the  judge  finds  that  the  account  is
    fabricated and that  is  why  the  appeals  have  been  dismissed.   He
    submitted that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

34. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the  judge  has  only  applied
    half of the relevant test.  He has not considered whether on return  to
    Pakistan  the  appellants  will  be  treated  as  homosexual.   It  was
    submitted that based on his positive findings of fact and the  case  of
    HJ Iran, there must be a material error of law.

35. Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  made  an  error  of  law  by  not
    considering these matters and by taking miniscule matters into  account
    and stating that these go against  the  appellants'  credibility.   She
    submitted that  permission  has  been  granted  on  all  grounds.   She
    submitted that poor grounds of appeal should not be  held  against  the
    appellants.

36. Counsel submitted that the core of the appellants'  identity  is  their
    sexuality. This  is  intrinsic  to  their  fundamental  personas.   She
    submitted that to  draw  conclusions  from  things  like  typographical
    errors on the marriage certificate is unfair to the appellants.  I  was
    asked to look substantively at the facts and  consider  credibility  in
    the relevant context of HJ Iran and allow the appeal.

Decision and Reasons

37. I have to decide if there is a material error of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  The judge states that the key issue in this case is  whether
    the appellants are homosexual or not.  Counsel submits that that is not
    the test and when  HJ  Iran  is  considered  it  is  whether  they  are
    homosexual or not or whether they would be  treated  as  homosexual  on
    return to Pakistan.  This is not in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  as  was
    pointed out by the Presenting Officer.

38. Counsel's argument is that because  they  have  entered  into  a  civil
    partnership they have declared publicly that they are homosexual.

39. The judge has explained very  clearly  why  he  does  not  believe  the
    appellants'   evidence.    He   has    detailed    discrepancies    and
    inconsistencies in the evidence of both appellants in his decision.

40. At paragraph 125 of the decision the judge refers  to  the  appellants'
    representative having had to concede that there were inconsistencies in
    the evidence relating to the first appellant's marriage.   Counsel  for
    the appellants argued that these inconsistencies did not relate to  the
    key issue before the Tribunal which was whether the first appellant was
    gay. Whether the appellants would  be  treated  as  gay  on  return  to
    Pakistan was not raised before the  First-tier  judge.   Nonetheless  I
    have taken note of this issue and the terms of HJ Iran and I have noted
    the civil partnership agreement. It is clear that  the  judge  did  not
    believe any of  the  appellants'  evidence.  This  must  include  their
    evidence of who knows of their homosexuality or the  civil  partnership
    agreement in Pakistan.  The judge clearly finds that they have told no-
    one so the civil partnership agreement will not make any difference  to
    the appellants on return to Pakistan.

41. The judge had gone into considerable detail about the discrepancies and
    inconsistencies in the evidence. There were so many of them he  had  no
    choice but to do this.  He states however that cross-examination should
    not be a memory test and he  states  that  he  has  factored  into  his
    decision that it is not always  easy  for  a  witness  to  recall  with
    accuracy, events or the chronology of  events  which  took  place  some
    years ago. Nonetheless he finds that  these  appellants  gave  evidence
    which was contradictory not only  about  unimportant  issues  but  also
    about important issues.   With  regard  to  the  marriage  and  divorce
    certificates, he finds that the evidence about these goes to  the  core
    of the claim.  The first appellant's account of  his  relationships  in
    Pakistan,  his  marriage  and  his  divorce  must  be  considered  when
    assessing his evidence about his sexuality.

42. The judge refers to the first appellant's evidence about  his  marriage
    and divorce being so poor that he does not accept any  aspect  of  this
    part of the claim.  Neither does  he  accept  the  explanation  of  why
    asylum was not  claimed  earlier.   He  finds  the  second  appellant's
    evidence highly contradictory as to when he received threats  from  his
    family in Pakistan.

43. With regard to whether an adjournment should have been granted, I  have
    noted  that  no  adjournment  request  was  made  by  the   appellants'
    representative  at  the  First-tier  hearing  although  an  adjournment
    request was made by the Presenting Officer which was refused. And which
    the   appellants'   representative   objected   to.   The   appellant's
    representative  clearly  had  a  perfect  opportunity  to  support  the
    adjournment request but did not take it. In the circumstances there  is
    no error of law in the judge not granting an adjournment.

44. I have to decide if there is a material error of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination based on what was before him and I find that there is  no
    material error of law.  The fact that he  did  not  make  any  decision
    about the appellants being treated as homosexuals on return to Pakistan
    is because it was not in the grounds of appeal but I find that even  if
    it had  been  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  because  of  the  lack  of
    credibility in the evidence before him, he  would  have  dismissed  the
    appeals on the same basis as he has done.  There is no  material  error
    of law in the First-tier Judge's decision.

45. The First-tier Judge's decision dismissing the two appeals, promulgated
    on 12 May 2015 must stand.

46. Anonymity has been directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
