
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09531/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 August 2014                              |On 22 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR A G


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hodson, Solicitor instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Cockrill in which he allowed the appeal
    of the respondent on asylum grounds.
2.   The respondent was born in Ethiopia and accepts that he is  technically
    a citizen of Ethiopia.  He accepted that he was born in January 1988.

3.   The judge noted  that  there  was  an  issue  as  to  the  respondent's
    ethnicity.

4.   The respondent's case is that he was born in, and  lived  in  Ethiopia.
    Both his parents were born in Mandefara which is now part  of  Eritrea.
    He did not have any grandparents in Ethiopia.  His father died when  he
    was about 2 years old and was buried in Addis Ababa.

5.   He travelled to Assab in Eritrea in 2005.  He lived with  his  mother's
    parents.  The grandparents mainly spoke Tigrinya to the  appellant  and
    he started to pick up some Tigrinya at that point.  His mother spoke to
    him in Amharic and that was the main language used by the appellant.

6.   His mother was a Pentecostal Christian.  She had an Eritrean  ID  card.
    His grandparents were not Pentecostal but Orthodox and were  not  happy
    at the fact that his mother was a Pentecostal  Christian.   His  mother
    could speak both Tigrinya and Amharic.  As he had spent his early years
    in Ethiopia and his mother spoke to him in Amharic, that turned out  to
    be his first language.  His mother continued to speak to him in Amharic
    even though they had moved across to Eritrea where the appellant stayed
    for about five years.  Assab, where they lived in Eritrea was  an  area
    in which Amharic was apparently widely spoken.  A number of people  had
    returned to Eritrea from Ethiopia in that particular region.

7.   The appellant said in evidence that because of her religious  faith  as
    a Pentecostal Christian, his mother had been taken by  the  authorities
    in Ethiopia and had been imprisoned in 2009.  He had been cared for  by
    neighbours.  In 2010 he left Eritrea to go to Sudan.   He  stayed  with
    his paternal uncle in Khartoum for three years.  In  2013  he  flew  to
    Paris, the airfare being paid for by his uncle.  He was accompanied  by
    an agent who provided him with a  passport.   The  agent  retained  the
    passport.  The appellant was then put on a lorry bound for  the  United
    Kingdom in March 2013.  He was apprehended  as  he  was  entering  this
    country in a clandestine manner and was here illegally.  That was  when
    he sought asylum.

8.   His asylum application was refused on 12 July  2013.   He  was  however
    accorded discretionary leave up until 19 July 2013 in light of his age.
     He submitted an application for further leave on 31 July 2013.

9.   At the  hearing  the  respondent  spoke  through  an  Amharic  speaking
    interpreter.  He relied on what was set out in  his  three  statements.
    He was also questioned about the issue of tracing  his  family.   There
    had been some letters from the Red Cross, notably on 25  February  2014
    showing the steps that they had taken.  There had not been any positive
    response unfortunately to their intervention in tracing family  members
    of the respondent.  The person that was being  sought  was  a  paternal
    uncle in Sudan and there was also in fact the aunt  of  the  respondent
    who was a sister of that uncle.

10.  The respondent confirmed much of what was in  his  witness  statements.
    He said he was Tigrinian and not Afar.

11.  In his findings the judge noted  that  the  respondent's  parents  were
    born in Mandefara, which is now part of Eritrea but had  been  part  of
    Ethiopia previously.   The  respondent  speaks  Amharic  which  is  the
    dominant language in Ethiopia.  He had expressed a fear of  going  back
    to Ethiopia because of his religious faith which was the  same  as  his
    mother's, a Pentecostal Christian.  He had accompanied  his  mother  to
    church.  He was also attending a Pentecostal church in  the  UK  called
    the Calvary Victory Church in  Canterbury.   He  attends  church  every
    Sunday.

12.  The judge said at paragraph 71 that the critical  question  is  whether
    or not the Ethiopian authorities will now accept the  respondent  as  a
    citizen of Ethiopia and have him back in their country.  The reason why
    they may not take him back is if they perceive that  he  is  ethnically
    Eritrean.

13.  The judge noted that the Secretary  of  State  did  not  challenge  the
    respondent's evidence that his parents were born  in  a  border  region
    which was previously  Ethiopian  but  has  now  become  Eritrean.   The
    respondent's description of events seemed to have  just  two  features.
    The first was that he went to church  regularly  with  his  mother  and
    secondly that he assisted her on the market where she was selling fruit
    and vegetables.  There was little other information provided.

14.  He found that the respondent spoke Amharic and  one  could  simply  say
    that this is because he is basically an Ethiopian and that  is  why  he
    would speak Amharic.  Alternatively, one might say it  is  because  his
    parents wanted to pass him off as an Ethiopian if one may  term  it  as
    such, so that attention would not be  drawn  to  him  and  his  family.
    Inevitably therefore he would be raised using  the  local  language  of
    Amharic and certainly not Tigrinya which of course would cry out to all
    concerned that these were, so to speak, foreigners from Eritrea.

15.  The judge found the respondent's account plausible of the raid  on  the
    house and the arrest of his mother by the Eritrean authorities  because
    of her religion.  He said this was  a  plausible  account  knowing  the
    treatment of those who practised as Pentecostal Christians in  Eritrea.
    There was nothing inherently implausible in  the  respondent's  account
    that he stayed with neighbours for a period and then moved  on  to  his
    uncle.   There  was  nothing  inherently  implausible  or   likely   or
    incredible about the respondent's account of his circumstances both  in
    Ethiopia and then in Eritrea.

16.   The  judge  acknowledged  that  unfortunately  there  were  very   few
    documents that really assisted in one way or the other.  The respondent
    said he did not have any  documentation  in  the  form  of  say  an  ID
    document or a passport, and there was nothing that helped him  in  that
    sense.  His father is now dead and his mother  has  been  arrested  and
    detained.  His uncle in Khartoum Sudan has not  been  traced.   All  of
    this puts therefore great weight  on  simply  what  the  appellant  had
    asserted.

17.  The judge said what  he  found  particularly  revealing  in  trying  to
    assess this case as a whole  was  the  documentation  provided  by  the
    Ethiopian Embassy.  Basically they have rejected the  respondent.   The
    judge said he had tried to weigh up as carefully as  he  could  whether
    simply that arises from the  respondent's  failure  to  produce  enough
    documents, or really whether it was as a result of  an  interview  with
    the respondent that the Ethiopian authorities appreciated that  he  had
    this Eritrean ethnicity.  The connections with Eritrea are through both
    parents and that really meant, so far as the Ethiopian authorities were
    concerned, the respondent would not be welcomed back in Ethiopia.

18.  The judge found that although  this  case  was  not  at  all  clear-cut
    because of a lack of independent information and evidence, the view  he
    formed, following MA, is that it is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
    Ethiopian authorities will accept him as one of  their  nationals.   He
    considered that the truth was that they will see him not  as  Ethiopian
    and just Ethiopian but will see him as a young  man  who  has  got  his
    Eritrean background and therefore he is simply not going to be accepted
    back in Ethiopia.  It might be said that this conclusion flies  against
    the fact that the respondent was speaking Amharic and that is his first
    language, but he thought that the respondent could get over that hurdle
    by his explanation that his mother spoke Amharic as  well  as  Tigrinya
    but she was anxious that Amharic would be the language  the  respondent
    spoke and used wherever possible so that he would not draw attention to
    himself in Ethiopia.  The judge said that although these cases are  not
    straightforward because there is not very much material  available,  it
    did seem to him that this particular respondent has shown that  he  has
    got  Eritrean  ethnicity,  although  he  is  technically  an  Ethiopian
    national.  As matters stand, the respondent would not be accepted  back
    in Ethiopia by the Ethiopian authorities.  Although that in  itself  is
    not persecutory, it  would  leave  the  respondent  in  practice  in  a
    complete limbo whereby he would not be able  to  go  anywhere,  and  he
    could see that it could lead to persecutory treatment of the respondent
    because of the practical effect of withdrawal of Ethiopian  citizenship
    from him.

19.  For these reasons the judge allowed the respondent's appeal  concluding
    that the respondent has successfully shown that there is a real risk of
    persecution for a Convention reason and this  stemmed  from  the  mixed
    Ethiopian and Eritrean elements in his case.

20.  The appellant's grounds challenged  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    respondent has  established  that  he  would  be  perceived  as  having
    Eritrean ethnicity largely on the basis that the Ethiopian Embassy have
    not been able to approve his application for a passport.   The  grounds
    argued that the judge failed to have due regard to ST (ethnic  Eritrean
    - nationality - return) Ethiopia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  00252  (IAC)  which
    requires  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  steps  taken  by   the
    respondent in facilitating the acquisition of the  requisite  document.
    The grounds argued that the judge had materially erred  by  failing  to
    address  whether  the  respondent  had  provided   all   the   relevant
    information at his disposal, and whether all reasonably practical steps
    had been used.  The inability of  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  to  issue  a
    passport  is  not  determinative  that  the  respondent  is  ethnically
    Eritrean.  There were a number of reasons that the competent  authority
    could not verify nationality.

21.  The second ground argued that the  judge  failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for accepting the respondent's account.  The judge's conclusion
    that the respondent's first language is Amharic was he would want to be
    "passed off as Ethiopian" since "Tigrinya would cry out that these were
    foreigners from Eritrea", failed to engage  why  the  respondent  would
    continue to speak Amharic when he relocated to Eritrea at  9  years  of
    age, and where there  would  be  no  such  need  to  pass  him  off  as
    Ethiopian.

22.  The appellant was refused permission to argue the second ground on  the
    basis that it was simply an expression of the respondent's disagreement
    with a finding of fact that was reasonably open to the Tribunal on  the
    evidence.  Permission was granted to argue the first ground.

23.  In granting  permission  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  said  it  is
    arguable that the  Tribunal  misdirected  itself  at  paragraph  57  by
    stating that "the critical question" was  whether  it  was  "reasonably
    likely that the authorities in Ethiopia would accept the  appellant  as
    one of its nationals".  On this issue  I  agree  with  Mr  Hodson  that
    paragraph 57 was a record of the submission made by Mr Hodson  and  was
    not a finding that the judge made.

24.  With  regard  to  the  first  ground,  Mr  Hodson  submitted  that  the
    respondent had approached the Ethiopian Embassy on two  occasions.   At
    Annexe H6 and H7 of the Secretary of State's bundle, was an application
    form completed by the respondent for an Ethiopian passport.  At page 87
    the Head of  Consulate  at  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  had  written  "the
    applicant has not attached supportive documents  with  his  application
    for an Ethiopian passport.  Therefore, there is no valid reason for the
    embassy to issue him with an Ethiopian passport".  It is dated 31  July
    2013 and signed by the Head of Consulate and is stamped by the embassy.
      I accept Mr Hodson's submission that neither the stamp  nor  what  is
    written by the embassy has been disputed  as  not  emanating  from  the
    Ethiopian Embassy.

25.  The respondent made a second approach to the Ethiopian  Embassy  on  25
    March 2014.  On this occasion he submitted a statement giving his name,
    the names of his parents, where he was born and where they  were  born.
    I find that this statement and the  background  details  he  gave  were
    consistent with the evidence the appellant provided in support  of  his
    asylum application.  On this occasion the Head of Consulate wrote:

         "Taking into consideration the information letter  and  further  to
         the questions asked to the applicant  in  relation  to  his  family
         background, we have come to the conclusion that the  applicant  has
         not provided sufficient documents to substantiate his  nationality.
         Therefore the embassy is subjected to refuse this application."


    Again it was signed by the  same  Head  of  Consulate  who  signed  the
    previous statement and it is dated 25 March 2014.


26.  I find that the Ethiopian Embassy were plagued  by  the  same  problems
    the judge was faced with; which was that the  respondent  had  provided
    very  few  documents  to  assist  the  Ethiopian   Embassy.    In   the
    circumstances, I fail to see what further steps  the  respondent  could
    have  taken  to   facilitate   the   acquisition   of   the   requisite
    documentation.  His father has died and from his evidence his mother is
    detained.  His uncle in Sudan cannot be traced.  Bearing in  mind  that
    the appellant was a minor when his mother took him to  Eritrea,  was  a
    minor when he went to Sudan and when he came to the UK, it is not clear
    to me what other documents he  could  have  produced  or  attempted  to
    obtain in order to establish his nationality.

27.  Accordingly, I do not find that the appellant's first  ground  is  made
    out.

28.  Mr Jarvis then sought to argue that the test in this  case  is  whether
    deprivation of  nationality  amounts  to  persecution.   He  relied  on
    paragraph 76 of MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 289.  At paragraph
    76 the Court of Appeal held as follows:

         "This curious concession was, in my view,  the  basis  of  Longmore
         LJ's judgment.  I say curious because it is  implicit  in  it  that
         once a person claiming asylum has shown to the appropriate standard
         that she has in fact been deprived of her citizenship,  it  is  for
         the Secretary of State to show that deprivation did not  amount  to
         persecution.  But it is trite law that it is for  the  claimant  to
         prove persecution or  a  well-founded  fear  of  it,  not  for  the
         Secretary of State to prove that there has  not  been  persecution.
         Longmore LJ expressed his agreement with the  concession,  but  the
         fact remains that it was not  the  subject  of  argument.   It  was
         followed by Longmore LJ when at [70] he formulated the question for
         decision before the court.  That too was  the  way  that  Jacob  LJ
         regarded the matter  in  his  judgment  in  which  he  agreed  with
         Longmore LJ's judgment and added:


             '75. Once a claimant for refugee status has  established  that
                  their country of origin has taken away  their  nationality
                  on grounds of race, they in my  view  have  established  a
                  prima facie case for such status.  It  is  true  that  the
                  decision maker must ask: would they  have  a  well-founded
                  fear of persecution if they were returned today?   But  in
                  the absence of contrary evidence,  someone  who  has  been
                  deprived  of  nationality  because  of  race   would,   if
                  returned, be in a near-impossible  position  -  unable  to
                  vote, to leave the country or even unable to  work.   They
                  may well be treated as pariahs precisely because they  had
                  their nationality taken away.  They have 'lost  the  right
                  to have rights'.  (Chief Justice Warren's vivid words) and
                  they have already been put in the position that their home
                  state will not let them in - they cannot even go home.


             76.  In this case there is no rebuttable evidence showing that
                  the appellant would not suffer from being stateless in the
                  ways I have identified'."

29.  Mr Jarvis also relied on paragraph 64 of MA where it was stated:

          "... whether a stateless person who is unable  to  return  to  the
         country of his former of  his  former  habitual  residence  is,  by
         reason of those facts alone, a refugee within the  meaning  of  the
         1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees... The  Tribunal
         found, and the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  ("the
         Secretary of  State")  contends,  that  it  is  also  necessary  to
         establish a present well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of
         'race, religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social
         group or political opinion' ("the Convention grounds")."


         The Court of Appeal upheld the Secretary of State's contention  and
         dismissed the appeal against the Tribunal's decision. The  decision
         of the Court of Appeal is binding  authority  for  the  proposition
         that a denial of return is not of itself persecution."


30.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the fact that the  respondent  speaks  Amharic
    is evidence that he is an Ethiopian national.  He spent five  years  in
    Eritrea with his mother who  spoke  Amharic  to  him.   These  are  all
    relevant facts  which  ought  to  be  considered  in  deciding  whether
    deprivation of his Ethiopian nationality amounts to persecution.

31.  He argued that the judge was wrong to find that because the  respondent
    would be in Limbo because he does not have an Ethiopian passport  would
    amount to persecution.  Mr Jarvis submitted  that  this  is  the  wrong
    approach and is unlawful in light of MA  and  Revenko  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2001] QB 601.

32.  I accept Mr Hodson's submission that Mr Jarvis had varied  the  grounds
    of appeal without applying to vary  the  grounds.   At  this  point  Mr
    Jarvis made an application to vary the grounds but as  he  had  already
    argued the point, I allowed Mr Hodson to respond to the argument raised
    by Mr Jarvis.

33.  Mr Hodson relied on ST which he said held that it is for  the  Tribunal
    to decide that  the  motivation  behind  the  rejection  to  grant  the
    respondent Ethiopian nationality had persecutory intent.  He relied  on
    paragraph 93 of ST which states as follows:-

         "MA (Ethiopia) establishes that a person seeking to rely  upon  the
         denial of a right of return from the United Kingdom to his  or  her
         home country must take 'all reasonably practical steps to  seek  to
         obtain the requisite documents' to facilitate the  person's  return
         (paragraph 50 of the judgements).  The  test  is  not  whether  the
         applicant has shown that there is a real risk that he or she  would
         be refused a right of  return  for  reasons  engaging  the  Refugee
         Convention.  Instead, the applicant must show, on  the  balance  of
         probabilities, that all reasonable steps have been  taken.   It  is
         then for the Tribunal to make findings as to the  reasons  for  the
         embassy of the country concerned to enable the applicant to  return
         as a national (paragraph 57)."

34.  I find that the judge dealt with this issue at paragraphs  81  and  82.
    His findings indicate that the motivation behind the rejection to grant
    the respondent Ethiopian nationality had persecutory intent which stems
    from the mixed Ethiopian and Eritrean elements in his case.

35.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose an error of law.

36.  The judge's decision allowing the respondent's appeal shall stand.






Signed                                  Date 12.09.2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

