
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09518/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                |Decision Promulgated            |
|on 6 October 2016               | On 14 December 2016            |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SMA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Fraczyk instructed by Migrant Legal Project
                    (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal MM
        Thomas promulgated on the 18 May 2016, following a hearing at
        Columbus House, Newport on the 5 May 2016, in which the Judge
        dismissed the appellants appeal on all grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by Upper Tribunal
        Judge Blum on the 13 July 2016.


Background

     3. The appellant is national of Pakistan born on the 4 April 1980. The
        Judge noted the evidence being relied upon by both  parties  before
        setting out the findings in relation to the asylum  claim  at  [40-
        86], the humanitarian protection claim at [87] and the human rights
        claim at [88-102].
     4. At [40] the Judge noted that the sole issue in the case was that of
        the appellant's credibility. It was noted as being accepted by  the
        respondent that the appellant fell  within  the  particular  social
        group being relied upon  and  that  she  had  suffered  verbal  and
        physical abuse in the UK.
     5. The Judge considered the evidence and found there were a number  of
        discrepancies. At [84] it is found:


        84. I therefore do not find that the Appellant has  discharged  the
        burden of proof and met the standard of proof  of  having  a  well-
        founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention  or   Qualifying
        Directive reason on grounds of being a member of a PSG.

The Grounds


     6. Ground 1 asserts the Judge unlawfully omitted  to  consider  expert
        evidence  and  country  background  evidence  supportive   of   her
        claim/took an incorrect approach to the assessment  of  the  expert
        evidence.
     7. The Judge noted there was no challenge to the status of  Mrs  Moeen
        but did not find there had been an objective consideration  of  the
        evidence by Mrs Moeen.   It  is  clear  the  Judge  considered  the
        evidence of Mrs Moeen with the required degree of anxious  scrutiny
        and makes extensive reference to the report in the  decision  under
        challenge.
     8. In relation to the weight given to the report, the Judge found that
        there was insufficient material to allow him  to  depart  from  the
        findings in the country guidance case of  SM  and  MH  despite  Mrs
        Moeen asserting in her report that the Judge should do  so.  In  SM
        (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067, promulgated on
        the 2 February 2016, it was held that (i) Save as herein  set  out,
        the existing country guidance in SN and HM (Divorced women  -  risk
        on return) Pakistan CG [2004]  UKIAT 00283 and  in  KA  and  Others
        (domestic violence - risk on return) Pakistan CG  [2010]  UKUT  216
        (IAC) remains valid; (ii)  Where a risk of persecution  or  serious
        harm exists in her home area for a single woman or a female head of
        household, there may be an internal relocation  option  to  one  of
        Pakistan's larger cities,  depending  on  the  family,  social  and
        educational situation of the woman in question; (iii) It  will  not
        be normally be unduly harsh to expect a single woman or female head
        of household to relocate internally  within  Pakistan  if  she  can
        access support from family members or a male guardian in the  place
        of relocation; (iv) It  will  not  normally  be  unduly  harsh  for
        educated, better off, or older women to seek internal relocation to
        a city.  It helps if a woman has qualifications enabling her to get
        well-paid employment and pay for  accommodation  and  childcare  if
        required; (v) Where a single woman, with or  without  children,  is
        ostracised by family members and other sources of  possible  social
        support  because  she  is  in  an  irregular  situation,   internal
        relocation will be more difficult and whether it  is  unduly  harsh
        will be a question of fact in each case; (vi)  a  single  woman  or
        female head of household  who  has  no  male  protector  or  social
        network may be able to use the state domestic violence shelters for
        a short time, but the focus of  such  shelters  is  on  reconciling
        people with their family networks, and places are in  short  supply
        and time limited. Privately run  shelters  may  be  more  flexible,
        providing longer term  support  while  the  woman  regularises  her
        social situation, but again, places  are  limited;  (vii)  Domestic
        violence shelters are available for women at risk  but  where  they
        are used by women with children, such shelters do not always  allow
        older children to enter and stay with their mothers.  The  risk  of
        temporary separation, and the proportionality of  such  separation,
        is likely to differ depending on the  age  and  sex  of  a  woman's
        children: male children may be removed from their  mothers  at  the
        age of 5 and placed in an orphanage or a madrasa until  the  family
        situation  has  been  regularised  (see  KA  and  Others  (domestic
        violence risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216  (IAC)).  Such
        temporary separation will not always be disproportionate or  unduly
        harsh: that is a question of fact in each  case;  (viii)  Women  in
        Pakistan are legally permitted to divorce their  husbands  and  may
        institute divorce proceedings from the country  of  refuge,  via  a
        third party and with the help of lawyers in Pakistan, reducing  the
        risk of family reprisals. A woman who does so and  returns  with  a
        new partner or husband will have access to male protection  and  is
        unlikely, outside her home area, to be at risk of ostracism,  still
        less of persecution or serious harm.
     9. The Judge found that the appellant and her  husband  were  divorced
        which is a finding reasonably open to the Judge  and  supported  by
        adequate evidence.
    10. The Judge found there was no evidence of ongoing hostility from the
        appellant's former husband in the UK and noted  in  particular  the
        lack of evidence of conflict at contact meetings organised  by  the
        appellant and  her  husband  directly,  the  lack  of  evidence  or
        incidents at the appellants home even though her husband was  aware
        of the address which had been released in family court papers,  and
        the lack of evidence of abusive and or threatening  text  messages.
        This is a finding reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.
    11. The Judge noted the lack of evidence of verbal threats or  physical
        abuse  when  the  appellant  was  in  Pakistan  and  the  fact  the
        appellants evidence regarding what happened during that period  was
        inconsistent and lacking in credibility [49]. The lack  of  contact
        with the husbands family since January 2015 is noted by the Judge.
    12. At [58] the Judge finds:


        58. I make this point for a number of reasons, I do not accept that
             there has been an objective consideration of the  evidence  by
             Mrs Moeen.  I have dealt already with the point concerning the
             court document (document A30-A59 bundle A1)  which  have  been
             adduced today completed by the  Appellant's  ex-husband  which
             within he refers to the Appellant as his  'ex-wife'.   In  Mrs
             Moeen report she identifies the serious  implications  to  the
             Appellant in having to pursue divorce proceedings on the basis
             that there is 'no proof of' the divorce.  I  assume  that  Mrs
             Moeen will have received a copy of this same document for  the
             purposes of her report.  Mrs Moeen has not made any  reference
             to what is set out therein and the fact that  the  Appellant's
             ex-husband refers to her as his 'ex-wife'.  No  findings  have
             been made by Mrs Moeen as to the weight that would be attached
             to  these  documents  within  the  Pakistani   legal   system.
             Therefore, what is set out in the report from paragraphs 17 to
             28, all paragraphs identifying the potential  implications  to
             the  Appellant  if  she  had  to  seek  a  divorce  would   be
             immaterial.  Further, the identified 'shame' to the family  as
             a result of divorce proceedings would again be  immaterial  on
             the basis of the facts (paragraph 29 to 32).  I  find  this  a
             fundamental error within this report as the premise upon which
             it has been written is on the basis that the  appellant  would
             be returning to Pakistan as still the wife of what she asserts
             is her ex-husband.  Further  the  implications  identified  of
             then being forced to return to live with the in-laws  and  the
             possibility that Emman could be kept by  them  are  all  based
             upon the premise that she is still married.


    13. At [60] the Judge finds:


             In the circumstances I find the  report  to  be  fundamentally
             flawed in that there is a failure by Mrs Moeen to consider the
             position of the Appellant and Emman as a returning  'ex-wife'.
             Further, I find that there is no reasons to  depart  from  the
             country guidance case of SM and MH  for  the  reasons  already
             given.


    14. A Judge is entitled  to  depart  from  the  opinion  of  an  expert
        provided adequate reasons are provided for doings so.  The  reasons
        provided by the Judge are arguably adequate on the  facts  of  this
        case.
    15. The grounds also assert the  risk  to  the  appellant  derives  not
        solely from the appellant perusing her divorce in  Pakistan,  which
        also fails to  acknowledge  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  is
        already divorced and will not have to pursue a divorce in Pakistan,
        but also on account of the perceived insult to her husbands  family
        by her actions in reporting the domestic violence to the police and
        seeking separation. There was no evidence to show such  speculation
        represents a real risk for the applicant in  return.  The  lack  of
        weight the Judge was able to place upon the report is also relevant
        to the assessment of this part of Mrs Moeen's evidence too.
    16. No arguable legal error material to the findings  is  made  out  in
        relation  to  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  expert  report   or
        conclusions reached in relation to the  appellants  credibility  or
        risk on return.
    17. Ground 2 asserts the Judge erred in failing to consider the  impact
        of the decision and  return  upon  the  appellants  evidence.  This
        ground lacks arguable  merit.  The  Judge  considered  the  medical
        issues as part of the human rights assessment in paragraphs 89  and
        90 of the determination. It is also the case that the Judge records
        at [12] that  the  appellants  counsel  raised  the  issue  of  the
        appellants  vulnerability and that the appellant was able  to  give
        evidence at the hearing and was reminded that  if  she  required  a
        break she was entitled to ask for one. The  assertion  the  adverse
        credibility findings show no consideration of  the  impact  of  the
        appellants vulnerability has no merit. It is reasonable to conclude
        that if a judge accepts a perosn is a vulnerable witness they  will
        consider the relevance of this to the evidence given.. The fact  of
        the matter is that the appellant gave  inconsistent  evidence  with
        there being nothing produced to enable the Judge to  conclude  this
        was as a result of her anxiety and/or depression.  The Presidential
        Guidance does not say that no adverse credibility findings  can  be
        made if inconstancies arise but that  this  is  an  element  to  be
        considered when  assessing  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  such
        evidence. There is no legal requirement upon a Judge to explain  by
        reference to the vulnerability each and every thought  in  relation
        to the evidence. The assessment of the credibility of the appellant
        involved assessing the evidence as a whole. This is what the  Judge
        did. The appellant was willing and able to give  the  evidence  and
        the Judge was entitled to assess the degree of weight that could be
        attached the evidence. A vulnerable witness is  still  expected  to
        tell the truth.
    18. A reading of  the  decision  as  a  whole  and  the  evidence  made
        available to the First-tier Judge clearly demonstrates that it  was
        properly considered with the required degree of  anxious  scrutiny.
        The Judge has given adequate reasons for the findings made and,  as
        such, the weight to be given to the evidence was a matter  for  the
        Judge. The finding of lack of evidence of ongoing hostility  is  in
        accordance with the evidence. Speculation as to  what  may  be  the
        position generally in some families in Pakistan does to prevent the
        Judge assessing the issue of real risk on the basis of the  factual
        subjective evidence accepted as being credible by the  Judge  which
        supported the claim there were no indicators of  credible  risk  on
        return from the appellants former husband or his  family,  even  if
        the issue of family shame can give rise to violent reaction in some
        families. The finding it had not been made out this was such a case
        is within the range of findings reasonably open to the Judge on the
        evidence.
Decision

    19. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    20. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 November 2016


