
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09613/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 6 May 2015                       |On: 28 May 2015                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                               Mr Mamady Conde
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr R Pennington-Benton, of counsel (instructed by
                    Lawrence Lupin, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Guinea, born on  14  October  1994.  His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent  dated  3  November  2014
    refusing his application for further leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds and to  remove
    him was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Walker  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 February 2015.

 2. On  4  March  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal, finding that the Judge's  dismissal  of
    his private life claim without any considerations to the content of his
    private life and the evidence relating to it, was arguably an error  of
    law.

 3. He found that the remainder of  the  grounds  appeared  to  be  without
    merit. However, permission to argue those grounds was not refused.

    Background to the appeal

 4. The appellant was born on  14  October  1991  in  Conakry,  Guinea.  He
    belonged to the Malinke tribe. He had no medical conditions.  He  lived
    with his parents and younger sister until his mother died. He was still
    young at the time.

 5. His father remarried and had three sons. His stepmother did not  accept
    him and did not treat him well. She forced him into selling  fruit  and
    ice water on the streets. He was eight  years  old  at  the  time.  His
    father did not intervene although he was aware of this treatment.

 6. He went out to work selling fruit and iced water very early each day so
    he could attend school from 2pm until 6pm. If he had not sold  all  the
    produce he could not attend school.

 7. He continued to do the work required by his  stepmother  for  three  to
    four years. After this, he ran away from home and lived in  the  market
    in Conakry.

 8. When he was 11, his father died. He slept on  a  table  in  the  market
    place. In the morning, he helped the women set up their produce and  he
    would be paid about 500 francs per day.

 9. A year after he ran away, he met his sister at the market. She told him
    that she too had left the home  after  he  left.  She  was  a  domestic
    servant and she lived at their house. He did not keep in contact.

10. There were problems at the market. He belonged to the Malinke tribe and
    the majority of people belonged to the Peul tribe. If the  people  knew
    he was Malinke, he would not get work. He  had  minor  fights  and  was
    beaten and hit on his head. He has since had problems with his knee.

11. Two or three times a  month  at  night,  people  including  adults  and
    children were kidnapped and their body parts and internal  organs  were
    taken. The rest of the body was thrown  onto  the  railway  tracks.  No
    investigation was carried out as to these deaths.

12. He had known a man called 'Frank' for a year. The  latter  visited  the
    market. The appellant helped load his car. Frank came twice a week.  He
    sometimes gave the appellant money. He took pity on the appellant.

13. The appellant explained his fears to him. A few days later Frank  asked
    if he wanted to go to the USA. He said he would. One day Frank came  to
    the market and told him to get into the car with him. Frank took him to
    his house. He stayed there for a week and Frank gave him food.

14. A week later, Frank told him that the appellant was  going  to  Europe.
    They would be travelling together. On the journey, whilst in the hotel,
    Frank touched him. The appellant did not like it and threatened to  hit
    him. Frank told him that he could not leave. The appellant realised  he
    had nowhere to go. He told Frank that he would sleep on the  floor  and
    that if he touched him again he would shout.

15. The reason he came to the UK was "because I had no hope  in  Guinea.  I
    had no home and often slept at the market or in front of bars."

16. If he goes back to Guinea, he would have to go back to  living  at  the
    market. He fears that he will be caught and killed like the others.  He
    will be beaten again by the bandits. They would abuse him,  steal  from
    him and attempt to rape him. In the past, he managed to  get  away.  He
    fears that the police will not assist him. He has no family or  friends
    to help or protect him. It is the rainy season and he has no roof  over
    his head.

17. Judge Walker set out the respective cases  of  the  appellant  and  the
    respondent. The respondent contended that  the  appellant's  motivation
    for claiming asylum was based on a desire for economic  betterment  and
    not a genuine fear of persecution. When his claim was refused,  he  was
    granted discretionary leave to remain on account of his  age  until  14
    April 2012.

18. The appellant is now 20  years  old  and  on  return  would  not  be  a
    vulnerable or orphaned child. He had been looked  after  by  Hillingdon
    Social Services. He had had full access to education and medical care.

19. Both the current President and ruling government  in  Guinea  are  from
    Malinke, the appellant's claimed ethnicity. There would be  sufficiency
    of protection for him. Internal relocation would also be  available  if
    he does not wish to return to his home area.

20. The Judge's findings are set out from paragraphs 38 onwards.  He  found
    that there had been ethnic unrest in the past between the  Malinke  and
    other groups but there was no current evidence showing that such unrest
    is widespread now. In any event, a person could stay away from  certain
    areas or gatherings so as to avoid becoming  involved  in  such  unrest
    [41].

21. The Judge found that  there  was  no  "objective  evidence"  that  that
    individuals kidnap and murder in order to obtain internal  organs.  The
    appellant is now a grown man and can look after himself. He  would  not
    be subjected to any risk on account of this claim [42].

22. The appellant claimed to have received threatening telephone  calls  in
    the UK, believing they may have been from  Frank  or  his  friends.  No
    evidence had been produced about this other than the claim itself.  Nor
    did he explain why he thinks Frank would be behind this. The  appellant
    last saw Frank at Heathrow Airport nearly five years ago  and  has  not
    seen nor heard from him since. It was not credible that Frank would re-
    appear and make such threats. He rejected the appellant's claims  about
    those threatening phone calls [43].

23. The appellant's wishes not to return to Guinea have nothing to do  with
    his being personally targeted in  any  way.  Nor  would  there  be  any
    inherent risk to him on a return there. He would  be  returning  as  an
    adult who is fit and well.  He  is  taking  no  medication.  He  speaks
    English very well and has four  languages  including  Malinke,  Sousou,
    French and English [45].

24. He has also acquired skills and qualifications after being educated for
    nearly five years in the UK. He has qualifications in IT which  are  of
    great benefit anywhere in the world. He also has work  experience.  All
    this adds up to his being at an advantage in the job market [45].

25. He has also re-established contact with his younger sister via Facebook
    and he has a family member to return to.

26. There would be a sufficiency of protection on return there. He has  not
    shown that the Guinean authorities are unable or unwilling  to  provide
    protection against persecution or serious harm.

27. He would also have the advantage of internal relocation within  Guinea.
    He belongs to one of the  main  ethnic  groups.  That  would  help  him
    integrate in other areas and cities in that country. Although there may
    be some hardships involved in relocation, given his circumstances, this
    would not be particularly onerous [47-48].

28. With regard to his human rights claim, and in particular Article 8, the
    appellant was not able to satisfy the requirements of  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE with regard to private life. He  is  no  longer  in  a
    relationship with a girlfriend as he previously was. He does have  good
    friends, three of whom came to Court to give evidence  on  his  behalf.
    This does however not amount to family life.

29. He has been in the UK for nearly five years. This does  not  amount  to
    private life that would be of such substance as to  engage  Article  8.
    Nor had any reasons or facts been put forward warranting any Article  8
    claim being considered outside of the Immigration Rules [54-55].

30. Mr Pennington-Benton referred to evidence from the interview record  of
    the appellant, including the fact that he moved out of home between the
    ages of 11 and 12. He had not seen or heard  from  his  stepmother  and
    stepbrothers since. The only family member he stayed  in  contact  with
    was his sister.

31. He had been abused by his stepmother who used to hit him with a  stick.
    Although he met his sister in 2007, he was not able to maintain contact
    with her as she was in domestic servitude and he was on the streets.

32. One of the reasons for leaving Guinea was because he  belonged  to  the
    Malinke tribe. The Peul, the majority  of  people  in  his  area,  were
    jealous of the Malinke and refused them work. He had been  involved  in
    fights. He complained of a knee problem on account  of  people  hitting
    him on his knee.

33. He fears return because of his membership of the Malinke who are  still
    persecuted and under threat  from  the  Fula  community.  He  would  be
    identified on return. The country is unstable.

34. Further, because of his support for RGP, he is at risk of persecution.

35. Mr Pennington-Benton submitted that the Judge erred in failing to fully
    consider Article 8 and in particular private life.  He  submitted  that
    the Judge held that Article 8 was  not  engaged  [54-55].  In  granting
    permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  it  was  noted  that  the
    threshold is not  a  particularly  high  one.  The  main  focus  is  on
    proportionality. Whatever the Judge thought of  the  asylum  claim,  Mr
    Pennington-Benton noted that the Judge did not disbelieve  the  history
    given by the appellant, simply stating that the appellant would not  as
    an adult be personally at risk.

36. Nevertheless, the treatment and life experiences of the  appellant  and
    his subjective feelings are relevant factors under Article 8.  Although
    Mr Pennington-Benton submitted at paragraph 14 of  his  recent  keleton
    that the appellant has a girlfriend,  he  accepted  that  this  is  not
    correct. The appellant did have a relationship but no longer has one.

37. He submitted that the Judge was wrong to have discounted  private  life
    in this case. There is a  highly  fact  sensitive  assessment  that  is
    required. He submitted that it should  be  given  proper  consideration
    upon  remittal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is  necessary   and
    desirable, especially in the case of a young and vulnerable person with
    a difficult history such as  the  appellant,  for  the  decision  under
    Article 8 to be made carefully.

38. Mr  Pennington-Benton  submitted  that  the  term  "exceptional"  meant
    circumstances in which refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences   for    the    individual,    rendering    the    refusal
    disproportionate. The matter had to be looked at in the round.

39. He referred to the respondent's guidance regarding a claim outside  the
    rules based on exceptional circumstances. This did not  mean  "unusual"
    or "unique." The epithet expresses no more than an  expectation  as  to
    the statistical likelihood of cases requiring a grant of leave  outside
    the established categories in the rules.

40. He submitted that the appellant's only experiences of Guinea appear  to
    have been difficult and harsh. He experienced the death of close family
    members; his treatment and abuse by his  stepmother;  homelessness  and
    brutality on the  streets.  His  only  family  contact  in  Guinea  was
    occasional contact with his sister via Facebook. He does not have  real
    connections to Guinea. He was a child when he left and in  a  real  and
    compelling sense has nothing to return  to.  Given  those  factors,  he
    submitted that there are very significant obstacles to the  appellant's
    integration into Guinea under paragraph 276ADE.

41. He also submitted that whilst it was true that the  appellant  did  not
    make "very significant submissions" in respect of  the  potential  risk
    factor of his membership of  RGP,  he  had  mentioned  in  the  witness
    statement.

42. In that respect he referred to the statement dated 4 December  2013  in
    the respondent's bundle. There the appellant stated  that  he  supports
    the RGP, whose supporters are persecuted by opposition leaders  and  he
    does not feel safe going back. His country is not stable. He also  made
    a statement on 5 April 2012. There he stated that  the  Fula  community
    are now uprising and have threatened to bring in rebels,  resulting  in
    curfews. He would easily be identified and  would  remain  at  risk  on
    account of his ethnicity.

43. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tufan referred to  paragraphs  137  and
    138 of the refusal letter. The respondent had  considered  whether  his
    application raised any exceptional circumstances warranting a grant  of
    leave to remain outside the requirement of the  immigration  rules.  It
    was noted that he was a Guinean national who entered the UK on 29  June
    2010. He had therefore lived in the UK for only four years and was  now
    20. He did not fulfil the requirements under paragraph 276ADE.

44. The Judge noted that he was unable to  fulfil  the  requirements  under
    paragraph 276ADE [54]. The appellant had given evidence to  the  effect
    that he has good friends here, three of whom came to give  evidence  on
    his  behalf.  The  Judge  took  into  account  that  this  showed  good
    friendships [54].

45. The Judge noted that he had only been here for about five years. He had
    been educated at the taxpayer's expense and nothing else had  been  put
    forward.  The  Judge  referred  to  his  qualifications  that  he   had
    undertaken in the UK. He therefore submitted that there was nothing  of
    an exceptional nature beyond those factors which had  been  taken  into
    account.

46. With regard to his claim of potential risk owing to his  membership  of
    RGP, he submitted that his real claim related to  his  ethnicity  as  a
    Malinke and his fear that individuals kidnap and  murder  in  order  to
    obtain internal organs [42]. There was hardly any reference to the RGP.
    Mr Tufan  submitted  that  there  was  not  a  material  error  in  the
    circumstances.

47. In reply, it was submitted that there remained  a  prospect  under  the
    rules regarding very serious obstacles relating to his return. Further,
    his experience and background were all relevant  to  the  private  life
    considerations which had not been engaged with by the Judge. Nor was it
    clear as to the basis for  the  finding  that  the  appellant  has  re-
    established contact with his younger sister.

    Assessment

48. Mr Pennington-Benton accepted that the  appellant  had  not  made  very
    significant submissions relating to the asserted potential risk  factor
    on account of membership of RGP. This had been mentioned in the witness
    statement that was put forward.

49. He submitted that the appellant had provided a more recent statement to
    the Upper Tribunal where this has  apparently  now  been  substantially
    fleshed out.  However,  there  was  no  application  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal under Rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Procedure Rules. No  application
    was made to introduce this evidence.

50. Although directions in this regard had been sent by the Upper  Tribunal
    to the appellant he only recently adduced this evidence in  support  of
    the appeal. There was no compliance with the Rule's requirements.

51. The appellant had contended before Judge Walker in  a  short  statement
    dated 4 December 2013, that he feared return to Guinea  because  of  Mr
    Frank and his accomplices who will be looking for him  and  because  of
    the party he supports. He asserted that the RGP  supporters  are  'very
    persecuted by opposition leaders'.

52. However, as pointed out by Judge  Brunnen  in  granting  permission  to
    appeal, there was one brief reference to a political party in the short
    statement cited in the grounds. There was no other reference to  it  or
    any other involvement in politics in the appellant's interviews or  any
    of his several other, much longer statements.

53. I agree with that assessment. There does not appear to be any merit, as
    noted by Judge Brunnen, in the submission that  consideration  of  this
    brief reference might have affected the outcome of the asylum claim.

54. Further, as noted by Judge Brunnen with regard to paragraph 276ADE(vi),
    the appellant was not  over  18  years  of  age  at  the  date  of  his
    application, which is the relevant date, having regard to  the  opening
    words of that paragraph.

55. The respondent had regard to the grant of discretionary leave.

56. The Judge noted with regard to Article 8 that the appellant was  unable
    to satisfy the requirements  under  paragraph  276ADE  with  regard  to
    private life [54].

57. I do however find  that  the  Judge's  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant has been in the UK for five years  but  that  this  does  not
    amount to private life that would be of such  substance  as  to  engage
    Article 8, were inadequate and terse  in  the  circumstances  [55].  As
    noted by Judge  Brunnen  in  granting  permission,  the  threshold  for
    engagement of Article 8 is not high.

58. I find that there is merit in Mr  Pennington-Benton's  submission  that
    having  regard  to  the  implicit   acceptance   of   the   appellant's
    credibility, this is a  case  where,  in  considering  proportionality,
    there could arguably be unjustifiably harsh consequences rendering  the
    decision to remove disproportionate.

59. The Judge was required to  have  regard  to  all  factors  relevant  to
    proportionality. The appellant had referred to his age and  his  strong
    integration into UK society. Moreover, the Judge did not  consider  his
    return on the basis of the appellant's experiences of Guinea, which had
    been difficult and harsh. As submitted by Mr Pennington-Benton, he  had
    experienced the death of close family members, mistreatment and  abuse,
    homelessness and  brutality  on  the  streets.  He  has  difficult  and
    troubling memories.

60. These were not matters that were appropriately considered by the Judge.
    The appellant had given reasons and had put forward facts  which  might
    warrant his claim being considered outside of the immigration rules.

61. I accordingly find to the limited extent above, that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law. I accordingly set aside the determination insofar  as  it
    relates to the appellant's private life appeal.

62. It was submitted without contention to the contrary that  this  was  an
    appropriate case to be remitted for hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.

63. I  have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
    regarding the issue of remitting an appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh decision. In giving effect to that approach, I am satisfied
    that the effect of the error has been to deprive the  appellant  before
    the First-tier Tribunal of a full and proper opportunity for  his  case
    to be put and to be considered.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point
    of law. The appeal is accordingly remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Hatton Cross) for a fresh decision on the appellant's  private  rights
    claim to be made.

    The appropriate administrative arrangements will accordingly need to be
    made and completed.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed   Dated 26 May 2015


    Judge C R Mailer
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
