
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09168/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28th November 2016                      |On 22nd December 2016            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 IBRAHIM [I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain, Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Sudan. He applied for asylum  in  the
    UK and was refused by the Secretary of State on  5th  June  2015.   His
    appeal against that refusal came before Judge Davies  on  8th  February
    2016.

Background

 2. The appellant left Sudan on 15th June  2008,  travelled  to  Egypt  and
    Turkey and then on to Greece where he stayed for six years.

 3. In considering the credibility of the appellants claim to be at risk on
    return to the Sudan on account of his being a member of the Berti clan,
    the judge wrote as follows:

         "I have no doubt when considering all the evidence  that  has  been
         put  before  me  that  the  appellant's  immigration   history   is
         significant in assessing his credibility.  I  find  him  to  be  an
         incredible witness both in relation to his ethnicity  and  what  he
         claims happened to him in 2008 and why  he  left  the  Sudan.   His
         immigration history overwhelmingly indicates that he did not  leave
         Sudan fleeing persecution. Someone who spends  some  six  years  in
         Greece without taking steps to seek international protection is  in
         my view incredible. Whilst  I  accept  that  the  Greek  system  of
         offering international protection is without doubt imperfect and it
         may not be regarded as a safe country because of that, one  has  to
         examine why the appellant spent six years there.  If he  could  not
         seek international protection in Greece as he  suggests,  he  would
         have moved as quickly as possible to another country in an  attempt
         to seek international protection.  The fact that he spent six years
         in Greece and made no  attempt  to  seek  international  protection
         fatally damages his claim."

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal the judge's decision  on  the
    grounds, inter alia, that the judge had improperly applied Section 8 of
    the 2004 Act.

 5.  Mr  Harrison,  for  the  respondent,  did  not  seek  to  defend   the
    determination and accepted that the appeal would  have  to  be  reheard
    before a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The judge erred in law.  It is clear that he did not take into  account
    the failure of the appellant to claim asylum in Greece as his  starting
    point when considering the credibility of the claim, but rather as  the
    determinative factor.  In effect, he predetermined the outcome  of  the
    ethnicity assessment  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    history which is wrong.



Notice of Decision

 7. The decision is set aside and is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to
    be heard by a different Immigration Judge at Manchester.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 19 December 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
