
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09685/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2016                 |On 11th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                  Mavis [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Faryl of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Foudy of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 1st August 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female Ghanaian citizen born 11th  June  1978.   She
    entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in January 2004 and overstayed.
     She has two dependent sons born 7th March 2008 and  1st  January  2010
    respectively.  Both were born in the United Kingdom but are not British
    citizens, the father of both boys was an illegal immigrant and  has  no
    contact with them and his current whereabouts are unknown.

 3. The Appellant claimed asylum on 15th January 2015, and  her  claim  was
    refused on 12th June 2015.

 4. The Appellant appealed to  the  FtT  pursuant  to  section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).   The  FtT
    heard evidence from the Appellant and found her  to  be  an  incredible
    witness.  The FtT found that the Appellant would  not  be  at  risk  if
    returned to Ghana, and therefore her appeal was dismissed  in  relation
    to asylum, humanitarian protection, and Articles 2 and 3  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 5. The FtT considered Article 8 of the 1950 Convention, and considered the
    best interests of the Appellant's sons, the elder of whom is  autistic.
    The FtT found that it would be reasonable for both boys to relocate  to
    Ghana with their mother, notwithstanding that the elder boy  had  spent
    over seven years in the United Kingdom.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
    one issue only, that being Article 8 of the 1950  Convention.   It  was
    contended that the FtT had erred in finding that it would be reasonable
    for the children to relocate to Ghana because the  FtT  had  failed  to
    properly consider evidence, that being a letter from the  head  teacher
    of the school which both children attended.  The  head  teacher  stated
    that any move from the  school  would  disrupt  their  learning,  their
    emotional well-being, and risk any future  progress  they  could  make.
    The elder child was described as very vulnerable and needing  stability
    and consistency.  It was contended that this evidence was material, and
    the fact that it had been ignored amounted to a material error of  law.



 7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  FtT  Judge  Hodgkinson  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.   The  grounds  do  not  challenge  the  judge's  findings  and
             conclusions in relation to protection but,  rather,  challenge
             her Article 8 findings.  They argue that the judge  failed  to
             consider a letter from the Appellant's two  children's  school
             [AB 25-26], when considering  the  issue  of  whether  it  was
             reasonable to expect the children to relocate  to  Ghana,  the
             contention being that such evidence is highly material to  the
             issue of reasonableness.

         3.   The judge addresses the  question  of  the  interests  of  the
             children,  and  the  issue  of  the  reasonableness  of  their
             removal, in [24-26]  of  her  decision.   It  is  not  evident
             therefrom that she has given any consideration to the  content
             of the said school letter, let alone  adequate  consideration.
             That letter gives indication that the  children's  removal  to
             Ghana 'would disrupt their learning, disrupt  their  emotional
             well-being and risk any future progress they could make'.  The
             judge does not appear to have engaged at all  with  this  very
             important evidence, such omission  amounting  to  an  arguable
             error of law."

 8. Following  the  grant  of  permission  directions  were  issued  making
    provision for there to be a hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide
    whether the FtT decision should be set aside by reason of error of law.



The Appellant's Submissions

 9. Miss  Faryl  relied  upon  the  grounds  together  with  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal, and the letter from the head teacher  dated  14th
    March 2016 at pages 25-26 of the Appellant's bundle.

10. Miss Faryl submitted that the  FtT  had  failed  to  engage  with  this
    important evidence, which therefore meant that the decision was  unsafe
    and should be set aside.

The Respondent's Submissions

11. Mr Bates submitted that the FtT was not required to make  reference  to
    every single piece of evidence.  The FtT had indicated at paragraph  24
    that medical and educational evidence had been considered,  and  I  was
    asked to conclude that the letter from the head teacher  had  not  been
    disregarded.

12. I was asked to conclude that the  FtT  had  adequately  considered  the
    reasonableness of the children returning  to  Ghana  and  to  note  the
    absence of any expert report to  indicate  that  such  a  return  would
    adversely affect them.  Mr Bates submitted that the letter in question,
    was from a head teacher, not  an  expert  on  autism,  and  the  letter
    indicated that both children are in mainstream education and have  been
    making good progress.  The FtT had taken into account that there was no
    background evidence to indicate that autism could  not  be  treated  in
    Ghana, nor was there any evidence to indicate  that  there  was  not  a
    functioning education system.  Mr Bates  questioned  whether  the  head
    teacher was qualified to state that any move from the school would risk
    any future progress that the children could make.

The Appellant's Response

13. Miss Faryl contended that there was nothing  in  the  FtT  decision  to
    indicate that the head teacher's letter dated 14th March 2016 had  been
    considered, and the head teacher was well qualified to give an  opinion
    as to the adverse effects that a move from the school may  have.   Miss
    Faryl submitted that the FtT  was  not  entitled  to  simply  disregard
    material evidence.

14. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. I have taken into account the grounds submitted by the  Appellant,  and
    the submissions made by both representatives.

16. The issue that I am asked to consider is  whether  the  FtT  materially
    erred in law in finding that it was reasonable for the Appellant's  two
    minor sons to return to Ghana, taking into account that they  had  been
    born in the United Kingdom, and the  elder  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for in excess of seven years.

17. The FtT was clearly aware of the need to consider the best interests of
    the children and did so at paragraphs 24-26.  At paragraph 26  the  FtT
    found that the Appellant's  representative  was  wrong  to  argue  that
    because the elder child had  spent  over  seven  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom, he satisfied the Immigration  Rules.   This  presumably  is  a
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) which provides that an  individual
    would be granted leave to remain if at the date of  application  he  is
    under 18 years of age and has lived continuously in the United  Kingdom
    for at least seven years, and it would not be reasonable to expect  him
    to leave the United Kingdom.

18. The Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  confirmed  that  when
    considering the best interests of a child, this broadly means the well-
    being of the child, and the consideration of where the  best  interests
    lie will involve asking whether it is reasonable to expect the child to
    live in another country.

19. I agree with Mr Bates, in that the  FtT  cannot  be  expected  to  make
    reference to every single piece of evidence, for example there are  237
    pages in the Appellant's main bundle.  However I also agree  with  Miss
    Faryl, that it would be an error of law if material evidence  that  was
    before the FtT was ignored.

20. Having carefully considered the competing submissions, I  do  not  find
    that the FtT materially erred.  I am satisfied that the letter from the
    head teacher dated 14th March 2016 contained  at  pages  25-26  of  the
    Appellant's bundle was considered by the FtT for the following reasons.



21. The FtT at paragraph 9 listed the  documents  that  were  provided  and
    confirmed that these documents had been read and considered.   Included
    in those documents are the Appellant's  bundles,  the  main  bundle  of
    which includes the letter in question, and there is also  reference  to
    the Appellant's skeleton argument which at paragraph 17 makes  specific
    reference to the head teacher's letter.  I have been provided  with  no
    satisfactory evidence on behalf of the Appellant, to cause me to  doubt
    the FtT's confirmation that the documents in question were  considered.



22. In addition I  note  that  at  paragraph  24  the  FtT  makes  specific
    reference to educational evidence,  and  although  the  head  teacher's
    letter is not  specifically  referred  to,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    reference to educational  evidence  includes  this  letter.   The  only
    educational evidence in the Appellant's bundle is at pages  25-28,  and
    95-115,  the  latter  being  certificates  and  reports.   The  FtT  at
    paragraph 24 makes  reference  to  the  children  being  in  mainstream
    education and doing well, and that is confirmed in the  head  teacher's
    letter dated 14th March 2016.

23. I then have to consider whether the FtT erred in  concluding  that  the
    return of the children to Ghana would  be  reasonable,  notwithstanding
    the head teacher's opinion that a move from the  school  could  disrupt
    their  learning,  their  emotional  well-being,  and  risk  any  future
    progress they could make.  I take into account that  the  children  had
    only been at the school for less  than  a  year  when  the  letter  was
    written.  The elder child joined the  school  in  June  2015,  and  the
    younger in July 2015.  The question of  reasonableness  is  one  to  be
    decided by the  FtT  having  considered  all  material  evidence.   The
    question of the weight to be  accorded  to  the  opinion  of  the  head
    teacher is a matter for the FtT.

24. The FtT  took  into  account  that  both  children  are  in  mainstream
    education, and that there was no medical evidence to  indicate  that  a
    move to Ghana would adversely affect them.  The FtT found, and did  not
    err in doing so, that Ghana has  a  functioning  education  and  health
    system and there was no evidence to indicate that the elder child had a
    severe version of autism.

25. The Court of Appeal gave guidance on considering the best interests  of
    children in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  The  factors  to  be
    considered are listed in paragraph 35,  and  included  considering  how
    long the children had been in education, and what stage their education
    had reached.  In this case, as previously  stated,  both  children  had
    only been in the primary  school  for  less  than  a  year,  and  their
    education was at a very early stage.

26. In conclusion, I do not find that  the  FtT  materially  erred  in  law
    materially by disregarding material evidence.  I find that the FtT took
    into account all the evidence  placed  before  it,  and  attached  what
    weight was deemed appropriate to that evidence.  The FtT decision  does
    not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  I do not set  aside  the  decision.   The
appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There was no  request  made  to
the Upper Tribunal for anonymity, and I see no need  to  make  an  anonymity
order.


Signed                              Date 4th November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 4th November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
