
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09873/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th December 2016                |On 27 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    I.M.A
                          (ANONYITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

An Anonymity Direction is made.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Broudie Jackson and Cantor Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.  The appellant in the First-tier Tribunal proceedings is the one who is
   appealing to the Upper Tribunal. Consequently, the parties are named as
   before.

2. He sought protection in February 2013.He claimed he is a national of
   Somalia, born in June 1992.  He said he is from the Tumal Bajuni clan and
   was a fisherman. In 2012 his home was raided by Al Shabab and his brother
   taken away. The appellant managed to hide. The villagers decided to
   enforce Sharia law. When the appellant opposed this his home was
   attacked. His family relocated to another village. He there began a
   relationship with a girl who became pregnant. The relationship was
   discovered in January 2013. Rather than face punishment from the
   villagers he fled and travelled by boat to Yemen and then onwards,
   arriving in the United Kingdom.

3. His claim was refused by the respondent in June 2015. It was accepted he
   was a Somali national of Bajuni ethnicity. It was not accepted his
   village was targeted by Al Shabab and his brother taken away; it was not
   accepted the villagers decided to enforce Sharia law; and his claimed
   sexual relationship was not accepted. Reliance was placed upon the
   country guidance decision of MOJ and others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia
   CG [2014] UKUT 00442.Taking the claim at its highest the respondent
   concluded the he could live in Mogadishu and the authorities there could
   provide adequate protection.

The First tier Tribunal

4.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin at
   Bradford in March 2016. The claim was dismissed on all grounds. The judge
   accepted the claims made by the appellant and concluded he would be at
   risk in his home area from Al Shabab and other islanders. However, there
   would be no risk if he relocated to Mogadishu and it would not be
   unreasonable to expect him to do so.

The Upper Tribunal

5. The application for permission to appeal was on the basis the judge
   erred in law in suggesting the appellant could relocate to Mogadishu.
   This was in light of the country guidance decision in MOJ and on the
   basis he was a minority clan member with no links to the city or support.
   The judge had consider the country guidance case and referred to the
   appellant being fit and healthy and that he had not specifically claimed
   to have used all of his mother's jewellery to fund his travel. It was
   contended that the appellant had said he had given all of the jewellery
   to the agent in order to fund his travel and the point was not disputed
   at hearing. It was also pointed out that in the appellant's statement he
   said the same. The judge had referred to the appellant `returning' to
   Mogadishu though the application suggested should be read as `relocate'.

6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the judge
   erred in concluding the appellant could relocate to Mogadishu given the
   finding he is from a minority clan: has never lived in Mogadishu: and the
   appellant's evidence that he has no funds left.

7. The respondent issued a rule 24 response contending that the grounds
   amount to nothing more than a disagreement and states the appellant would
   have access to funds through the returns package and would have a
   livelihood is a fisherman. If an error of law were found, the respondent
   sought to introduce information indicating there was a large Badjununi
   population in Mogadishu.

8. At hearing the appellant's representative referred to the points made in
   the application for leave. In response, the presenting officer contended
   that the decision was consistent with the country guidance and that the
   appellant would benefit from the reintegration package available and he
   was a young man who could avail of the economic opportunities that now
   existed. In response, the appellant's representative said that the
   country information the respondent sought to rely on would only be an
   issue if an error of law were found in which case they would need time to
   prepare a response. It was pointed out that the information pre-dated the
   decision of MoJ. The point was also made that if the relocation package
   were considered sufficient then no appeal would succeed.



Consideration

9. The first point I would make is that nothing turns on the judge's
   reference in paragraph 40 to the appellant `returning' to Mogadishu
   rather than relocating there. I believe this was simply a slip and
   neither party has sought to argue this. There is no suggestion elsewhere
   in the papers or in the decision that the appellant had any prior
   connection with Mogadishu. The slip was likely occasion because the head
   note of MOD (ix) refers to someone returning to Mogadishu.

10. The reasons for refusal letter does adequately engage with the issues
   arising. Notably, it accepts the appellant is a Somali national of Bajuni
   ethnicity. It does not contest the claim the appellant was a fisherman
   from the island of Chula. What is not accepted is the claim that Al
   Shabab came onto the island and took his brother away in 2012 or that the
   villagers agreed to enforce sharia law. The claim of a subsequent attack
   upon the family home was not accepted and followed from this that the
   family did not relocate to another island as claimed. His claim of a
   sexual relationship was also rejected.

11. The immigration judge considered all of these contended issues and
   accepted the claim: referring to the appellant giving a consistent and
   detailed account, without embellishment or exaggeration. The judge
   considered the challenges to the claim as weak. This demonstrates that
   the judge was engaging with the evidence and was even-handed. The
   respondent has not sought to challenge these findings. Rather, the issue
   is in relation to the question of his relocation in light of the country
   guidance decision of MOJ and Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]
   UKUT 00442.

12. The country guidance decision refers to the changes which have occurred
   in Mogadishu and that Al Shabab are no longer a force there. A civilian
   would not be at risk of persecution or risk of harm in Mogadishu because
   of the conditions there or for having claimed protection in the United
   Kingdom. The risk of being caught up in an attack could be reduced by the
   avoidance of possible targets.

13. Head note(ix) refers to the situation of someone returning to Mogadishu
   with no family or close relatives to assist. It says that a careful
   analysis must be made of all the circumstances. The decision refers to
   factors which are not exclusive. Amongst those relevant factors where the
   persons family or clan associations to call upon for help and their
   access to financial resources. Another factor was their prospects for
   obtaining employment. Another factor would be the support that might be
   available from abroad. Reference was also made to the person's ability to
   support themselves whilst in the United Kingdom and why their ability to
   fund the journey to the West no longer enables them to secure financial
   support on return. The head note summarises the position by saying it
   will be for the person facing return to explain why they could not
   benefit from the economic boom. There is reference then to the category
   of individual with no clan or family support; without remittances and was
   no real prospect of employment who will be at risk.

14. The country guidance decision clearly contemplates an enquiry as to
   why, having obtained funds for the journey, similar support would not be
   available on return. In the appellant's case he said he sold his mother's
   jewellery. This would be a finite resource. There is reference in the
   grounds to the appellant's asylum interview:


         `Q119 how much did pay agent-gave him gold
         `Q 120?... where from-my mother
         `Q123 so, you are a businessman, yet don't know value of gold you
         dealt in money, value, explain-it was a lot, don't know value of
         it, it's an antique old thing.


   The last reference would suggest he is referring to a single item. There
   is an a reference apparently to the evidence given in cross-examination:


         What take with you when you left?- jewellery
         Whose? - my mother's
         Why?-I didn't have anything . She gave me something to help me .
         How could jewellery help - gold and silver would help me to go
         somewhere where I would be safe .
         How would it help? - to sell and get money
         did you sell? - no
         why not ?- person who was going to help me said give me
         jewellery...
         How from Yemen to here? Plane
         How much was that-jewellery I gave him brought me here
         How much jewellery did you have?-many


15. His original statement was in May 2013. A second statement is dated 23
   March 2016, presumably for use in the First-tier hearing. Paragraph 9
   reads:


         ... I have no savings of my own. I use my mum's gold to help me
         leave the islands... I have none of that left, and nothing in
         Somalia to return to and have no way of getting any sort of funds.


16. The viability of living in Mogadishu was an issue and part of that
   involves consideration of his financial resources. The judge at paragraph
   35 went through the factors set out in the country guidance decision. The
   appellant had been absent from Somalia for a relatively short. It was
   accepted it was unlikely he would have clan assistance. However, he would
   be able to support himself through work. It was accepted there would be
   no remittances from abroad.

17. The judge referred to him using his mother's jewellery to fund his
   travel and commented `(he) has not specifically claimed that he has used
   all his mother's jewellery '. However, his statement would suggest
   however there was no gold left. In that sense, arguably, it was incorrect
   to say he had not claimed to have used all of the jewellery. It seemed
   clear the case being made by the appellant was that he would have no
   assets by way of the remnants of his mother's jewellery to start life
   afresh in Mogadishu.

18. While there is an arguable issue in relation to the judge's comments
   about him not specifically saying he had none of his mother's jewellery
   left are correct I do not find this would amount to a material error. The
   judge has gone through a number of factors. Some were accepted in the
   appellant's favour and some factors raised that support the viability of
   relocating to Mogadishu. The financial package from the respondent is a
   relevant factor. The package in itself would not defeat any claim made as
   the package is only meant to cushion the transition and give a person
   time to establish themselves. The judge makes the point the appellant
   could obtain work as a fisherman or fish seller and that he is young fit
   and healthy. He has not been out of the country so long that it would
   have serious problems readjusting. The judge refers to the economic
   opportunities in Mogadishu which is well documented in the country
   information.

19. It is my conclusion therefore that the judge's conclusion that
   relocation to Mogadishu is sustainable and is consistent with the country
   guidance case. The factors set out in the head note are not meant to be
   an all-inclusive checklist but are a guide to relevant factors. It is
   clear the judge balanced all of the issues for and against the appellant
   in line with this.


Decision.

The decision of First tier Judge Shimmin dismissing the appeal shall stand.
No material error of law has been established.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


An Anonymity Direction is  made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  them.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.




