

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09272/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|On 10 July 2013 & 21 August 2013              |On 26 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                             MR HOSSEIN SADEGHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Selway, Solicitor, Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal  J M Holmes dismissing  this  appeal  on  asylum  and
   human rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born on 1 December 1981 and  is  a  national  of  Iran.
   There are two limbs to his asylum claim.  The first is that  he  came  to
   the attention of the authorities in Iran by hosting a  Dervish  religious
   celebration.  As a result the authorities  ascertained  that  he  was  an
   installer of satellite TV equipment, which it appears  was  something  of
   which the authorities disapproved.  He was charged in  the  Revolutionary
   Court with anti-regime activities and fled when released  on  bail.   The
   second limb of his claim is that since arrival in the UK he has converted
   to Christianity and been baptised.  He claims to fear persecution  as  an
   apostate on return to Iran.

3)  The  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  satisfied  as   the
   credibility of the appellant's evidence.  The judge did not believe  that
   the appellant had hosted a Dervish religious celebration in his own  home
   and come to the attention of the authorities on  this  account.   Further
   the judge did not accept that the appellant  was  a  genuine  convert  to
   Christianity.

Application for permission to appeal

4) In the application for permission to appeal it  was  contended  that  the
   judge's credibility findings were unsound and  were  not  properly  based
   upon the evidence.  The appellant said in his evidence that following his
   departure from Iran he gave his passport to the agent  who  arranged  his
   departure.  The judge commented that there was "no obvious reason" to  do
   this and it would be more likely that the appellant would have  sent  his
   passport back to his family for safe  keeping.   The  appellant  contends
   that the judge had no reason to doubt his evidence  on  this  point.   He
   accepts that his family have his identity card and it would be irrational
   for him to say that his family did not also have his passport once he had
   acknowledged that his family had his identity card.

5) It is further submitted in the application that the judge  considered  it
   "significant" that the appellant did not provide "evidence" of his travel
   from Iran  to  Turkey.   According  to  the  appellant  this  matter  was
   irrelevant to his claim.  It should not have weighed against him that  he
   had no documentary evidence of how  he  left  Iran.   There  was  nothing
   unusual foe someone in his circumstances about the way he left Iran.

6) The grounds then point out that the judge determined that it was  "highly
   unlikely" that the appellant would  have  hosted  a  Dervish  celebration
   given that he  had  previously  been  on  a  religious  pilgrimage.   The
   appellant argued that hosting the celebration showed  nothing  more  than
   that he had an open mind and the judge was wrong to draw the inference he
   had.

7) In relation to the appellant's alleged conversion to Christianity,  along
   with his wife, the judge decided that this was undertaken to  "bolster  a
   false asylum claim".  It is pointed out in the application for permission
   to appeal that this  seemed  to  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  the
   appellant was converted after he was refused asylum and because his local
   minister, the Reverend Canon Farish, did not give evidence as  a  witness
   at the hearing.  In the application the appellant points out that he  was
   refused asylum less than a month after his arrival in the UK and that  he
   and his wife had little contact with Christianity  before  their  arrival
   here.  The fact that their conversion took place  after  the  refusal  of
   their asylum claim did not detract from its credibility.   The  appellant
   further points out that both he and his wife have been baptised.

8) Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.  The appeal came  before
   me first on 10 July 2013 for consideration of whether there was an  error
   of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Submissions on error of law

9) On behalf of the appellant,  Mr  Selway  submitted  that  the  issue  was
   whether the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  materially  in
   reaching conclusions that were arguably not open to him on the  evidence.
   Mr Selway submitted that  the  judge  had  engaged  in  conjecture.   His
   findings  at  paragraphs  19-20,  where  he  considered  the  appellant's
   passport and his travel from Iran to Turkey, had coloured his view of the
   case.  It might be argued that the findings made were open to  the  judge
   but there was a problem with the way the determination was set out.   The
   findings in paragraphs 19 and 20 were not  at  the  end  of  the  judge's
   findings but at the start.  At paragraph 19 the  judge  plucked  out  the
   idea that no reasonable appellant would act as the appellant had done  in
   handing his travel document over to the agent instead of sending it  back
   to Iran.  The judge also pointed out that the appellant had not  produced
   his identity card, which was in  Iran  with  his  family.   However,  the
   appellant's nationality was not in dispute.  Mr Selway continued that  at
   paragraph 20 the judge again referred  to  evidence  of  the  appellant's
   identity but this was not disputed.  It might be open  to  the  judge  to
   express concerns about the appellant's identity but the judge found  that
   the appellant's failure to produce his  passport  or  identity  card  was
   "significant".  This should not have been treated as significant  because
   the appellant's identity and nationality were not in  dispute.   The  way
   the judge had started to make his findings had coloured the rest  of  the
   determination.

10) Mr Selway then turned to the alleged Dervish religious celebration  held
   in the appellant's house.  The judge referred to  a  discrepancy  in  the
   appellant's evidence over whether he was aware that the people he invited
   to his house were Dervish.  According to his witness  statement  he  knew
   they were Dervish and offered to host  the  Dervish  celebration  at  his
   home.  At his asylum interview he said he did not realise those attending
   the party would be Dervish until they arrived.  Mr Selway submitted  that
   there was no inconsistency here.  The appellant knew that the  person  to
   whom he extended the invitation was Dervish but did not realise until the
   other guests arrived that they were Dervish as well.

11) In relation to the pilgrimage, Mr Selway submitted that  the  judge  had
   relied on conjecture in stating that it was highly unlikely that  someone
   who was sufficiently devout to have gone on  a  religious  pilgrimage  in
   2001 would host a Dervish  religious  celebration  in  2012.   Mr  Selway
   pointed out that the pilgrimage was eleven years previously.   The  judge
   assumed that the appellant was  so  bigoted  that  he  would  not  invite
   persons of a different faith to his house.  Further it was possible for a
   person to change their beliefs.  The judge  was  wrong  in  assuming  the
   appellant would not invite Dervishes into his house because he  had  been
   on pilgrimage.  These findings coloured the rest of the determination.

12) Turning to the conversion to Christianity, Mr Selway submitted that  the
   judge implied that the conversion was not genuine but  he  accepted  that
   the appellant had been baptised and a baptism was not undertaken lightly.
    The judge did not properly consider the  case  law  on  conversion,  for
   example in the case of SZ and JM (Christians  -  FS  confirmed)  Iran  CG
   [2008] UKAIT 00082.  There was no consideration by the judge of the  risk
   to the appellant on return as a result  of  his  conversion.   The  judge
   stated that he had "persuaded" the Reverend Canon Farish to  baptise  him
   but it was not clear what  the  judge  meant  by  the  use  of  the  term
   "persuaded".  The judge had made material errors of law  and  the  appeal
   should be reheard.

13) For the respondent Mr Mangion  accepted  that  nationality  was  not  in
   dispute.  The question the judge asked at paragraph 19 was whether it was
   reasonable for the appellant to hand over his passport to the  agent  who
   arranged his travel from Iran.  According to the appellant he handed over
   the passport willingly.  It was not stolen from him by the agent  and  it
   was not even part of a package deal. The appellant had paid 10,000  Euros
   to the agent and given him the keys to his car but there was  no  mention
   of handing over his passport as part of the deal.  Although the judge did
   not state that by handing over his passport the appellant may  have  been
   trying to avoid the possibility of  removal  after  his  arrival  in  the
   United Kingdom this may have been part of the judge's thinking.  The  use
   by the judge  of  the  word  "significant"  did  not  mean  that  it  was
   determinative.  The judge did not rely on this finding as the  basis  for
   other findings.

14) Mr  Mangion  then  turned  to  the  question  of  whether  there  was  a
   discrepancy in the appellant's evidence over whether he knew  the  people
   he had invited to his home were Dervish.  The Judge  of  the  First  Tier
   Tribunal found a discrepancy between the appellant's  witness  statement,
   in which he recorded that he offered to host a Dervish celebration at his
   home, and his answer to Q7 at his asylum interview,  where  he  indicated
   that he did not realise that those coming to his house were Dervish until
   they arrived.  Mr Mangion pointed out that the answer the appellant  gave
   to Q7 at his interview was a long answer and the judge had regard  to  it
   at paragraph 21 of the determination.  It was  part  of  the  appellant's
   evidence in his answer to Q7  that  he  realised  that  the  people  were
   Dervish when he saw them getting out of a mini bus at his house.  At  Q48
   of the asylum interview the interviewer asked the appellant if there  was
   anything in the house of his customer, Mr Karimi, to whom he extended the
   invitation to gather at his home, to indicate that he and the others were
   Dervish.  The appellant replied that he saw certain  musical  instruments
   and poetry on placards.   The  interviewer  would  not  have  asked  this
   question if the appellant had not earlier said that he had no  reason  to
   believe that the people whom he invited were Dervish.

15) Turning to the pilgrimage, Mr Mangion pointed out that in  his  response
   to Q49 at interview the  appellant  said  that  Dervish  was  a  kind  of
   Christianity.  This was a very odd response.  The Dervish celebration was
   being held on a Muslim holy day.  The judge was not saying that no Muslim
   would invite Dervishes to his house but saying  it  was  improbable  this
   appellant would have done so.  This ground of appeal was no more  than  a
   disagreement with the findings of the judge.

16) Turning to  the  baptism,  Mr  Mangion  submitted  that  the  judge  had
   addressed this properly at paragraphs  28-29  of  the  determination  and
   followed the case  of  Dorodian  (01/TH/1537).   The  appellant  had  not
   complied with the evidential requirements set out in  Dorodian  and  this
   diminished the weight of his testimony  on  his  conversion.   The  judge
   found that the appellant attended the church only  in  order  to  benefit
   from free tuition in English.  If the conversion was  not  genuine,  then
   the judge was not required to consider the case law on the risk on return
   as a result of conversion.

17)  In  response  Mr  Selway  submitted  that  Mr  Mangion  had  relied  on
   supposition to support the judge's findings in respect of the appellant's
   passport.  The appellant was travelling with  his  wife.   They  had  not
   claimed asylum before.  The agent asked the appellant  for  his  passport
   and it was unlikely that the appellant would have declined this  request.
   Mr Selway pointed out that  the  appellant  had  said  at  his  screening
   interview that he used his own passport to go to Turkey but in Turkey the
   agent took his passport and helped him to board a plane to the UK.    The
   judge's use of the word "significant" in paragraph  20  showed  that  the
   judge's finding in relation to the passport and  the  identity  card  had
   coloured his view of the rest of the evidence.

18) In relation to the alleged discrepancy  between  the  witness  statement
   and the asylum interview over whether the appellant knew that the  people
   he had invited were Dervish, the answer  the  appellant  gave  to  Q7  at
   interview was not "perfectly clear" as the judge maintained at  paragraph
   21 but  could  be  interpreted  differently.   In  response  to  Q58  the
   appellant said that he thought that there would be a party  where  people
   would play music together and he did not see any problem.  At Q59 he  was
   then asked why the Dervish would have put themselves  at  risk  of  being
   exposed by the  appellant  without  testing  how  he  might  react.   The
   appellant replied that he talked to Mr Karimi  and  that  Mr  Karimi  had
   assured the Dervish that there would not be a problem regarding the place
   where the party was to be held.  The problem came from the neighbours, Mr
   Selway submitted.  The entire determination was unsafe.

Error of law decision

19) So far as the first limb of the appellant's asylum claim  is  concerned,
   his claim that he came to the attention of the authorities by  hosting  a
   Dervish religious celebration, I consider that the judge's  reasoning  is
   adequate, notwithstanding the criticisms which have been made of it.   In
   his criticism Mr Selway did not directly attack paragraphs 23-25  of  the
   determination.  At paragraph 23 the  appellant's  evidence  was  recorded
   that he and his family lived in a suburb  popular  with  members  of  the
   Sepah.  (This appears to be a  reference  to  the  Revolutionary  Guards,
   sometimes known as "Sepah Pasdaran".)  The judge then went on to make the
   following findings:

      "24.  I note that the core of the appellant's oral evidence to  me  is
      that he voluntarily brought into such a neighbourhood a group of  some
      25 Dervish men to undertake a Dervish religious celebration in his own
      home.  On his evidence he did  not  tell  any  member  of  his  family
      (including his wife) about what he proposed; which if true is a  clear
      indication that he believed they would  object.   Again,  on  his  own
      evidence he took no steps to conceal the presence,  or  the  religious
      affiliation of his guests from his neighbours.   Nor did  he  perceive
      any need to warn his visitors about the  stance  that  his  neighbours
      were likely to take towards a Dervish religious celebration, and  thus
      have the need for discretion, and give Mr Karimi and his  friends  the
      opportunity to make an informed decision as  to  whether  they  should
      accept his invitation.  Thus on his  evidence  the  group  arrived  by
      minibus, some of them already in religious costume, so that  they  are
      able to be seen in public alighting from  the  bus  and  entering  his
      home, and to be capable of visual recognition as Dervish.   I  am  not
      satisfied that this is credible.


      25.          Moreover  neither  before  the  start,  nor  during   the
      religious ceremony that the appellant claims  was  undertaken  in  his
      home, did the appellant take any precautions to prevent his neighbours
      discovering what was going on.  On his evidence both the  street  door
      and the windows were open, and no curtains or blind were drawn.   Thus
      it is his case that his neighbours were drawn to his house  either  to
      complain about the noise or  to  enquire  as  to  the  cause,  and  he
      believes that at least some of those who did, were able  to  ascertain
      what was taking place inside his house.  Again I am not satisfied that
      this is likely to be true."


20) In these two paragraphs the judge expressed ample reasons for  rejecting
   the core of the appellant's account in respect  of  the  alleged  Dervish
   celebration.  Although the judge might be criticised for making  findings
   about the appellant's passport and his identity card, and his travel from
   Iran to Turkey, I accept Mr Mangion's submission that these  points  were
   not determinative.  So far as the alleged discrepancy in the evidence  is
   concerned between the answer the appellant gave at Q7  of  his  interview
   and what he said in his witness  statement  about  whether  he  knew  his
   visitors were Dervish, I consider the judge was entitled to interpret the
   evidence in the way that he did.  The appellant  clearly  stated  in  his
   witness statement that he invited the men he met at Mr Karimi's house  to
   hold a Dervish celebration at his own house.  He records that he told the
   men that it was his house and his family would be out so there  would  be
   no problem.  The invitation was accepted.  This is inconsistent with  his
   earlier statement at his asylum interview  when  he  said  that  he  only
   realised the people arriving at his house were Dervish when they came out
   of the minibus wearing Dervish costumes.  The appellant's  evidence  both
   at his asylum interview and in his witness statement was that he told his
   wife only that he would be hosting a party for some male friends but  not
   the nature of the party.

21) When it comes to the judge's findings, however,  about  the  appellant's
   claimed conversion to Christianity, I am not satisfied that the reasoning
   is sound.  The appellant could not personally be  expected  to  know  the
   evidence he ought to produce in terms of the Dorodian guidelines but,  of
   course, he was represented, although not by the firm  who  currently  act
   for him.  Those guidelines are  themselves  described  as  no  more  than
   "suggestions" in that decision and there  is  only  one  of  the  four  -
   relating to the oral testimony of a clergyman - which was  not  followed.
   The judge had before him a letter from the  Reverend  Canon  Farish,  who
   attended the hearings before me on 10 July 2013 and 21 August 2013.   The
   judge did not properly consider the contents of this letter and there was
   no adequate basis in the evidence for the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
   appellant had somehow  "persuaded"  Rev  Canon  Farish  to  baptise  him,
   implying that the minister was misled or deceived.   The  judge  gave  no
   weight to the appellant's baptism and found that this had been undertaken
   in an effort "to bolster a false asylum claim" but  the  reasoning  given
   for this is inadequate.  The judge gave as one of his  reasons  for  this
   finding that the appellant had expressed no  interest  in  converting  to
   Christianity before his asylum  claim  was  refused.   As  the  appellant
   points out in the application for permission to appeal, the asylum  claim
   was refused just under a month after the appellant  arrived  in  the  UK.
   The refusal letter is dated 27 September 2012.  According to  the  letter
   from the Reverend Canon Farish, dated 21 November 2012, the appellant and
   his wife had been attending the church for about three months, since they
   arrived in Stockton. This would mean their attendance began in the second
   half of August 2012, which was before the refusal decision.  Even if  the
   judge's finding was correct, namely that  the  appellant  did  not  start
   attending the Alpha course until after the refusal of his  asylum  claim,
   having regard to the short timescale of the events in question, the judge
   was stretching his reasoning too far to rely  on  this  as  a  basis  for
   saying that the appellant's conversion was not genuine.  I consider  that
   the judge's reasoning  does  not  adequately  support  his  findings  for
   rejecting the evidence of the Appellant's conversion.  This amounts to an
   error of law and the decision of the judge is set  aside,  together  with
   those findings relating to the conversion.

22) I considered the possibility of  re-making  the  part  of  the  decision
   dealing with the appellant's conversion to Christianity at the hearing on
   10 July 2013.  Both the appellant and  the  Reverend  Canon  Farish  were
   present.  Mr Selway indicated, however,  that  he  wished  more  time  to
   prepare and I noted that there were no specific directions  stating  that
   the decision would be re-made at the same hearing were an error of law to
   be found.  Furthermore, there was another  appeal  listed  for  the  same
   afternoon and it was questionable whether there would be adequate time to
   complete a hearing involving the evidence of two witnesses.   Accordingly
   I adjourned the hearing so that the decision could be re-made on a  later
   date in relation to the appellant's claimed  conversion  to  Christianity
   and any risk on return arising from this.

23) The parties were directed to ensure that  any  evidence  on  which  they
   sought to rely that was not before the First-tier Tribunal, including any
   witness statement, was filed with the Upper Tribunal and  served  on  the
   other party no later than  seven  days  prior  to  the  further  hearing,
   together with the notice required by Rule 15(2A) indicating the nature of
   that evidence and why it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Evidence at the resumed hearing

24) The appeal came before me for a resumed hearing for the purpose  of  re-
   making the decision on 21 August 2013.  At the resumed hearing I was  not
   concerned with the asylum claim as originally put forward  but  with  the
   claimed conversion to Christianity by the appellant and his wife.

25) The appellant gave evidence before me and adopted his witness  statement
   of 13 July 2013.  He was asked by Mr Selway if he had ever brought anyone
   to his church.  He said that he had brought two or three people but  only
   one of them was still in the area.  They were  all  asylum  seekers  from
   Iran and some of them had obtained leave to remain and had left the area.
    He had brought them to the church because as a Christian it was his  job
   to evangelise.  Not all the people he had approached had agreed to attend
   the church.   Some had attended only once and did  not  wish  to  return.
   The appellant said he had one friend who came to the church but  did  not
   wish to convert.

26) The appellant was asked if he would practise his faith  if  he  returned
   to Iran.  The appellant replied that he had to be able to evangelise  and
   talk about Christianity.  In Iran he could not attend  church  and  would
   have to practise his religion in his home or in a basement.  He would not
   be safe if he returned to Iran because he had practised  his  faith  here
   and evangelised about Christianity on Facebook.  He had been  doing  this
   on Facebook  for  about  nine  months.   His  material  on  Facebook  was
   addressed to his friends but the Facebook page was open to  anyone.   The
   appellant referred to a printout of his page.  The appellant was asked if
   he would evangelise on his return even at he risk to himself and his wife
   and child.  The appellant replied that this was the path  he  had  chosen
   and he was happy with it.  His wife had converted as well.  The appellant
   was asked what was it about Christianity which would make  him  risk  his
   life and welfare.  The appellant replied that from the day  he  converted
   he felt that he could communicate with God and he was close to  God.   He
   acknowledged that adherents of other faiths could communicate  with  God.
   He said, however, that the Koran was written in Arabic and could  not  be
   understood. Now he could understand and could communicate with no barrier
   between him and God.  He could evangelise easily.

27) In cross-examination the appellant was referred to a  reference  in  his
   witness statement to having attended an Iranian  church  in  Turkey.   He
   acknowledged that he had done this when he was on holiday in Turkey.  His
   friend asked him if he would like to go to the  Iranian  church  and  the
   appellant agreed.  He joined the congregation for  the  service  and  his
   wife accompanied him.  He only went once but he  was  given  a  Bible  in
   Farsi as a gift.  He said he was aware of the risks of taking  the  Bible
   back to Iran but he was curious about Christianity and wanted to know the
   difference between the Koran and the Bible.  He wanted to  know  why  the
   Iranian Government did not let them read the Bible.   The  appellant  was
   asked why in his previous witness statement  he  had  not  said  anything
   about smuggling a Bible into Iran or attend  a  church  in  Turkey.   The
   appellant said he had gone to church in Turkey  because  it  was  a  free
   country and you could go to the  mosque  or  the  church.   No-one  would
   follow you.  The appellant said he was curious.  Christians used to  come
   to his shop in Iran but when he asked questions they would  not  stay  to
   answer him.  The appellant wanted to know more.  He took the  Bible  back
   to Iran and read it but could not understand the content  without  having
   someone to explain it.  This was why he asked the customers in  his  shop
   but they would not answer him as they were too scared.  The appellant was
   again asked why he had  not  mentioned  these  matters  in  his  previous
   witness statement.  The appellant said his solicitor at the time had told
   him to refer to his Christianity in the witness statement.  The appellant
   had not wanted to do so.  He said he did not convert because of his  case
   but because of his heart.

28) The appellant was asked how soon he had started  attending  services  in
   the UK after he had arrived.  He replied that after only a  week  he  was
   sent to Stockton.  The appellant was trying to find out how to top  up  a
   SIM card for his phone.  He was talking about this with a friend  when  a
   man who lived in the same building came up to him.   This  man  was  also
   Iranian and offered to help.  The man mentioned that he was  a  Christian
   and asked the appellant if he would like to come to church.  He  said  it
   was a good place and that that there were English classes on Tuesday  and
   Thursday evenings.  There was a Sunday  service  and  Bible  study  on  a
   Wednesday.  On Sunday they went to church together.   The  appellant  was
   welcomed by Alan Farish, the priest-in-charge.   The  appellant  and  his
   wife left their names and addresses.  There was  no  translation  of  the
   service so they started going to the  English  lessons  on  Tuesdays  and
   Thursdays and going to Bible study on a  Wednesday.   The  appellant  was
   given a book in Farsi for  the  Alpha  course.   When  the  Alpha  course
   started all those attending came together for prayer but after  that  the
   Farsi speakers were taken to a different room where they were  instructed
   in Farsi.

29) The appellant was asked when he had received his refusal  decision  from
   the Home Office.  He replied that he could not  be  precise  but  it  was
   maybe 20-22 days after his move to Stockton.  He  started  attending  the
   Alpha course before he knew his claim had been refused and  had  been  to
   one or two sessions before he was told.  The course lasted 7-8 weeks  and
   took place every Wednesday.  The appellant's wife attended with him.

30) It was put to the appellant that at the hearing  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal he said that he first started attending the church in  order  to
   study English and gradually  developed  an  interest  in  religion.   The
   appellant replied that going to the English classes  had  nothing  to  do
   with going to church.  From the start he was restless and this was before
   he gave his heart to Jesus Christ.  It was then put to him that he had  a
   prior interest in Christianity so why had he only  gone  to  the  English
   classes to begin with and not to the Farsi Bible classes.  The  appellant
   replied that he did not speak English at the time and he did not have any
   information about Christianity.  He acknowledged that he had the Bible in
   Farsi but he said he could not comprehend it.  When he  read  Matthew  he
   did not know what Matthew meant.  When he started going to church he  did
   not feel anything.  He could not even understand  the  Lord's  Prayer  in
   English.

31) It was put to the appellant that in  his  witness  statement  he  stated
   that his wife became interested in Christianity when she  found  out  she
   was pregnant.  The appellant replied that before his wife became pregnant
   he gave his heart to Jesus Christ and prayed for Jesus to  give  him  and
   his wife a child.  It was put to the appellant that  his  wife  had  been
   attending the Alpha course and the church before she found  out  she  was
   pregnant.  The appellant acknowledged this but said  that  wherever  they
   went they went together.  The appellant  was  referred  to  his  Facebook
   page, on which his name was given as Farzad.   The  appellant  said  that
   Farzad was his  second  name.   This  was  not  the  name  on  his  birth
   certificate but it was the name by which he was known by friends  and  at
   church and elsewhere.  When he arrived he gave his two names.   Attention
   was directed to the appellant's screening interview of 28 August 2012, in
   which he said his first name was  Hossein  but  he  was  normally  called
   Farzad with the word "nickname" in brackets.

32) The appellant's wife, Marijeh  Rasooli,  appeared  as  a  witness.   She
   adopted her witness statement on 31 July 2013 and was cross-examined.

33) Mrs Rasooli acknowledged that she had taken a  holiday  in  Turkey  with
   the Appellant and had attended church there on one occasion.   They  went
   with friends because they were curious about Christianity.  At  the  time
   she did not have any intention to  convert  but  she  was  interested  in
   religion.  She has developed an interest in Christianity through watching
   movies.  She had seen one about Maryam, the mother of Jesus Christ.  This
   was on television in Iran.  She had not talked to anyone at the church in
   Turkey but her husband had.

34) Mr Rasooli was then asked whether she had started  attending  the  Alpha
   course before or after her  husband  received  his  refusal  letter.  She
   replied that it was before.  She was asked why she  attended.   She  said
   she wanted to know more about Christians and Christianity.  She  had  not
   read the  Bible  before  she  came  to  the  UK.   She  did  not  discuss
   Christianity with her husband before she came  here.   She  knew  he  had
   brought a Bible back from Turkey.  This was a gift  which  was  given  to
   him. Mr Rasooli was asked why she did not read the Bible if  the  had  an
   interest in Christianity.   She  replied  that  she  did  not  have  much
   information about Christianity.

35) Mrs Rasooli confirmed that she had given birth to a baby boy on  1  July
   2013.

36) The Reverend Canon Alan Farish appeared as a witness.   He  referred  to
   three letters he had written on behalf of the appellant.   He  was  asked
   about his baptism policy.  He replied that according to the  law  of  the
   Church a minister of the Church of England can only defer baptism until a
   person has been adequately prepared.  Rev Canon Farish said  he  required
   regular attendance at church as part of that preparation.  He turned down
   about 15 requests a year  for  baptism  because  of  non-attendance.  His
   policy was to ensure that people requesting baptism were  believers.   He
   acknowledged  that  other  parishes  allowed  bookings  to  be  made  for
   christenings without attendance  or  belief.   Attendance  was  just  the
   start.  He talked  to  those  preparing  for  baptism  about  the  eleven
   promises that they would take before God and the Church.  They  would  be
   accountable for keeping these promises.

37) Rev Canon Farish said that about 30 asylum seekers attended his  church.
    Currently there were about 20 as 10 had been given leave to stay.   Many
   of those given leave to stay left Stockton.  This  was  only  the  fourth
   appeal hearing he had attended.  He only attended when he  felt  he  knew
   the person well and he turned down several requests a year.

38) Rev Canon Farish said the Alpha  course  ran  throughout  the  year  for
   seven weeks at a time.  There was a course the previous autumn which  was
   the first time he had run the course.  It ran from late  September  until
   the end of November with a full day on a Saturday.

39) Rev  Canon  Farish  was  asked  why  he  believed  the  appellants  were
   committed Christians.  Rev Canon Farish confirmed  that  he  did  believe
   this.  He believed the appellants got to know Jesus Christ in their  time
   with him and his congregation.  They knew of Jesus  from  their  time  in
   Iran but in church they came to accept him as the son of God,  which  was
   not a Muslim belief.  As a Christian  he  believed  that  the  appellants
   entered into a relationship with God and accepted  the  spirit  of  Jesus
   within them.  Mr Sadeghi had done this more overtly and extrovertly  than
   his wife but she had talked to Farzad who believed she was genuine.  Each
   week they travelled the six miles to church - twice to worship and  twice
   to the asylum support group.  The church had now taken on a paid  Iranian
   member of staff and Farzad had helped this person to move in.   This  new
   member of staff now translated the Sunday service through headphones.

40) Ref Canon Farish said that he had been a minister for 28 years  and  all
   of his service was in the diocese of Durham.

41) In cross-examination Rev Canon Farish was asked if the family  had  ever
   discussed details of their asylum  claim  with  him.   Rev  Canon  Farish
   replied that he would have asked Farzad why he had come here but he could
   not remember properly.  He may not have talked about it  with  him  since
   but he would have asked all those attending church initially.  Rev  Canon
   Farish was asked how many times the appellant had brought other people to
   church.  He replied that he thought he had done so  on  three  occasions.
   These were people he had met in Stockton where people tended  to  get  to
   know each other.  The appellant had talked to people in groups.   He  had
   spoken before 30 people and told them about the meaning  of  passages  in
   the Bible they had been looking at.  Rev Canon Farish  said  he  did  not
   know anything about the appellant having been preaching  in  the  streets
   and this was not something that would be encouraged.

Submissions

42) In his submission on behalf of the respondent, Mr Mangion relied on  the
   original refusal letter.  He referred to the country guideline case of SZ
   and JM (Christians - FS  confirmed)  Iran  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00082.   Mr
   Mangion questioned whether  the  appellant  was  a  genuine  convert  and
   whether he intended to proselytise.  If not it would be safe for  him  to
   return.  The appellant had given new evidence today about his  experience
   of attending church in Turkey.  The appellant said that in  his  original
   witness  statement  he  was  persuaded  by  his  solicitor   to   include
   information on Christianity but he failed to mention that he had read the
   Bible in Iran, a Bible which he had smuggled into the country,  and  that
   he had attended church in Turkey.  The appellant's  evidence  of  a  long
   standing interest in Christianity was contrary to  the  evidence  he  had
   given before the First-tier Tribunal.  There the judge recorded that  the
   appellant began attending English  classes  and  gradually  developed  an
   interest in Christianity.

43) Mr Mangion continued that the appellant had been on  holiday  in  Turkey
   for 20 days and if he had an interest in religion why did  he  only  once
   visit a church.  The friend who invited  him  to  attend  was  a  regular
   attender.  It was strange that this had never  come  up  in  conversation
   previously.  The appellant  had  attempted  to  embellish  his  claim  in
   relation to his conversion to Christianity just as he had embellished his
   asylum  claim.   The  evidence  of  the   appellant's   wife   was   also
   inconsistent.  She said she went to church because she was interested  in
   Christianity.  She knew there was a Farsi Bible in the  house  but  never
   once thought to read it.  Her husband said  he  read  it  but  could  not
   understand it.  The appellant's wife watched a  television  programme  on
   the life of Mary. This was consistent with the country guideline case  of
   FS (Iran - Christian converts) Iran CG [2004] UKIAT 00303,  in  terms  of
   which the authorities tolerated different religions  unless  they  caused
   problem.

44) Mr  Mangion  continued  that  according  to  the  appellant  his  wife's
   interest began after she became  pregnant  but  she  did  not  have  much
   interest till then. This was inconsistent with the long-standing interest
   professed by the appellant's wife.

45) Mr Mangion referred to the appellant's  Facebook  account.   He  pointed
   out that this was in a different name from  the  appellant's  name.   The
   appellant said it was  open  to  everyone  and  not  just  friends.   The
   authorities in Iran would not be able to link the site to his name if his
   name was "googled" at the airport. If his faith was not genuine he  could
   remove the material before his return.

46) Mr Mangion continued that there would be no breach of SZ and  JM  unless
   the appellant was proselytising.  He had taken two  or  three  people  to
   church but they had not  given  evidence  before  the  Tribunal.   Little
   weight  should  be  attached  to  the  possibility   of   the   appellant
   proselytising on return.

47) Mr Mangion questioned the evidence of Rev Canon  Farish.   He  submitted
   that Rev Canon Farish held himself out as having the power of discernment
   to judge whether a person was genuine or not.  This depended on a mixture
   of trust and faith.  It was difficult for a minister to  be  critical  of
   someone showing open signs of religion.

48) It was pointed out to Mr Mangion  that  he  had  not  sought  in  cross-
   examination to question  Rev  Canon  Farish's  judgment  on  whether  the
   appellant's conversion was genuine.  Mr Mangion replied  that  Rev  Canon
   Farish and the appellant did not speak the same language.   If  a  person
   was  attending  church  Rev  Canon  Farish  would  accept  the   person's
   commitment.  Rev  Canon  Farish  had  no  insight  into  the  appellant's
   fabricated asylum claim.  He had only seen what the appellant  wanted  to
   show him.  Mr Mangion submitted that as a  judge  I  was  in  as  good  a
   position as Rev Canon Farish to weigh the appellant's character.

49) In relation to Article 8 Mr Mangion submitted  that  the  appellant  and
   his wife and child would return as  a  family  unit.   There  was  little
   evidence of any strong relationships in the UK.

50) On behalf of the appellant, Mr Selway also relied  on  SZ  and  JM.   He
   asked me to find that both  the  appellant  and  his  wife  were  genuine
   converts and that the appellant intended to proselytise on return,  which
   as pointed out in SZ and JM was the same as evangelising.  Mr Mangion had
   said that the appellant had only brought 2-3 people to church.  This  had
   to be seen in context.  The appellant had only limited English and  there
   were few places where the Iranian congregation collected.  The  appellant
   had tried to spread the word. In his evidence Rev  Canon  Farish  pointed
   out that the appellant had professed his faith before 30  people  and  he
   was reasonably likely on return to spread the word of God  and  would  be
   persecuted for proselytising.

51) In relation to the evidence the appellant and his wife gave about  their
   trip to Turkey, Mr Selway said that they were  entitled  to  amplify  the
   evidence they had given in their statements. The appellant  had  inserted
   this in his most recent statement and had taken  a  risk,  albeit  not  a
   great one, by smuggling a Bible into Iran.  He had  tried  to  understand
   the contents but had difficulty in doing so.  This was not surprising  as
   for centuries theologians had had difficulty in doing so.

52) It was pointed out that the determination of the Tribunal in SZ  and  JM
   pre-dated the decision of the House of Lords in HJ  (Iran)  [2011]  1  AC
   596.  Mr Selway submitted that as a convert the appellant should  not  be
   expected to hide his light under a bushel.  There was also  the  risk  to
   the appellant of being accused of apostasy.  Turning to the  evidence  of
   Rev Canon Farish, Mr Selway pointed out that he had 28  years  experience
   of the ministry.  He had given evidence in only four appeals.  He was not
   a man who would be easily persuaded against his better judgment.

Discussion

53) I will begin my consideration with the evidence  of  Rev  Canon  Farish.
   He is a senior and highly experienced minister of the Church of  England.
   In his closing  submission  Mr  Mangion  questioned  Rev  Canon  Farish's
   judgment but he did  not  do  so  directly  in  cross-examination,  which
   weakens significantly his submission  in  this  regard.   When  this  was
   pointed out to him he submitted that as a  judge  I  was  in  as  good  a
   position as Rev Canon Farish to assess whether the appellant's conversion
   was genuine.  I accept, of  course,  that  it  is  for  the  Tribunal  to
   determine the credibility of a claim  made  by  an  appellant.   In  this
   appeal, however, Rev Canon Farish is a person who knows the appellant and
   has long experience of Christian ministry.   His  evidence  ought  to  be
   given considerable weight unless there is good reason  to  the  contrary.
   Mr Mangion submitted that the appellant and Rev Canon Farish do not  have
   a shared language.  The appellant has, however, been learning English and
   it is clear from Rev Canon Farish's evidence that he  and  the  appellant
   have conversed.  Furthermore, the parish church now employs a  full  time
   Iranian member of staff.  In addition, Rev Canon  Farish  has  heard  the
   appellant address other members of the Bible study group on  passages  of
   the Bible which they have been studying.

54) Mr Selway submitted that Rev Canon Farish was not a  man  who  would  be
   persuaded against his better judgment and I agree with  this  assessment.
   Rev Canon Farish has written three letters about the appellant and  their
   tone is instructive.  The first letter was dated 21 November 2012 and was
   before the First-tier Tribunal.  In this letter Rev Canon  Farish  stated
   that the appellant and his wife had recently attended and  completed  the
   Alpha course and they were preparing to be baptised on  2  December.   He
   stated he believed their Christian faith was genuine  and  that  if  they
   were returned to Iran they would continue to follow Jesus  and  hopefully
   to continue to share their faith with others.   They  were  attending  an
   asylum group within the parish church each week on Tuesdays and Thursdays
   and were working hard to improve their  English  as  well  as  taking  an
   active part in the community.

55) The second letter is dated 25 May 2013.  He states  that  he  has  known
   the appellants for about 10 months since the first moved to  Teeside  and
   they are regular members of Stockton Parish Church.  They  have  attended
   the main church  service  each  Sunday  since  August  2012  as  well  as
   attending the Alpha course.  In the professional  opinion  of  Rev  Canon
   Farish their Christian  faith  is  genuine  and  is  growing.   They  are
   learning about their faith through reading  their  Farsi  Bible,  through
   prayer, through public worship and through regular fellowship within  the
   church.  The appellant himself is working hard to improve his English and
   he now understands most of what is said to him and can converse  fluently
   in English.  The appellant is described as natural preacher who was being
   given some initial  preaching/teaching  experience  in  the  discipleship
   group, which meets  every  Wednesday  evening.   This  was  developing  a
   leadership gift within the appellant.  If the appellant and his wife were
   returned to Iran, Rev Canon Farish is sure that the appellant would share
   his faith with others openly and enthusiastically and would try to invite
   other Muslims to follow Jesus Christ.  The appellant's wife is  described
   by him as very quiet and timid but her faith was still real and  genuine.



56) The third letter is dated 13  July  2013.   In  this  letter  Rev  Canon
   Farish states that he has now known the appellant and his wife for almost
   a year and he stands fully by everything that he said in his previous two
   letters. Rev Canon Farish refers to the Home Office claiming to doubt the
   authenticity of Hossein and  Manijeh's  baptism,  "stating  that  it  was
   granted by me through persuasion and coercion  by  them  and  questioning
   their and my motives for carrying out the  baptism".   Rev  Canon  Farish
   describes this attitude as "very disappointing and patronising".   He  is
   also disappointed that the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  "treated
   their new Christian faith dismissively at their appeal in December 2012".



57) Rev Canon Farish then refers to  the  strict  baptism  policy  which  he
   operates.  He states that  he  regularly  receives  requests  to  baptise
   children of parents who do not attend the church and, because of what  he
   required of them before conducting a baptism, many of these choose not to
   go ahead with their original request.  He records that since January 2013
   he has refused to baptise five Iranian asylum seekers because he was  not
   convinced that their profession of faith was genuine and he thought their
   motives were dubious.  In the case of  the  appellant  and  his  wife  he
   expresses himself 100% confident that their  baptisms  were  genuine  and
   appropriate.  He states that the appellant  and  his  wife  continued  to
   practise their faith with consistency  and  enthusiasm,  still  attending
   church every Sunday for worship  and  every  Wednesday  for  discipleship
   training.  Hossein would be in danger  if  he  returned  to  Iran  as  he
   continues to share his faith with others and from  time  to  time  brings
   visitors to church with him.

58) A letter has also been provided by Mrs N Farish, who is the wife of  Rev
   Canon Farish.  She refers to the appellant as Farzad.  She describes  him
   as confident about answering questions in  public  and  demonstrating  an
   active faith from the answers he gives and the  questions  he  asks.   He
   makes jokes about Farsi words and English words and is trying  very  hard
   to improve his English.  He and his wife have brought a number of friends
   to the church.

59) I regard the evidence of Rev Canon Farish as strong evidence in  support
   of the appellant.  Not only does he give evidence of a genuine conversion
   by the appellant and his  wife  to  Christianity  but  he  shows  in  his
   evidence a sustained commitment by the appellant  and  his  wife  to  the
   activities of the Christian church.  The claim by  Mr  Mangion  that  Rev
   Canon Farish and the appellant were unable to communicate in English  has
   clearly been superseded by the appellant learning English  to  the  point
   where is now able to make jokes comparing  English  and  Farsi  words  or
   phrases.

60) Mr Mangion submitted that Rev Canon  Farish  had  no  knowledge  of  the
   embellished or fabricated asylum claim made by the appellant upon arrival
   in the UK and was therefore not in a proper position to ascertain whether
   the appellant was a trustworthy person.  I  note,  of  course,  that  the
   adverse credibility findings made by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
   in respect of the appellant's account of the events which he  claims  led
   him to leave Iran have not been disturbed.  What  I  am  concerned  with,
   however, and what Rev Canon Farish is concerned with in his evidence,  is
   the appellant's behaviour following his arrival in the UK and the  making
   of his asylum claim.  The appellant and his wife arrived in the UK on  28
   August 2012 and claimed asylum on the same day.  Their claim was  refused
   by the respondent only just over four weeks later, on 27 September  2012.
   The appellant's recollection was that his asylum claim was refused  about
   three weeks after he moved to Stockton.  He had been attending the church
   in Stockton for at the most three weeks at the time his asylum claim  was
   refused.  This was early in the development in his Christian faith.   His
   appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was heard on 3 December 2012,  only
   the day after his baptism.  The appellant gave evidence at  that  hearing
   but his wife did not.

61) The implication of Mr Mangion's submission is that having failed in  his
   original asylum claim the appellant was now attempting to use his claimed
   conversion in an opportunistic manner to further his desire  to  stay  in
   the UK.  If this were so, I do not think that Rev Canon Farish would have
   been taken in by the appellant for long and certainly not for the  period
   of almost a year for which Rev Canon Farish has now known  the  appellant
   and his wife.  Mr Mangion suggested that if Rev Canon  Farish  had  known
   the history of the appellant's asylum claim, then he would not accept the
   appellant's conversion as genuine.  Having read the determination by  the
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and having heard the appellant give oral
   evidence about his Christian faith, it appears that the appellant  was  a
   fairly poor and unconvincing  witness  when  giving  evidence  about  his
   asylum claim before the First-tier Tribunal but  by  contrast  he  was  a
   compelling and sincere witness when giving evidence before me  about  his
   Christian faith.

62) Mr Mangion referred to certain inconsistencies he said  arose  from  the
   appellant's evidence before me.  He referred to the appellant not  having
   mentioned in his original witness statement for the  hearing  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal that he had attended a church service in  Turkey  and
   smuggled a Farsi Bible into Iran.

63) In his oral evidence the appellant explained his reluctance to  rely  on
   his conversion to Christianity in  relation  to  his  asylum  claim.   Mr
   Selway rightly pointed out that a witness statement does not have  to  be
   exhaustive of an appellant's account but may be added to at the  hearing.
   Mr Mangion pointed out, with  some  justification,  that  the  appellant,
   having found not to be credible in relation to  the  events  in  Iran  on
   which he based his asylum claim originally, might not be  believed  about
   the additions to his witness statement.  In this  regard  I  should  also
   take into account, however, the evidence of the appellant's  wife.   This
   was consistent with her  husband's  evidence  about  attending  a  church
   service in Turkey.

64) Mr Mangion questioned why the appellant and his  wife  would  only  have
   attended church in Turkey on one occasion.  He  questioned  why,  if  the
   friend who took the appellant and his wife to church  was  interested  in
   Christianity, the appellant would not have discussed this with his friend
   at greater length.

65) The appellant's evidence was that he  went  to  church  in  Turkey  only
   towards the end of his holiday of only slightly less  than  three  weeks'
   duration.  This does not seem surprising when one looks at the  range  of
   activities people carry out on holiday.  If a person is not  particularly
   religious, attending a place of worship will not usually be high on their
   holiday priorities.  This was something which was done only  towards  the
   end of the holiday and  it  may  be  that  the  appellant's  friend  felt
   comfortable about inviting the appellant to church only after he had been
   in his company for some time.  This might also explain why his friend did
   not talk to him about Christianity earlier.

66) Mr Mangion questioned why the appellant's wife, in particular, said  she
   had no interest in converting when she arrived  in  the  UK  if  she  had
   earlier been curious about Christianity, as she claimed.  For my  part  I
   can envisage a considerable difference between curiosity about a religion
   other than one's own and  a  desire  or  intention  to  convert  to  that
   religion.  I do not think the appellant's wife's evidence on  this  point
   is inconsistent.  Mr Mangion questioned why the appellant's wife did  not
   read the Farsi Bible when she returned to Iran.  In my view it is  to  be
   expected that when people return from holiday they  resume  their  normal
   activities and a person will not necessarily go out of their way to study
   something which caught their interest while on  holiday.   The  appellant
   was also asked why he had not studied the Bible in Farsi.  He  said  this
   was because he could not understand it and he gave the example of looking
   at the book of Matthew and not knowing who Matthew was or what  the  book
   was about.  It seems to me readily comprehensible that as  the  appellant
   had not been educated in the Christian faith he would not know the origin
   and significance of the gospels and would therefore find it difficult  to
   comprehend what he was reading.  Only after he arrived in the UK  did  he
   receive  instruction  in  the  Christian  faith  which   gave   him   the
   understanding  and  direction  required  to  begin  studying  the   Bible
   properly.

67) Having regard to the evidence I have heard, and for the reasons  I  have
   given above, I find both  the  appellant  and  his  wife  to  be  genuine
   converts to Christianity who will seek to carry on their  faith  if  they
   return to Iran.  The question I then have to consider is the risk to  the
   appellant on return.

Risk on return

68) Mr Mangion referred me to the refusal letter but this is concerned  with
   the appellant's asylum claim as originally expressed and does not address
   his conversion to Christianity.  Both parties referred me to the  country
   guideline case of  SZ  and  JM.   This  refers  to  the  significance  of
   proselytising or evangelising but, as was pointed out at the hearing,  it
   predates the decision of the House of Lords in HJ (Iran).

69) The evidence before me was that  the  appellant  has  already  begun  to
   evangelise in this country and it was his evidence and the expectation of
   Rev Canon Farish that he would continue to do so in  Iran.   Indeed,  the
   appellant has already shown some  interest  in  this  by  trying  to  ask
   questions of Christians who came to his  shop,  although  they  were  too
   scared to answer.  In the UK he has talked to other  Iranians  about  his
   faith and he has brought several of them to church as visitors.

70)  Although  the  Church  of  England  might  not  be  thought  of  as  an
   evangelical church, in  the  way  that  phrase  is  sometimes  used,  the
   evidence received by the Tribunal in SZ and JM  indicated  that  this  is
   something  of  a  misapprehension,  particularly  having  regard  to  the
   evidence of the Very Reverend Nicholas Coulton recorded at paragraphs 82-
   85 of the decision.  I note that the Very Reverend Nicholas Coulton is  a
   former Dean of Newcastle, where he was responsible for pastoring a  group
   of Iranians who worshipped there.  He describes  evangelising  as  simply
   meaning spreading the gospel.

71) The suggestion in FS was that in Iran it was those who attended the  so-
   called evangelical churches who were most  at  risk  of  persecution.   A
   distinction was made between what were terms "ethnic Christian"  churches
   and Protestant churches.  There was evidence that the Church  of  England
   in Tehran had a substantial congregation before  the  Islamic  Revolution
   but after the revolution this congregation became very small as those  of
   Iranian origin were deterred from attending.

72) The appellant is a man who by his own inclination would want to talk  to
   other people about his faith and to share his faith  with  them.   To  do
   this in Iran, particular as a convert from Islam, would give  rise  to  a
   real risk of persecution.  If he were to be deterred  from  doing  so  by
   fear of such persecution, he would fall within the scope of HJ (Iran).  I
   am satisfied it would be the intention of  the  appellant  to  share  his
   faith with others if he returned to Iran and were he  not  to  do  so  it
   would only be because of a fear of persecution.  On this basis his asylum
   claim should succeed.

73) In addition, there is the appellant's position as  an  apostate  and  as
   someone who has declared his faith  openly  on  his  Facebook  page.   Mr
   Mangion submitted that the appellant  would  not  be  recognised  by  the
   Iranian authorities from his Facebook page because he used  his  nickname
   rather than his given first name.  This  seems  to  me  a  fairly  slight
   defence as far as the appellant is concerned.  He is widely known to  his
   family and friends as Farzad and it would not  be  difficult  for  anyone
   investigating his activities to make the link between  his  identity  and
   the identity on the  Facebook  page.   This  adds  to  the  risk  to  the
   appellant.

Conclusions

74) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.  I have set aside the decision.

75) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

76) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)
   of the Asylum & Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

Fee Award                                       Note: This is  not  part  of
the determination.

In the light of my decision  to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee  award  (Rule  23A
(costs) of the Asylum & Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and
section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

