
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09029/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Date Sent                  |
|On 3rd June 2013                                |On 12th June 2013          |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                         FATHIMA NAWAL ABDUL CAREEM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan instructed by Howells Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Bagral
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 5th November 2012.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 21st March  1978.   Her
    son is a named dependant on the appeal.  They  arrived  in  the  UK  as
    visitors on 16th July 2012 and the Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  20th
    July 2012.

 3. She said that she comes from a conservative family and was  raised  and
    educated by her parents in Saudi Arabia where her father worked  as  an
    engineer.  She had an arranged marriage with her mother's cousin Naleem
    Abdul Latif and the marriage took place on 16th July 1999.  Her son was
    born on 3rd November 2000. From 1999 until 2003  she  suffered  serious
    physical violence at the hands of her husband, who married a woman from
    a refugee camp in 2005 but the  couple  reconciled.  They  divorced  in
    2006.

 4. The Appellant  says  that  she  visited  Sri  Lanka  to  see  her  sick
    grandmother in July 2010 and met her ex-husband.  He said that  if  she
    returned to Sri Lanka he would throw acid in her face and take her  son
    away.

 5. In March 2012 the Appellant's father entered into negotiations  with  a
    view to her marrying an older Saudi man as his third wife.  He arranged
    for her to come to the UK for a holiday, following  which  she  was  to
    return and marry.  She arrived in the UK on 16th July 2012 but lost her
    bag containing her and her  son's  passports.   She  then  applied  for
    asylum.  She said that she could not return to  Sri  Lanka  because  of
    threats from her ex-husband and could not go to  Saudi  Arabia  as  she
    would be forced into an arranged marriage against her will.

 6. In a thorough and detailed determination the judge concluded  that  the
    Appellant's motive in claiming asylum was because she did not  wish  to
    return to Sri Lanka with her parents, who planned to  retire  there  to
    live near her husband whom she clearly disliked.  However she  did  not
    accept that the  animosity  which  she  harboured  for  him  was  as  a
    consequence of years of abuse.  She considered that the  Appellant  may
    not have had a happy marriage but did not believe that it broke down as
    a result of  domestic  violence.   She  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    following grounds.

 8. She argued that the judge failed to give weight to material matters  in
    making her findings on domestic violence. In particular she  had  erred
    in her assessment of the messages sent to the Appellant  from  her  ex-
    partner and had failed to engage with the context of  the  claim.   The
    messages had been produced as evidence of persistent  unwanted  contact
    which constituted harassment.

 9. It was  accepted  that  her  account  was  consistent  with  background
    evidence of marital abuse in Sri Lanka and it had been  internally  and
    externally consistent. The judge had erred in failing to give  adequate
    weight to the acceptance of consistency.

10. Thirdly, the judge had made perverse findings on a matter  material  to
    the outcome of the  appeal.   She  had  not  accepted  the  Appellant's
    account of her parents as being controlling and had used the example of
    the Appellant's mother assisting her to find a lawyer. However it was a
    social worker who put her in touch with a lawyer and not  her  parents.
    Moreover the judge had held it  against  the  Appellant  that  she  had
    allowed her son to go to Sri Lanka to see his father but  her  evidence
    was that he was taken against her will  and  she  had  no  say  in  the
    matter.

11. Finally the judge had made a factual mistake in respect of her previous
    visits to the UK and had not given proper reasons for not accepting the
    Appellant's account of the loss of her passports.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Mailer on 16th  January  2013
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

13. Miss Khan relied on her grounds, in essence submitting that  the  judge
    had not properly placed the Appellant's account in the context  of  the
    evidence as a  whole,  in  particular  the  evidence  of  abuse  within
    marriage in Sri Lanka. The judge had an over simplistic  view  of  what
    constitutes domestic violence.  She had relied upon the  messages  sent
    by the Appellant's husband which appeared to show that he  was  a  nice
    person at face value, but these were classic symptoms of an  abuser  in
    appearing to be charming whilst maintaining unwanted  contact.  In  the
    context  of  violence  during  the  marriage  any  contact   would   be
    threatening.

14. With respect to ground two, she submitted that the  judge  had  made  a
    factual mistake in referring to her mother assisting her  to  obtain  a
    divorce lawyer; the judge had simply misunderstood the  evidence.   She
    had also made factual errors in respect of a family visit to the UK  in
    2011 and had not taken into account the fact that, prior  to  the  2012
    visit, the Appellant had always been accompanied by  a  male  guardian.
    She was not a seasoned traveller as the judge asserted, and the loss of
    her passport should have been seen in that context.  There was a police
    report confirming the theft, which involved not only the passports  but
    also money and jewellery and it was perverse for the judge to  conclude
    that the Appellant was trying to hide her travel  history.

15. Mr Diwnycz submitted that the judge was perfectly within her rights  to
    reach the conclusions which she did.

Findings and Conclusions

16. The grounds and submissions amount to a disagreement with the  decision
    but do not disclose any error of law.

17. With respect to ground one, the  judge  set  out  at  some  length  the
    background  evidence  drawn  to  her  attention  by  the  parties,   in
    particular the expert's report from Professor Good which  she  analysed
    in great detail.  She acknowledged that  the  Appellant's  account  was
    consistent with the background evidence and that it had been internally
    consistent but was entitled to observe that a consistent account is not
    necessarily  a  truthful  one.   She  was  entitled  to  rely  on   the
    Appellant's own evidence in the form of emails  and  Facebook  messages
    and to conclude that there is nothing in those messages which give  any
    hint of her husband showing the least ill-will to her  or  particularly
    to her son, and that the emails suggested that he  wanted  to  maintain
    contact with him and had an interest in his welfare.  The  judge  could
    have concluded that the messages were further evidence  of  an  abusive
    personality but I have to say that that it would be very surprising  if
    she had. The fact that abusers can be nice does not mean that all  nice
    people are closet abusers.

18. Plainly the  judge's conclusions were open to her on the evidence.

19. With respect to the factual errors, they are not material. I have  read
    the judge's Record of Proceedings and it is clear that the  Appellant's
    evidence was that her mother was supportive.  She said that, after  her
    son was born, her mother saw how she was being treated.  The fact  that
    the social worker rather than her mother introduced her to the  divorce
    lawyer is immaterial.

20. With respect to her son's visit to Sri Lanka,  the  judge  was  plainly
    aware that it is the Appellant's case  that  she  was  not  allowed  to
    exercise proper autonomy as  a  woman  born  of  conservative  parents.
    However she rejected the argument that she had been  as  restricted  as
    claimed since she had been able to pursue her education  and  work  and
    had been allowed to travel. She noted that in 2006  the  Appellant  was
    permitted to work and to pursue further education in Saudi  Arabia  and
    that her father subsequently permitted her to travel to the UK where he
    would not have been able to restrict her movements  as  she  clamed  he
    wished to do. In that context the judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the
    Appellant's claim that her son had been threatened with violence by her
    ex-husband and by her ex-husband's cousin and not to find  it  credible
    that, if any of the claims were true,  she  would  permit  her  son  to
    travel to Sri Lanka to see his father.

21. Any inaccuracy in respect of the purpose of the visits in 2011 and 2012
    is immaterial since it is accepted that the Appellant travelled to  the
    UK in those years.

22. With respect to the loss of the passport, again  it  was  open  to  the
    judge to conclude that her  actions  suggested  that  she  intended  to
    secure her entry before  she  claimed  asylum  because  she  wanted  to
    conceal documentary evidence such as her and her son's  passport  which
    did not support her account.  The Appellant did not take advantage of a
    reasonable opportunity to make an asylum claim on arrival and the judge
    properly applied Section 8 to her behaviour as potentially damaging  to
    her credibility.

23.  This  is  an  exceptionally  detailed,  thorough  and  well   reasoned
    determination. Any minor factual inaccuracies  are  wholly  immaterial.
    The grounds and submissions amount to a disagreement with the  decision
    but disclose no error of law.



Decision

24. The original judge did not err and the original  decision  stands.  The
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


