

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number:  AA/09540/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 21st November 2014                        |On: 17th March 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     MRF
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:        Ms Johnrose, Broudie Jackson and Canter
For the Respondent:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran date of birth 17th April 1985.   He
    appeals with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Hague) to dismiss his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    to refuse him entry to the United Kingdom[2].  That  decision  followed
    rejection of the Appellant's claim to international protection.


 2. The Appellant claimed asylum on arrival advancing a fear of persecution
    in Iran for reasons of his imputed political opinion. He had worked  in
    high-end hotels and had been employed providing catering at the British
    embassy. He had contact with foreign visitors to Iran.  He claimed that
    as a result he had been subject to what appears to have been an  extra-
    judicial detention - people he believes to  have  been  agents  of  the
    security services had kidnapped and tortured him  and  accused  him  of
    being a spy.  That was the first plank of the Appellant's  case  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. The second was that since his arrival  in  the
    UK  he  had  converted  to  Christianity:  he  therefore  also   feared
    persecution for reasons of his religious belief.

 3. The First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  the  political  asylum  claim.  The
    account was held to be "implausible": there did not appear  to  be  any
    reason why he had been detained, the intentions of the authorities  had
    not been revealed  during  questioning  and  there  was  no  background
    material to support the Appellant's claim that  a  work  colleague  had
    been  executed.  Nor  was  there  medical  evidence  to   support   the
    Appellant's claim to have been severely tortured.  In  respect  of  the
    conversion claim the Appellant relied on the  evidence  of  a  Reverend
    Ferguson and Mrs Stanley, who both attested  to  their  belief  in  the
    sincerity of the Appellant' spiritual conversion. Judge Hague  was  not
    swayed by their assessment. Although he accepted it to be made in  good
    faith  he  considered  that  the  Appellant's  minimal   knowledge   of
    Christianity and his  relatively  short  period  of  Church  attendance
    revealed this to be a cynical ploy. The appeal  was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

 4. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier  Tribunal  has  made  the
    following errors of law:

        i) Unfairly characterising the account of political persecution  as
           "implausible".  In making this finding the  Tribunal  failed  to
           place the account in  the  context  of  the  country  background
           material and it amounted to impermissible speculation about  how
           the security services in Iran might be expected to behave:  HK v
           SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 and Awala v SSHD [2005] CSOH 73.


       ii) Failure to take account of the evidence. The Tribunal found that
           the Appellant had been  "vague  and  non  committal"  about  the
           reason why the authorities might be interested in him.  In  fact
           he had set out at some length in his asylum  interview  and  his
           interview why  the  authorities  were  interested  in  him  (his
           contact with the British embassy  and  various  foreigners).  In
           relation to the alleged conversion  it  is  submitted  that  the
           Tribunal has failed to take account of the express  evidence  of
           Reverend Ferguson that he had closely observed and assessed  the
           Appellant over a six-month period prior to baptising him.

      iii) Making contradictory findings. The determination states that the
           Appellant's knowledge of Christianity had not been tested; it is
           then found that his knowledge is  lacking.  The  grounds  submit
           that one cannot logically follow the other. If the Appellant has
           not been tested it cannot be said that he has failed a test.

       iv) Failing to conduct a discrete risk assessment on  the  basis  of
           the unchallenged fact that  the  Appellant  had  been  regularly
           attending church for six months: here the grounds  rely  on  the
           comments of Gilbart J in SA  (Iran)  [2012]  EWHC  2575  to  the
           effect that in the Iranian context these  facts  themselves  may
           place the subject at risk, even if the attendance was cynical.

        v) Failure to give reasons. The Appellant had  produced  a  summons
           said to originate from Iran. This had been rejected on the basis
           that its late production suggested "recent manufacture".  It  is
           submitted that this did not amount to a reason.

       vi) Failure to conduct a discrete risk assessment on the basis  that
           the Appellant would be returned  to  Iran  as  a  failed  asylum
           seeker. The  country  guidance  indicated  that  he  would  face
           questioning on arrival, and that if he was found  to  have  left
           Iran illegally he would face detention: the Respondent's current
           Operational Guidance Note indicates that in  such  circumstances
           there would a real risk of ill treatment amounting to  a  breach
           of Article 3 ECHR.

 5. The Respondent did not provide a Rule 24  response  and  before  me  Mr
    Diwnycz made no submissions in defence of the determination.




    My Findings


 6. At the heart of the analysis  of  the  original  asylum  claim  is  the
    finding, at paragraph  8,  that  the  Appellant's  arrest  in  Iran  is
    "implausible". The determination states that "there is nothing  in  his
    history to put him under suspicion... The Appellant is not a  spy,  and
    as a  cook  and  hotel  receptionist  he  has  no  obvious  sources  of
    information or access that could be of  any  interest  to  any  foreign
    power".  With respect to the First-tier Tribunal,  I  agree  that  this
    reasoning is unsustainable. It presupposes that  the  Iranian  security
    services are likely to act in a reasonable, and rational, manner. Given
    the background evidence that is not an assumption that  can  be  safely
    made. As the numerous authorities cited in the grounds point out, it is
    dangerous to assess what is "plausible"  in  a  foreign  state  in  the
    context of what is "plausible" in our own. As Lord Neuberger put it  in
    HK:
     28. Further, in many asylum cases, some, even most, of the appellant's
         story may seem inherently unlikely but that does not mean that it
         is untrue. The ingredients of the story, and the story as a whole,
         have to be considered against the available country evidence and
         reliable expert evidence, and other familiar factors, such as
         consistency with what the appellant has said before, and with other
         factual evidence (where there is any).


     29. Inherent probability, which may be helpful in many domestic cases,
         can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate, factor to rely on
         in some asylum cases. Much of the evidence will be referable to
         societies with customs and circumstances which are very different
         from those of which the members of the fact-finding tribunal have
         any (even second-hand) experience. Indeed, it is likely that the
         country which an asylum-seeker has left will be suffering from the
         sort of problems and dislocations with which the overwhelming
         majority of residents of this country will be wholly unfamiliar.
         The point is well made in Hathaway on Law of Refugee Status (1991)
         at page 81:
         "In assessing the general human rights information, decision-makers
         must constantly be on guard to avoid implicitly recharacterizing
         the nature of the risk based on their own perceptions of
         reasonability."
     30. Inherent improbability in the context of asylum cases was discussed
         at some length by Lord Brodie in Awala -v- Secretary of State
         [2005] CSOH 73. At paragraph 22, he pointed out that it was "not
         proper to reject an applicant's account merely on the basis that it
         is not credible or not plausible. To say that an applicant's
         account is not credible is to state a conclusion" (emphasis added).
         At paragraph 24, he said that rejection of a story on grounds of
         implausibility must be done "on reasonably drawn inferences and not
         simply on conjecture or speculation". He went on to emphasise, as
         did Pill LJ in Ghaisari, the entitlement of the fact-finder to rely
         "on his common sense and his ability, as a practical and informed
         person, to identify what is or is not plausible". However, he
         accepted that "there will be cases where actions which may appear
         implausible if judged by...Scottish standards, might be plausible
         when considered within the context of the applicant's social and
         cultural background".
 7. In this case the country background  material  did  indicate  that  the
    Iranian state routinely subjected its  citizens  to  arbitrary  arrest,
    irregular detention and ill treatment. There was no evidential basis to
    reject the Appellant's contention that they viewed  the  activities  of
    foreigners with suspicion, or that  they  might  be  interested  in  an
    Iranian with some connection, no matter how  tenuous,  to  the  British
    embassy. I therefore find ground (i) is made out.


 8. It follows that I need not deal with ground (ii) in any detail save  to
    say that I accept that there was evidence that the  Tribunal  does  not
    appear to have taken  into  account.  In  respect  of  ground  (v)  the
    Tribunal was entitled to be suspicious about the timing of the summons,
    and I am not satisfied that this in itself would amount to an error  of
    law.

 9. It was accepted by Mr Diwnycz that the Tribunal had failed  to  address
    the 'failed asylum seeker' point that was taken by Appellant's counsel,
    who relied principally on the uncontentious  material  in  Respondent's
    own OGN. The Court of  Appeal  and  High  Court  have  already  granted
    permission on the point in numerous cases[3] and I  am  satisfied  that
    the failure to deal with a specific submission was an error of law.

10.  Grounds (iii) and (iv) relate to the claimed Christian  faith  of  the
    Appellant. In submissions before me Mr Diwnycz agreed that it would  be
    difficult to extricate the Tribunal's  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    faith from its credibility findings  on  his  political  asylum  claim.
    Since the latter have been set aside it is therefore difficult  to  see
    how the former would not be infected by the same error.   I am  further
    persuaded that the Tribunal has not paid sufficient  attention  to  the
    apparently detailed evidence of Reverend  Ferguson  about  how  he  was
    qualified to assess the Appellant, and how  he  actually  did  it.  The
    Reverend expressly rejected the contention that  he  had  baptised  the
    Appellant simply because he had came  to  church  every  week  for  six
    months.   As to the SA (Iran) risk assessment - ie was there a risk  of
    serious harm even if the conversion was cynical - this is  absent  from
    this determination.

11. For the foregoing reasons this  decision  must  be  set  aside  it  its
    entirely. The parties agreed that if this was the outcome it  would  be
    appropriate, given the extent of  judicial  fact  finding[4]  required,
    that this matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-making.



      Decisions

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does contain an  error  of
    law and it is set aside.


13. Having regard to the alleged facts in this case, and having  regard  to
    the Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and
    the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders,  I  make
    an order for anonymity:


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".

14. The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     3rd
                                 March 2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused on the 27th January 2014 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Chohan but granted on the 25th February 2014,  upon renewed
application,  by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
[2] Decision dated 4th October 2013
[3] See for instance R v UT (IAC) and SSHD ona MA (Iran) C5/2014/0227, R v
UT (IAC) and SSHD ona RA (Iran) C5/2014/0437, R v UT (IAC) and SSHD ona SM
(Iran) CO/2972/14
[4] Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper
Tribunal paragraph 7 (b) provides that an appeal may be remitted to the
First-tier Tribunal where "the nature or extent of any judicial fact
finding which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal".


