
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09800/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|on 19th June 2013                             |On 24th June 2013            |


                                   Before

                                 LORD BURNS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                         SHOWKER SHAWKAT ABDULMAJID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Rendle instructed by Wai Leung Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Cockrill, written following a hearing at Taylor House on  the
        4th April 2013,  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
        against a direction for his removal to Iran which  accompanied  the
        refusal of his application for  further  leave  to  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom.


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was found to have a date  of
        birth of 1st January 1995. Details of his  claim  are  set  out  at
        paragraphs 9 and 10 of the determination. In summary, he claims  to
        be at risk as a result of working in a  photocopy  shop  run  by  a
        third party, Ahmad, who was arrested by the  Pasdar  (Army  of  the
        Guardians of the Islamic Revolution)  detained,  ill  treated,  and
        then released. The photocopier  in  the  shop  was  destroyed.  The
        appellant claims he was informed by his uncle that Ahmad  had  been
        working for the Kurdish Democratic Party  (KDPI)  and  that  Pasdar
        were aware he worked for Ahmed in the shop.  The  appellant  claims
        his uncle told him he will be detained and  tortured  and  that  he
        could not return to his own home. His home was subsequently  raided
        by Pasdar as a result of which it was decided he should leave  Iran
        which he did with the help of an agent. The appellant's mother  and
        younger brother remain in  Iran.  The  appellant  clams  he  cannot
        return due to the adverse interest taken  in  him  by  the  Iranian
        authorities.


     3. Judge Cockrill accepted the appellant worked in the shop,  for  the
        reasons given in paragraph 22 of the determination,  but  found  he
        had entered the United  Kingdom  as  an  economic  migrant.   Judge
        Cockrill states:


     "...I accept, therefore, a good deal of what the appellant has told me.
   I do not   accept though what really is  central  to  his  account  which
   relates to Ahmed.  I    think the appellant has not been truthful when he
   described witnessing    Ahmed being taken away  from  the  shop,  showing
   signs of injury, by the      Pasdar. I think that that whole element  has
   been added to provide a      mechanism for the appellant to leave Iran."


     4. The reason for such a finding is disclosed in paragraph 23 in which
        Judge Cockrill finds:


              23. I stress that there I no information that I find  reliable
   which points to                  Ahmad  ever  having  been  arrested  and
   detained.  I do not accept that               the authorities  have  come
   to the appellant's parental home to  try  and                  track  him
   down.


     5. As the appellant's claim was dependant upon the Tribunal  accepting
        his account in relation to Ahmed's detention in connection with the
        KDPI a finding no such event occurred was fatal to the  appeal,  as
        it broke the chain of causation.



Discussion



     6. Permission to appeal was sought and granted on the basis the  Judge
        had "provided an  absence  of  reasoning  to  justify  the  adverse
        findings".


     7. We accept that most of the appellant's claim was found to be
        credible and adequate reasons were given for why this was so. This
        does not mean, however, that all of the claim should have been
        accepted by the Judge as being credible.  In Karanakaran [2000] Imm
        A R 282 there are set out the four categories of evidence that
        decision makers may have to take into account when assessing the
        future risk facing an appellant on return to his home country:

        1)   evidence they are certain about;
        2)   evidence they think is probably true;
        3)   evidence to which they are willing to attach some credence,
        even if they       could not go so far as to say it is probably
        true;
        4)   evidence to which they are not willing to attach any credence
        at all.


     8. The  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  family  and  employment
        circumstances fell was found to fall within category  1  or  2  and
        that relating the detention of Ahmed  and  resultant  risk  to  the
        appellant in category 4.


     9. The grounds allege inadequate reasons were given  but  we  find  no
        merit in such a submission. The reason the claim  was  rejected  is
        clearly given in paragraph 23, namely  that  insufficient  reliable
        evidence had been provided to substantiate the claim.   The  source
        of the information relating to Ahmed was said by the  appellant  in
        his witness statement to be something his uncle had been told by an
        unnamed third party. It is therefore hearsay  evidence.  The  Judge
        did not reject the evidence on this basis but found the quality  of
        that evidence was not good enough to prove the claim. In R  (Ullah)
        v SSHD (CIS 4/12/03) the Court of Appeal said that the Secretary of
        State could not be precluded from advancing his case on  the  basis
        of an interview note between an immigration officer and  a  witness
        simply because the witness was not called and there was no  witness
        statement.  It was evidence, albeit hearsay in form, to  which  the
        judge was entitled to have regard.  The weight to be attached to it
        was, however, a different matter.


    10. Weight to be given to any evidence is a matter for a judge provided
        it is shown the judge has considered that evidence with appropriate
        care and given adequate reasons to support findings  made  -see  SS
        (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155.   We  find  the  Judge  was
        entitled to attach the weight he did to the  evidence  relating  to
        this aspect of the claim and that adequate reasons were  given  for
        why little weight was attached to such evidence.  The  finding  the
        appellant had not substantiated his claim to be at risk as a result
        of the poor quality of the evidence is within the range of findings
        open to the Judge. No error of law is proved.


Decision

    11. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.






   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20th June 2013












