
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09824/2014
     AA/09219/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 June 2016                                |On 5 December 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway

                                   Between

                               MATEEN FAROOQY
                               RAMEEN FAROOQY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Hooper
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Afghanistan.  They are siblings born  in
    1985 and 1986 respectively.  They appeal against decisions to refuse to
    vary leave and to remove under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. They claimed asylum in 2009 when they were minors.  The basis of  their
    claim was that if returned to Afghanistan they would be harmed  by  the
    family members of their  father's  first  wife  owing  to  difficulties
    between their father and his former in-laws which occurred before their
    birth.

 3. Their applications  were  refused  in  May  2010.   They  were  granted
    discretionary leave as unaccompanied minors.  An appeal against refusal
    of asylum was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Jones  following  a
    hearing in August 2010.

 4. In July 2012 before the  expiry  of  their  leave  an  application  for
    further leave to remain was  made.   They  repeated  their  claim  that
    removal would  breach  the  Refugee  Convention.  The  application  was
    refused on 23 October 2014.

 5. Following a hearing on 9 December 2014 at Taylor  House  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Meah  dismissed  the  appeals   on   asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.  He noted that the first  tribunal
    had found the Appellants to be 'wholly incredible' in their  historical
    accounts.  Applying Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1 and  noting  that  there
    was no new evidence as to the history he saw no reason to go behind the
    first tribunal's findings.

 6. He went on to note a 'new expert report ... drafted by the same  expert
    who provided a similar report for the 2010 appeals.  There is  in  fact
    nothing new in the report  which  essentially  states  that  which  the
    previous determination noted and dealt with.  I therefore do  not  find
    that this report is capable of taking the Appellants' claim for  asylum
    and international protection further' [14].

 7. Going on to consider risk on return the FTTJ found that the  Appellants
    are now adults 'two very savvy young  men'  who  had  created  a  'very
    strong bond between them' [15] and are  'better  educated  and  skilled
    young adults' who would be able to cope and  adjust  back  to  life  in
    Afghanistan on return.

 8. The FTTJ did not believe the claim that the Appellants had lost contact
    with their parents.  He found that 'It is likely that the parents  will
    be able to receive the adult Appellants now upon their return so it  is
    unlikely that they would have to fend for themselves in any  event  and
    this further diminishes any risk they may claim to face  on  return  to
    Afghanistan' [17].

 9. In going on to consider Article 8 the FTTJ found that any  family  life
    with other members in the UK did not go beyond normal  emotional  ties.
    Whilst  they  may  have  established  a  private  life,  as  'adaptable
    individuals' who had benefited from education in  the  UK,  they  could
    readapt to life in Afghanistan from where they could keep in touch with
    friends in the UK.  Removal would not be disproportionate.

10. They sought permission to appeal  which  was  refused  but  granted  on
    reapplication to the Upper Tribunal on 11 May 2015.




    Error of law hearing

11. The principal ground argued before me at the error of law hearing on 16
    September 2015 was that the FTTJ erred in law by  failing  to  consider
    whether the Appellants were entitled to humanitarian  protection  under
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

12. I concluded as follows:

         'In this context evidence had been before the FTTJ  that  postdated
         the country guidance case of  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
         [2012] UKUT 163 in the form of an expert report from  Dr  Giustozzi
         dated 28 November 2014 which indicated that there was an  increased
         level of violence in Afghanistan.

         Much country background material  on  Afghanistan  was  before  the
         FTTJ.  He referred to none of it  in  his  assessment  of  risk  on
         return for these two Appellants.  Further, there were  two  reports
         by Dr Giustozzi.  The first was dated 5 August 2010  and  had  been
         before the first tribunal.  A second report dated 28 November  2014
         was before FTTJ Meah.  The gist, as indicated, of the material  and
         reports was that the current level of violence in  Afghanistan  had
         increased over the last year and the likelihood of it continuing to
         do so.  Also, that violence  disproportionately  affected  children
         and young adults whether or not they had family to reside with.

         The FTTJ failed to refer to  and  analyse  any  of  the  up-to-date
         country material.  Indeed, he failed even to  mention  the  country
         guidance.  The only reference (at [14] of the  determination  noted
         above),  where  he  refers  to  Dr  Giustozzi's  second  report  as
         "similar" to his first, four years before, and added "nothing  new"
         was inadequate.  There are differences  between  the  reports,  not
         least in the latter which indeed states  that  levels  of  violence
         have increased.

         In failing to take into account and analyse all  relevant  evidence
         before him, in this case background evidence of country  conditions
         and the further export  report,  the  judge  failed  adequately  to
         consider risk on return and the issue of  humanitarian  protection,
         and thereby materially erred.'

13. I went on:

         'The second ground was that the FTTJ's analysis under Article 8 was
         inadequate because it gave inadequate consideration  to  conditions
         which the Appellants might face on return.

         I refused permission on  that  ground  because  the  error  of  law
         identified by  the  failure  to  take  account  of  the  additional
         material in the country reports, second expert report  and  country
         guidance goes to the consideration of humanitarian  protection  and
         Article 8.  Therefore on  this  point  the  claims  stand  or  fall
         together.'

         'I set aside the decision to be reheard in the  Upper  Tribunal  by
         myself.  The  issue  is  risk  on  return.   The  findings  on  the
         historical accounts stand.'

         Resumed hearing

14. Following two occasions when the resumed hearing had to  be  adjourned,
    and  giving  permission  for  the  grounds  to  be  amended  to   allow
    consideration of paragraph 276ADE, the case came before me  on  7  June
    2016.

15. For the hearing I had before me  the  Appellants'  original  bundle,  a
    supplementary bundle, a bundle  in  relation  to  internal  relocation.
    Further, I had additional bundles (27 May 2016), and 6  June  2016  the
    latter containing up-to-date statements by the Appellants.  I also  had
    before  me  the   Respondent's   Country   Information   and   Guidance
    Afghanistan: Security and  humanitarian  situation  (August  2015)  and
    skeleton arguments.

16. I heard brief oral evidence from the  Appellants,  first,  Mateen.   He
    adopted his last statement.  He accepted that he had not told the truth
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  He was sorry he had lied.  He had said
    what he had been told to say by the agent.  Such  included  that  their
    parents' whereabouts were unknown and contact had been lost.   In  fact
    he and his brother had been in contact with them by  phone.   They  had
    gone to Pakistan and are now in Turkey where, he thought, they had been
    for about a year.  He thought if he had told the truth they would  have
    been sent back to their parents even if they were in Pakistan.

17. He added that he is no longer a practising Muslim.

18. In cross-examination he agreed that his father has two brothers in  the
    UK.  They, too, know the parents are in Turkey.  They had not  attended
    the hearing and there was no evidence from Turkey in support.  He  said
    that he was now telling the truth.

19. In response to questions from myself he said he knew his  parents  were
    out of Afghanistan about six years ago.   The  first  time  they  spoke
    after the parents' exit was two or three years ago.  He  did  not  know
    that if he had said to the British authorities that they  were  not  in
    Afghanistan such might have helped them.  They had said what  they  had
    been told to say by the agent.

20. I then heard from Rameen.  He adopted his statement.

21. In cross-examination he, too, had said what the agent had told  him  to
    say.  They had been scared to tell the truth.  He is  in  contact  with
    his parents by phone and less often by Skype.  He does not  know  where
    in Turkey they are.  He has not asked them.

22. In submissions Mr  Kandola  sought  to  rely  on  the  refusal  letter.
    Referring me to several extracts from AK he said there was no reason to
    depart from it.  Even although the casualty rate  had  increased  since
    that case such was not enough to alter the conclusion set  out  in  AK.
    The indication was that the risk was less in Kabul.  Also,  return  and
    reintegration packages were made available to all.

23. Mr Kandola urged me not to believe  the  evidence  about  the  parents.
    There was no good reason to believe the  Appellants  now  in  light  of
    their previous dishonesty.  The appropriate finding is that they are in
    Afghanistan and it would be to them  that  they  would  return.   There
    would be stable accommodation and a network of support.

24. As for the expert reports they were all  premised  on  there  being  no
    family there.

25. Mr Kandola asked me not to believe Mateen's claim to  no  longer  be  a
    practising Muslim.  This was the first time it had been raised.  As for
    the  claim  that  they  might  be  at  risk  because  they  had  become
    westernised there was no reason why they could not  re-assimilate  into
    Afghani society.

26. In conclusion Mr Kandola submitted that whilst  it  was  accepted  that
    since AK there had been an increase in violence it had not reached  the
    level necessary to satisfy Article 15(c).  Nor could the  case  succeed
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  They have been in the UK  a  relatively
    short time, both speak Dari, and have their family there.  There was no
    need to look at  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   Even  if  that  was
    considered the public interest in removal was weighty.

27. In reply Ms Hooper reminded me that when they  arrived  the  Appellants
    were minors.  Whilst their  dishonesty  had  been  regrettable  it  was
    understandable.  They had been under orders and did not want to be sent
    back to a war zone.  She asked me to accept their current evidence that
    their parents are not in Afghanistan.  She added that it was clear that
    the family had money in order to pay for the  plane  ticket  and  false
    documents.  They had also lived close to the US Embassy and as such  in
    an area of targeted attack.  Anyone with money would likely have left.

28. Ms Hooper, referring me to extracts from  the  most  recent  background
    bundle and her skeleton submitted that those suffering  in  Afghanistan
    were a not insignificant number.  Death  is  an  everyday  matter.   Of
    relevance in considering Article 15(c) was not only the number of those
    suffering but also the criminality arising from conflict,  particularly
    in respect of returnees who would be regarded as western  and  to  have
    money.  Such would be an added problem for Mateen whose evidence,  that
    he was no longer a practising Muslim, should be believed.   If  it  was
    untrue his brother would have said the same.

29. Ms Hooper emphasised that year on  year  since  AK  the  situation  for
    civilians had got worse.

30. Ms Hooper continued by submitting that if the  case  was  not  to  come
    within Article 15(c) the circumstances  were  nonetheless  relevant  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The Appellants would be returning  in  effect
    to an IDP situation.  There was no guarantee that  their  accommodation
    in Kabul would still be empty.  There is an accommodation crisis.   The
    parents may have sold their property to pay for their own exit.   There
    would also be difficulties in finding work.

31. In that regard they have been away so long  they  will  have  lost  the
    social network that might have helped in getting work.  There is little
    available work anyway.  Also,  they  are  not  from  a  robust,  manual
    background.  All in all it would be difficult for  them  to  integrate.
    Looking at the  circumstances  cumulatively  the  Appellants  satisfied
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

32. Finally, in respect of Article 8  ECHR  the  Appellants'  circumstances
    amounted to an exceptional case.  They had arrived  as  children,  were
    fully integrated into UK society, their length of  residence  here  was
    considerable.  There had also been considerable delay by the Respondent
    in deciding the application.  In light of these factors  removal  would
    be disproportionate.

          Consideration

33. The first issue to be considered is whether removal would  be  contrary
    to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive which is transposed  as
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.

         'A person will be granted humanitarian  protection  in  the  United
         Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that ...

         (iii)    substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the
             person concerned, if he is returned to the country of  return,
             would face a real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  and  is
             unable, or, owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself  of
             the protection of that country ...

         Serious harm consists of: ...

         (iv) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person
             by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in   situations   of
             international or internal armed conflict.'

34. In considering the elements a 'real risk' determines  the  standard  of
    proof.   Exceptional  situations  are  possible  where  the  degree  of
    indiscriminate violence is of such a  high  level  that  an  individual
    would face a real risk solely on account of his presence (Elgafaji Case
    C-465/07).  'Serious harm' characterises the nature  and  intensity  of
    interference with a person's right; the harm in Article 15(c) is a more
    general risk of harm than in 15(a) and 15(b).

35. 'Internal armed conflict' occurs when the State's armed forces confront
    one or more armed groups or two or  more  armed  groups  confront  each
    other (Diakite (Case C-285/12) CJEU (Fourth Chamber)).

36. A broad interpretation is required for 'indiscriminate  violence'.   In
    Elgafaji it was found that violence may extend to  people  irrespective
    of their personal circumstances.  An exceptional  situation  is  needed
    for Article 15(c) to apply to civilians generally.   Typical  forms  of
    indiscriminate  violence  may  include:  massive   targeted   bombings,
    guerrilla attacks, collateral  damage  in  direct  or  random  attacks.
    There must be a causal nexus between the violence  and  the  threat  to
    life or person.  Being a 'civilian' is a necessary prerequisite.

37. As  for  'serious  and  individual  threat'  (per  Elgafaji),  that  an
    applicant may be specifically affected is not a  necessary  requirement
    of Article 15(c).  As for general risk an extreme  degree  of  violence
    must be shown.  The more an applicant  is  specifically  affected,  the
    lower the level of violence required.

38. Before considering the background situation in Afghanistan I  find  the
    facts of this particular case. I noted these contemporaneously with the
    hearing.

39. As indicated the Appellants' historical accounts of fear of persecution
    were found to be untrue.  It was also found by  the  previous  tribunal
    that they had not been truthful in saying that they  had  lost  contact
    with their parents.  Rather 'it is likely that the parents will be able
    to receive the adult Appellants now upon their return ...'.

40. As further indicated the Appellants admitted before me  that  they  had
    been untruthful on that  matter  before  the  previous  tribunal.   The
    truth, they claimed, was that for a short time after arrival in the  UK
    they had been in contact with their parents in  Afghanistan  by  phone.
    Soon, however, they lost contact believing it to be  because  they  had
    left Afghanistan.  They knew that they were out  of  Afghanistan  about
    six years ago and spoke to them for the first time  thereafter  two  or
    three years ago.  They are currently in Turkey.

41. I did not believe a word of it.  Their explanation appeared to be  that
    they were told by the agent not to say where their parents were as they
    would be sent back to Afghanistan.  Such makes no sense.  Had they said
    at the time of application or subsequently that they were  in  Pakistan
    or  India  or  Turkey  such  would  potentially  have  helped  them  by
    indicating that their parents were not in Afghanistan to receive them.

42. I find it significant also  that  there  was  no  documentary  evidence
    before me, evidence which one would reasonably have thought would  have
    been available, to support the  claim  of  the  parents'  residence  in
    Turkey or elsewhere out of Afghanistan.

43. Further, the Appellants' father has two brothers in the UK.  I was told
    that they knew of the parents being in Turkey.  The brothers, also, are
    in contact with them.  I found it surprising and significant that there
    was no oral evidence from the  brothers  or  even  witness  statements.
    Again, one would have thought such would have been  easily  obtainable.
    There was no explanation why it was not.

44. The Appellants have a history of deception. I find that the  Appellants
    having been untruthful to the Respondent and at the previous  tribunals
    have continued to be untruthful.  They do not  satisfy  me  that  their
    parents are no longer  in  Afghanistan.  I  also  do  not  believe  the
    evidence raised, for the first time before me, that Mateen is no longer
    a practising Muslim.

45. The situation is thus as follows.  The Appellants  are  now  young  men
    aged 21 and 20 years respectively.  They are  from  Kabul  where  their
    parents remain.  They are as the previous tribunal found  'savvy  young
    men'.  They are in good health.

46. I now consider the background situation in Afghanistan.

47. The starting point is the country guidance case of AK  (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 in which the Tribunal held that whilst
    assessing a claim  in  the  context  of  Article  15(c)  in  which  the
    Respondent  asserts  that  Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable   internal
    relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account  (both  in
    assessing 'safety' and 'reasonableness') not only the level of violence
    in that city but also the difficulties experienced by that city's  poor
    and also the many Internally  Displaced  Persons  living  there,  these
    considerations will not in general  make  return  to  Kabul  unsafe  or
    unreasonable.

48. The Appellants' position is that the security situation in  Afghanistan
    has significantly got worse since 2012 such that the  country  guidance
    is no longer applicable.  Death, Ms Hooper commented,  is  an  everyday
    matter.  More people are leaving now than before.

49. I look first at the expert reports.  Dr Giustozzi's  second  report  is
    dated 28 November 2014.  He notes (at [17]) that 'after  a  decline  in
    violence in 2011-12, 2013 witnessed new peaks of violence.  During 2012
    overall levels of violence have declined in  Afghanistan,  due  to  the
    start of the withdrawal of foreign troops.   However,  Afghan-on-Afghan
    violence has actually increased ...'

50. That paragraph apart there is little in the report to assist not  least
    because  Dr  Giustozzi's  comments  are  premised  on  the  Appellants'
    original assertions that their historical accounts are true, that  they
    would be at risk from family of their father's former wife and from the
    families of the kidnappers as well, all of which has been found  to  be
    untrue.  It also proceeds on the assertion that  they  have  no  family
    there.

51. The more recent report is by Mr Tim Foxley MBE (25 November 2015).   It
    too proceeds on the basis (at [31]) that the  Appellants  do  not  have
    contact  with  their  Afghanistan-based  family  before   adding   that
    'Generally,  it  seems  that  the  availability  of  immediate  family,
    particularly those in a stable environment,  secure  accommodation  and
    with regular income, is helpful  in  cushioning  the  impact  of  being
    returned to Afghanistan'.

52. Elsewhere, Mr Foxley says rather  more  than  Dr  Giustozzi  about  the
    security situation.  Mr Foxley also notes a worsening in  the  security
    situation (at [20]).  He states that Kabul is assessed as being  within
    a Taliban attack zone.  Also, that over the whole country the situation
    remained 'volatile' noting that 'in 2014  there  were  22,051  recorded
    incidents, which surpassed those of 2013 by 10 percent ... In 2014  the
    number of civilians killed and injured in the conflict  in  Afghanistan
    topped 10,000 for the first time  since  the  UN  began  systematically
    documenting civilian casualties in 2009.  Nearly three quarters of  all
    civilian casualties continue to be attributed to the Taliban affiliated
    groups'.

53. Mr Foxley goes on at [24] to criticise the Home Office's assertion that
    Kabul is relatively safe from a security perspective.  He  states  that
    the city and province saw the 'third  highest  level  of  international
    military casualties' and 'is the scene of  regular  terrorist  attacks,
    usually involving suicide bombers.  Being able to penetrate and  attack
    into the heart of the city is an essential part of the media war,  more
    or less guaranteeing headlines for the Taliban'.

54. However, he continues 'the city is more benign generally than  much  of
    Afghanistan.  The Afghan security forces in Kabul have now at least had
    some experience in dealing with complex security incidents.  For people
    with the profile of your  clients,  I  generally  take  the  view  that
    insurgent or terrorist groups would be unlikely to be aware of or  have
    any interest in, them were they to be returned to Kabul.  They would be
    "small fry" in the national capital,  of  little  consequence  and  not
    someone that, for example, the Taliban, would  be  inclined  to  expend
    resources on to pursue'.

55. Further, at [27] 'Although violent when they  do  take  place,  Taliban
    attacks into Kabul are not frequent.  It would be mainly bad luck  that
    would place them in the firing line'.

56. It is  appropriate  to  observe  that  'bad  luck'  does  not  get  the
    Appellants into the threshold of Article 15(c).

57. Much of the rest of Mr Foxley's report deals  with  issues  other  than
    violence.  He notes that there is  'no  dependable  solid  safety  net.
    They will likely have little cash or other resources to  support  their
    initial arrival in the city' [27].

58. I find such to be of very limited assistance to the Appellants  because
    it has been found that they have family and resources on the ground.

59. As for the comment that having been away for some years they  'may  now
    stand out - unwittingly - as Westernised young  persons'  and  as  such
    being viewed by some with suspicion and at risk of  criminality,  again
    they would have the support of their family and there seems  no  reason
    why  they  could  not  re-assimilate  into  Afghani  society  as   they
    assimilated into British society.

60. At [37] and [46] Mr Foxley makes comment on the risk of exploitation be
    it criminal, narcotic or sexual for 'young and vulnerable  men  without
    regular employment or reliable accommodation'.  Once more I do not find
    this to assist the Appellants as they  will  have  family  support  and
    accommodation.

61. I look at other material.  Mr Kandola sought to  rely  on  the  Country
    Information  and  Guidance:  Afghanistan:   Security   &   humanitarian
    situation (August 2015).

62. It notes (at 2.5.4) AK which found in Kabul  the  'great  majority  [of
    attacks]  have  concentrated  on  areas   where   the   government   or
    international organisations have their offices or where their employees
    frequent' [226].    However, the Tribunal went on with regard to  Kabul
    city to find that  '...  given  the  fact  that  this  has  a  reported
    population of around 5 million and that Kabul province does not feature
    in any list of the  most  violence  provinces,  the  argument  for  any
    engagement of the  Article  15(c)  threshold,  if  based  primarily  on
    civilian deaths, is  even  weaker'  [than  Kandahar  and  Helmand,  the
    provinces with the highest number of civilian  deaths,  and  Ghazni,  a
    province with a significant rise in violent incidents] [219].

63. Ms Hooper was correct to submit that the  security  situation  has  got
    worse since the promulgation of AK  in  2012  and  indeed  it  was  not
    disputed by Mr Kandola.

64. The COI Report (at 2.5.6) notes that since then,  according  to  UNAMA,
    'the number of civilian deaths and injuries has  increased  ...  Whilst
    injuries to civilians steadily increased between  2010  and  2014,  the
    number of deaths fluctuated, increasing in 2011 compared to 2010,  then
    reducing in 2012 and  2013  before  rising  again  in  2014  to  10,548
    civilian casualties (3,699 deaths and 6,849 injured) the highest number
    of civilian deaths and injuries in a single year since recording  began
    in 2009'.

65. The report goes on (at 2.5.7): 'Analysts  and  media  sources  noted  a
    significant escalation in violence in Kabul during the latter months of
    2014, and a surge of terrorist attacks in Kabul in mid-May 2015'.

66. In that regard, in the section  'Nature  and  levels  of  violence'  in
    respect of Kabul the report notes (at  4.4.1)  the  Institute  for  the
    Study of War stating 'Analysts and media sources  alike  have  noted  a
    significant escalation in Kabul  during  the  latter  months  of  2014.
    Insurgent violence in Kabul increased in July  2014  and  maintained  a
    consistent level of intensity through March 2015.   In  these  attacks,
    militants focused on targeting Afghan government and Western interests,
    including foreign military and diplomatic  personnel,  Afghan  security
    forces, and Western NGOs ... at least 77 attacks occurred in  Kabul  in
    2014, compared to the 29 attacks recorded in 2013'.

67. Further, (at 4.4.2) 'A surge of terrorist attacks in Kabul  in  mid-May
    saw at least 26 deaths and over 80 injuries'.   On  a  day  in  May  an
    assault on a hotel killed 14 people; an explosion at  Kabul  University
    several days later injured two.  In other incidents that month, in  the
    city three people were killed and 20 wounded.  A  suicide  bomb  attack
    near Kabul airport killed three people and injured at least 18  others.
    On 19 May a car bomb exploded next to the Ministry of Justice  building
    killing five and wounding at least 43 others [4.4.2].

68. I conclude that the most up-to-date information put before  me  clearly
    supports  Ms  Hooper's  contention  that  the  security  situation  has
    deteriorated since AK was promulgated in 2012.

69. In QD (Iraq) and AH (Iraq) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 620 Sedley LJ '... it
    is not every armed conflict or violent situation which will attract the
    protection of Article 15(c), but only one where the level  of  violence
    is such that, without anything to  render  them  a  particular  target,
    civilians face real risks to their  life  or  personal  safety'.   When
    Article 15(c) speaks of a threat to a civilian's life or person  it  is
    concerned not with fear alone but with a possibility that may become  a
    reality, such that 'risk' in Article 2(e)  overlaps  with  'threat'  in
    Article 15(c), so that the latter reiterates but does  not  qualify  or
    dilute the former.  Article 15(c) is concerned with 'serious threats of
    real harm'.  Although there is no requirement that the  armed  conflict
    itself need be exceptional there  does  need  to  be  an  intensity  of
    indiscriminate violence 'great enough to meet the test set out  by  the
    ECJ'.

70. Having accepted that the evidence clearly shows a deterioration in  the
    security situation in Afghanistan in recent years  I  nonetheless  note
    and find of considerable weight (at 2.5.8) of the COI  Report  '..  the
    proportion of civilians directly affected by violence remains low.  The
    CIA World Factbook estimated the population at 31,822,848 (July  2014).
    Taking the number of civilians killed and injured in 2014, 0.03% of the
    population were directly affected by violence during this time'.

71. I note also the Judicial Review decision of July 2015 in  the  case  of
    Naziri & Others, R (on the  application  of)  v  SSHD  (JR  -  scope  -
    evidence) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 437  (IAC).   It  was  argued  that  having
    regard to a substantial body of evidence which had  materialised  since
    2012, it was appropriate to reconsider the guidance promulgated in  AK.
    However the Upper Tribunal found that  'within  the  limitations  of  a
    judicial review challenge and the hearing which has taken place we find
    no warrant for departing from the current country guidance  promulgated
    in AK.  In particular,  we  find  that  the  evidence  falls  short  of
    satisfying the stringent Article 15(c) test'[95].

72.  In  seeking  to  assess  the  background  evidence  in  light  of  the
    Appellants' circumstances I conclude that despite the deterioration and
    difficulties faced by many of those living in Kabul,  wherever  in  the
    city the family house is, they are not at real risk of serious harm  by
    reason of indiscriminate violence in  a  situation  of  internal  armed
    conflict.

73. The appeals fail under Article 15(c).

74. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was also raised: 'very significant obstacles to
    reintegration'.

75. Clearly conditions in Kabul for much  of  the  populace  are  far  from
    ideal. However, I do not accept  the  submission  that  the  Appellants
    would effectively be returning as  IDPs.   As  indicated  they  do  not
    satisfy me that their parents are not there to receive them.  Nor  that
    there would no longer be accommodation for them.  It seems  clear  that
    the family finances were such that they were able to fund  the  journey
    to the UK.  I see no reason  why  the  family  would  not  be  able  to
    continue to do so while the Appellants sought work.

76. Both speak Dari as well as English.  Whilst they have  both  been  here
    for some years and from teenage years it cannot be argued that they are
    alienated  from  their  culture.   As   indicated   they   successfully
    integrated in British society.  I see no reason why they should not  be
    able to reintegrate into Afghani society particularly in light  of  the
    family support and with the education and skills got  from  their  time
    here.

77. The appeals do not succeed under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

78. I see there to be nothing exceptional  or  compelling  over  and  above
    these circumstances and conclude that consideration under Article 8  is
    otiose.

79. However, in any event in relation to any claim under Article 8  outside
    the Rules it was not suggested that the Appellants have a  family  life
    other than with each other.  They would be removed together.  Therefore
    they are limited to a claim in respect of private life.

80. It may well be that as the  submissions  put  it  that  they  have  'an
    extended supportive family network' in the UK. I find that having  been
    in the UK for some six years they will have built up a  social  network
    and ties here. They have studied and both now are in work. I find  they
    have clearly established a private life.  Removal would interfere  with
    that private life.

81. In considering proportionality and the  balancing  exercise,  in  their
    favour they have been in the UK for some six years part of that time as
    children; any delay in considering their application has  given  weight
    to their private lives; on the other hand, the majority of their  lives
    has been spent in their home country, they have their family to  return
    to in Afghanistan and to help them to adjust to the  conditions  there.
    In addition they have education and skills, language and  otherwise  to
    assist them. I note, further, from the Country Information and Guidance
    that 'all individuals who are returned to Afghanistan  by  the  UK  are
    offered support in re-establishing  their  lives...'  (2.4.5).  As  the
    previous tribunal found and I endorse, they have shown themselves to be
    'adaptable individuals' and 'two very savy young  men'.  Their  private
    life has been established at a time when their immigration  status  was
    precarious  (s117B  (5)).  Public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control is weighty.  I do not see that the circumstances in
    the Appellants' cases outweigh the public interest in  the  maintenance
    of effective immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal showed material error of law.   That
decision is set aside and remade as follows:

     The appeals are dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.

     The appeals are dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

     The appeals are dismissed under Article 8 ECHR.

No anonymity direction made.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway                      5 December 2016

