
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09988/2012
     AA/09991/2012
     AA/09989/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination sent         |
|On 23 July 2013                                 |On 10 October 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                                 AMTUL BASIT
                                ROZINA ZAFAR
                              IFRAN ULLAH KHAN
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal, Bake & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The first appellant is the mother  of  the  second  appellant  and  the
    grandmother  of  the  third  appellant.   The  appellants   were   born
    respectively on 3 January 1937, 29 July 1967 and 25 January 2001.  They
    are all citizens of Pakistan.  They arrived in the United Kingdom on 12
    September 2012 and claimed asylum.  By decisions dated 21 October 2012,
    the appellants were refused leave to enter and  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  They appealed  against  those  decisions  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which, in a determination dated 10  December  2012,  dismissed
    the  appeals  on  all  grounds.   The  appellants  now   appeal,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I shall deal with the grounds of appeal as they  are  set  out  in  the
    application for permission and also the appellants'  skeleton  argument
    submitted by Mr Iqbal for the hearing before the Upper Tribunal  on  23
    July 2013.  The appellants are  Ahmadis  who  claimed  that  they  will
    suffer persecution or ill-treatment if returned to their home  area  of
    Pakistan. The first appellant was born in Kampala, Uganda and moved  to
    Pakistan in 1963.  The account of the  appellants  relates  to  alleged
    incidents of vandalism and harassment in Pakistan which the  appellants
    assert are likely to be repeated should they return  to  that  country.
    The second appellant claimed that the house which he formerly  occupied
    with the husband had been vandalised. Photographs were produced to  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The judge noted that, "Mrs Zafar  maintains
    that these rocks had been deliberately dislodged from her driveway  and
    that this is evidence that she and her family are being targeted by the
    religious extremists from the mosque opposite [their home]."  The judge
    considered the photographs and concluded that they,

         "show some very minor damage. They do appear to be rocks which have
         been dislodged but this could equally be caused by the over-revving
         of a motor vehicle and the tyres of the vehicles causing the damage
         shown.  What is important is that the  appellant  does  not  assert
         that the gates have been covered in anti-Ahmadi graffiti.  I simply
         could  not accept that the photograph number  3  as  described  did
         shown the vandalism which the appellant maintains."

 3. I was not shown those photographs at the Upper  Tribunal  hearing.  The
    grounds assert that the judge's comments  which  I  have  quoted  above
    amount to "mere speculation". They complain also that the judge was not
    "an  expert  in  photographic  evidence".   I  reject  both  of   those
    submissions.  It was, perhaps, not particularly helpful for  the  judge
    to suggest another possible cause for the presence of the rocks or  the
    damage shown in the photograph but the point that he  has  clearly  and
    effectively made is that the photograph did not, in the absence of  any
    other supporting evidence, prove that the damage had been caused in the
    manner which the appellants claim. The  burden  of  proof  was  on  the
    appellants to prove their case and the judge was, in the passage of the
    determination at issue, doing no more than weighing  the  evidence  and
    assessing whether that burden had been discharged.   To  complain  that
    the judge erred in law because he was not an  "expert  at  photographic
    evidence"  is,  frankly,  a  nonsense.  If   the   appellants   adduced
    photographic evidence to the Tribunal then  they  should  not  complain
    when the Tribunal makes findings in relation to it.   I have  no  doubt
    that, if the judge found  the  photographs  proved  that  part  of  the
    appellants' account, then the appellants would not have  complained  of
    the judge's lack of expertise.

 4. The second ground considers an alleged kidnap by Muslim  extremists  of
    the second appellant's son.  The appellants had alleged that there  had
    been a knock at the gate by the public road  from  the  yard  of  their
    house.  The judge noted that it was "never clear how the knock would be
    heard within the house".    The  grounds  submit  that  "the  appellant
    explained that in her oral evidence that the knock was heard inside the
    house because it sounded as though someone was knocking  with  a  metal
    object, like a set of keys". It was asserted that the judge  failed  to
    consider that explanation or give reasons for rejecting it.

 5. The judge is not required to deal with each and every  single  item  of
    evidence adduced by an appellant or to give reasons for  rejecting  it.
    The judge had made it clear in his determination that he had considered
    all the oral and documentary evidence  carefully  before  reaching  his
    conclusions.  It follows from that statement that he had considered the
    explanation provided by the second appellant and  any  reading  of  the
    determination indicates that he had rejected it.   If that were not the
    case, he would not have made the comment at [26(3)].

 6. The judge had also gone on to say in the same  paragraph  that  he  did
    "not accept that [the Muslim extremists] were the type  of  people  who
    would politely knock at the gate in  order  to  gain  entry".   It  was
    asserted that the appellant had never claimed that the knock  had  been
    "polite".  Once again, I find that the grounds amount to  nothing  more
    than a disagreement with the finding which was open to the judge on the
    evidence.  It was open to the judge to  find  that  the  Khat-E-Nabuwat
    (the Muslim extremists) would  not  have  knocked  at  the  gate  of  a
    property in order to gain entry in order to assault and/or  kidnap  the
    occupants.  The judge has correctly examined the account given  by  the
    appellants in the context of the background material  relating  to  the
    Khat-E-Nubuwat and their activities in Pakistan.

 7. As regards the Khat-E-Nubuwat's attempts to kidnap the third appellant,
    the judge noted also that "it may be that the son was  the  subject  of
    the attempt to kidnap for ransom and financial purposes rather than  as
    a result of a conflict of religion". [26(3)].  The grounds assert  that
    this is speculation on the part of the judge.  It is asserted that  the
    judge should have accepted the appellant's version of events.

 8. As with the judge's interpretation of the  photographs  of  rocks  (see
    above), I  find  that  the  judge  is  here  doing  nothing  more  than
    suggesting that an event  which  the  appellants  assert  arose  for  a
    particular reason might, in fact, have occurred reasons other  than  as
    asserted by the appellant.  Once again, I  note  that  it  is  for  the
    appellants to discharge the burden of proving  that  their  account  is
    true and that they have a real reason for fearing persecution  or  ill-
    treatment on return to Pakistan.  It is clear  from  the  determination
    that the judge found that they had not succeeded  in  discharging  that
    burden. He considered all the evidence in reaching that conclusion  and
    he was not obliged to accept the appellant's explanation of events.

 9. The judge had also recorded that, "Mrs Zafar told me  that  the  mosque
    was already there [opposite the appellants' home] when  the  house  was
    built but Mrs Basit told me the house  was  built  before  the  mosque.
    Both accounts could not be true". [26(4)].  The grounds state that  the
    second appellant gave oral evidence to the effect that the  first  part
    of the house had been built before the mosque and that her own home had
    been built on land adjacent to that of the first appellant and in front
    of the mosque.  It would perhaps have been helpful  if  the  judge  had
    dealt with  that  explanation  and  expressly  rejected  it  but  I  am
    satisfied that the judge has considered all the evidence  carefully  as
    he claims to have done and that, notwithstanding the fact he had  heard
    the second  appellant's  explanation,  he  still  considered  that  the
    apparent inconsistency in the evidence had not been resolved. Even if I
    am wrong in that finding, any error or misunderstanding on the part  of
    the judge in this instance does not undermine his findings of fact  or,
    indeed, his assessment of the  risk  faced  by  these  appellants  upon
    return to Pakistan.

10. At [29], the judge wrote that,

         "The appellants say they are Ahmadis and that they left  their  own
         country because  of  the  persecution  which  they  suffered  there
         because they were unable to practice their  religion  freely.   One
         would have thought that as soon  as  they  arrived  in  the  United
         Kingdom, a country renowned for its religions tolerance, that  they
         would have gone to the nearest Ahmadi mosque in order  to  practice
         that which had been denied to them in Pakistan.  Whilst  there  are
         letters from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association in the United Kingdom
         describing their situation in Pakistan, there is no  evidence  that
         any of the appellants have attended any Ahmadi mosque whilst in the
         United Kingdom.  The fact that they have not so attended  persuades
         me that Mrs Zafar is not a committed Ahmadi but only  a  low  level
         Ahmadi who chose of their own volition to have  a  low  profile  in
         Pakistan.  Her mother, out of free  choice,  is  retired  from  her
         previous activities."

11. The grounds assert that there was documentary evidence before the judge
    (in particular, pages  78  to  89  of  the  appellants'  bundle)  which
    indicated that the appellants had been involved in distributing  Ahmadi
    literature in the United Kingdom. Further, the judge recorded  at  [22]
    that permission had been sought by the  appellants'  representative  at
    the stage of  submissions  to  reopen  the  evidence  and  to  ask  the
    appellants whether they had attended an Ahmadi  mosque  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It appears that the Presenting  Officer  had  submitted  that
    there was no evidence to show that they had attended  any  mosque.  The
    judge records that he "declined to reopen the evidence  in  the  manner
    described. In my view this was far too late.  There  was  certainly  no
    oral or written evidence from any person in the  United  Kingdom  other
    than the appellants to the effect that they had attended at any  Ahmadi
    mosque." The grounds assert that the evidence should have been reopened
    and that it was wrong for the judge to make the comments which  I  have
    recorded above.

12. The grounds appear to ignore the careful wording used by the  judge  at
    [22].  The judge had noted that there was no oral or  written  evidence
    "from any person in the United Kingdom other than the  appellants"  [my
    emphasis] that they had attended any mosque in the United Kingdom.  Had
    the judge reopened the evidence, then it is clear that  the  appellants
    would have repeated their claim to have attended an  Ahmadi  mosque  in
    the United Kingdom.  I consider  that  the  judge's  comments  at  [29]
    should be read in the light of that finding at [22].   What was lacking
    was any evidence from witnesses other than  the  appellants  themselves
    regarding their attendance. I am also aware that the judge  had  before
    him the witness statement of Rozina  Zafar  (which  is  undated)  which
    states at [11] that "since being in the United Kingdom, I had continued
    to live as an Ahmadi, even I am not active in the community yet  but  I
    would continue to practice the religion as a  lifelong  believer."  The
    appellants were legally represented before the First-tier Tribunal  and
    they put their case before that Tribunal by way  of  oral  and  written
    evidence.  I do not consider that the judge erred in  law  by  refusing
    the appellants the opportunity to add  further  evidence  in  order  to
    contradict a valid submission made by the Presenting Officer.   In  any
    event, its is very difficult to see how oral  evidence  regarding  this
    part of the appeal would have added further weight to  the  appellants'
    case.

13. The judge made it clear at [27] that he  had  considered  the  relevant
    country guidance including MN (Ahmadis -  Country  Conditions  -  Risk)
    Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 000389 (IAC).   The  grounds  assert  that  the
    judge failed to apply the case law properly.  However, the  grounds  do
    little more than to assert that the appellants are  active  and  devout
    Ahmadis who had suffered severe harassment and persecution in the  past
    and would do so again if they returned to  Pakistan.   The  judge  made
    firm findings at [30] that he did not accept what had been  said  about
    "the vandalism, the  harassment  or  the  kidnap  in  Pakistan".  Those
    findings were clearly open to him on  the  evidence.   The  judge  also
    found that the first and second appellants, whilst they were members of
    the Ahmadi faith, had chosen of their  own  volition  to  adopt  a  low
    profile in Pakistan and that they would not now upon return enter  into
    open discourse in such a way as to expose themselves to persecution  or
    ill-treatment or refrain from doing  so  only  because  of  a  fear  of
    persecution.  The grounds complain  that  the  judge  had  "quoted  one
    sentence from an entire judgment [MN]"; with respect, the quality of  a
    determination is not to be assessed simply by  reference  to  quotation
    from case law but rather by an application of the  principles  of  that
    case law.  I find that the judge has  applied  the  principles  of  the
    relevant jurisprudence in and  there  is  nothing  in  the  grounds  to
    suggest to me otherwise.

14. As regards the question of internal flight, the judge deals  with  this
    at [30].  The judge stated that he had,

    "decided that there was no real risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm
    should the appellants return to their ordinary home in Pakistan.   Even
    if I were wrong on that, bearing in mind that the house is opposite the
    mosque,  there  is  in  my  conclusion  a  reasonable  internal  flight
    alternative. In new premises they could  practice their religion in the
    same way as they have chosen to do so hitherto".

15. It would, perhaps, have  been  better  if  the  judge  had  dealt  with
    internal flight at greater length; if the appellants had faced problems
    as Ahmadis living opposite a mosque it is it is not entirely clear  how
    those problems might be avoided by moving to new premises in  the  same
    town.  However, given the judge's primary finding that  the  appellants
    will be safe in their home area, I find that this  alternative  finding
    regarding the possibility of internal flight does nothing, even  if  it
    is faulty in law, to  vitiate  the  validity  of  the  judge's  primary
    conclusion on risk on return.

16. For the reasons which I have given above, I find that the appeal should
    be dismissed.  The judge did not err in law such that his determination
    falls to be set aside.

DECISION

17. This appeal is dismissed.







Signed                              Date 20 August 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
