
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09484/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th May 2016                              |On 4th July 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                   ms A S
                            (ANONYMITY retained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Russia born on [ ] 1987.   The  Appellant
    claims to have arrived in the UK on 5th October 2011  after  travelling
    on her own national passport and entering using a  student  visa  which
    expired on 13th March 2012.  The Appellant had  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 Student in April 2011 and this had been granted  and
    thereafter she applied for a residence card on 1st March 2013  and  was
    granted five years' leave to remain under Zambrano  on  11th  September
    2013 to 11th September 2018.  The Appellant however, according  to  the
    Home  Office  records,  claimed  asylum  on  8th  April   2013.    That
    application noted that the Appellant claimed asylum  based  on  a  fear
    that if returned to the Russian Federation she would face  mistreatment
    due to the abuse she suffered from her stepfather, her conversion  from
    Christianity to Islam and the fact that she had a child of mixed  race.
    That application was refused by Notice of Refusal  dated  22nd  October
    2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Lever sitting at Manchester on 15th September 2015.  In a
    decision and reasons  promulgated  on  2nd  October  2015,  whilst  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds and  she  was  found
    not to be entitled to humanitarian protection, her appeal  was  allowed
    pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. On 2nd February 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended that as the Appellant  had
    been issued with a residence card the appeal before the  judge  was  on
    asylum grounds only under Section 83(2) of  the  2002  Nationality  and
    Immigration Act.  As  the  judge  had  dismissed  this  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's appeal, following Schedule 2 of the EEA Regulations, it was
    contended the Appellant had no right of appeal on human rights grounds.
     Consequently it was submitted that the judge had materially  erred  in
    law in going on to consider and allow the appeal under Article 8 of the
    European Convention of Human Rights.  Further it was contended that the
    judge had made a mistake as to a material fact in that  in  giving  his
    reasons at paragraphs 30 and 31 allowing the appeal under Article 8  he
    stated:

         "In what I do acknowledge to be an unusual situation the  potential
         interference with the Appellant's private life by depriving her  of
         the right to work is in itself contrary to the public  interest  in
         the circumstances of this case."

    Contrary to the findings of the judge the Appellant has  permission  to
    work and that the judge's  mistake  of  fact  materially  affected  the
    decision on proportionality.

 4.  On  22nd  October  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes   granted
    permission to appeal.  The Appellant has lodged no  Rule  24  response.
    It is on this basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the legal process Ms Savina is referred to herein as the Appellant  and
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent albeit that this is an  appeal
    by the Secretary of State.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Nicholson.  Mr Nicholson is familiar with this matter having
    appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Diwnycz.

Submissions/Discussions

 5. This matter is made considerably less contentious by the acceptance  by
    Mr Nicolson of the Grounds of Appeal.  He indicates  however  that  the
    judge was doing his best in a complex situation  to  grapple  with  the
    consequences that would arise and he also  wishes  to  point  out  that
    there is no cross appeal extant before the Tribunal with regard to  the
    Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  and/or  humanitarian  protection.   Mr
    Diwnycz agrees with this analysis referring me to comments made  by  Mr
    Bilsland and he asked me to exercise discretion and to remit the matter
    back for rehearing.

The Law

 6.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 7. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

 8. Effectively what Judge Lever has done could be described as a 'belt and
    braces' decision.  Section 83(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 was abolished on 20th  October  2014.   The  Notice  of
    Refusal postdates that event.

 9. Schedule 2 Paragraph 1.(2) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
    states "Where a person has leave to enter or remain under the 1971  Act
    which is subject to conditions and that person  also  has  a  right  to
    reside under these Regulations, those conditions shall not have  effect
    for as long as the person has a right to reside."     Consequently  the
    Appellant is not excluded  from  having  her  appeal  considered  under
    Article 8 and the judge was entitled to do so.  In  such  circumstances
    the decision contains no material error of law.

Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of
    law and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Anonymity retained.






Signed                              Date: 4th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date: 4th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
