
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aA/09696/2008

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Date sent                    |
|On 8th August 2013                            |On 12th August 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                                     MR mathew moyo
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Rutherford (instructed by CAB, Stoke-on-
                  Trent))
For the Respondent:  Mrs K Heath (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 30th August  1966,  who
    entered the UK on 25th  December  2007  and  claimed  asylum.  On  10th
    November 2008 a decision was made to  refuse  his  application  and  to
    refuse him leave to enter the United Kingdom.
2.   The Appellant appealed and his appeal came before the AIT, as  it  then
    was, (Immigration Judge Chambers) at Stoke-on-Trent  on  18th  December
    2008. In a determination promulgated on 6th January 2009 Judge Chambers
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds. In his determination he found  the
    Appellant's claims to have been involved with the MDC in Zimbabwe to be
    without credibility. In particular at paragraph 51 of the determination
    he said:-

         "According to the Appellant there was no  final  incident  causing
         him to flee. He got fed up hiding and decided to leave Zimbabwe.  I
         do not accept despite the low standard of proof upon him  in  these
         proceedings that he was a member of the MDC or  involved  in  local
         politics in his area. I do not accept the  Appellant's  account.  I
         find he is not telling the truth".


3.   At paragraph 52 Judge Chambers found the  Appellant  was  HIV  positive
    but otherwise in good health and his condition stable. He noted that he
    was receiving medicine and that his condition was not  life-threatening
    and did not give rise to a claim under Article 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

4.   The Appellant sought reconsideration which  was  refused  by  a  Senior
    Immigration Judge on 21st January 2009. A renewed  application  to  the
    High Court was granted by Mr Justice  Mitting  on  14th  May  2009.  In
    ordering reconsideration Mitting J said this:-

         "The Immigration Judge's findings of fact  and  disbelief  of  the
         Applicant's account are unimpeachable, as is  his  summary  of  the
         country guidance given in RN; but he did not then address the issue
         of safety on return in his factual findings. It was an error of law
         not to do so: GM and YT  (Eritrea)  v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  833
         paragraph 31. It is possible that the Tribunal, on reconsideration,
         would conclude that it was not safe  to  return  the  applicant  to
         Zimbabwe in current circumstances".


5.   The reconsideration hearing came before  Designated  Immigration  Judge
    Garrett at Stoke on 21st September 2009. In a determination promulgated
    on 9th October 2009 Judge Garrett dismissed the appeal on all  grounds.
    Judge Garrett in his findings noted evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
    produced about his membership of the MDC in the UK  and  in  particular
    the Stoke and Crewe branch. He  found,  based  on  numerous  evidential
    inconsistencies that the Appellant had not been involved with  the  MDC
    since early 2008 and that he had not adopted any significant  political
    profile either in Zimbabwe as found by the previous Judge,  or  in  the
    UK.

6.   Judge Garrett noted that when the Appellant had been interviewed  about
    his asylum claim in November 2008 he was specifically asked whether  or
    not he was a member of the MDC in the UK and he said that he  was  not.
    However in front of him he claimed to have been a  member  since  early
    2008.

7.   Judge Garrett also noted that he claimed to have attended many  rallies
    and meetings, the first one being early in 2008 and in fact claimed  to
    have joined in  March  2008.  This  did  not  fit  with  his  interview
    responses in November 2008. There was also inconsistent evidence  about
    his MDC membership card that he produced which although he said it  was
    issued to him in January 2009 and had started paying  subscriptions  in
    December 2008, showed subscriptions starting in March  2008.  This  led
    the Designated Immigration Judge to conclude  that  the  Appellant  was
    seeking to give the impression that he been a member of the MDC in  the
    UK since early 2008,  forgetting  that  he  had  denied  membership  at
    interview.

8.   Judge Garrett noted that a letter had been produced  purporting  to  be
    from the  Secretary  of  the  MDC  in  the  UK  and  Ireland  and  also
    photographs to support his claims  of  MDC  support  and  activism.  He
    reminded himself of the guidance of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] IAT 00439.

9.   Judge  Garrett noted that the  letter  referred  to  the  Appellant  as
    being a registered and fully subscribed member of the MDC in the UK and
    was dated 4th August 2009 yet that could not  be  correct  because  the
    Appellant's membership card did not show any subscriptions beyond March
    2009. The same letter indicated the  Appellant's  membership  had  been
    registered in March 2008 but made no mention of the fact that  he  paid
    no subscriptions until  December  2008.  As  a  result  the  Designated
    Immigration Judge found it to  be  a  self-serving  letter  written  to
    document the  Appellant's  claims  rather  than  because  it  reflected
    independently verifiable records maintained by the MDC to  authenticate
    membership.

10.  As to the photographs, Judge Garrett noted,  taking  into  account  the
    same background on the photographs, that they showed nothing more  than
    that the Appellant had his photograph taken with other  people  in  one
    location and was unable to find that they supported  his  claim  to  be
    have been actively involved in rallies and meetings.

11.  The Designated Immigration Judge referred to  partial  copies  of  what
    were  claimed  to  be  minutes  of  two  meetings  of  the  Stoke   and
    subsequently Stoke and Crewe branch of the MDC for 2008  and  2009.  In
    both cases the Appellant was named as an  attendee  but  not  shown  as
    holding any office. In the absence of full signed copies of the minutes
    and  supporting  evidence  from  a  responsible  branch  official   the
    Designated Immigration Judge found those documents  were  not  reliable
    evidence of the Appellant's claims. He also noted that such  documents,
    being word processed documents would be easy to produce.

12.  The Designated Immigration Judge noted that no official from the  Stoke
    and Crewe branch of the MDC attended to support the Appellant's claims.

13.  At  paragraph  36  the  Designated  Immigration  Judge  summarised  his
    conclusions by saying:-

         "In summary, whilst I am satisfied that the  Appellant  has  posed
         for photographs designed to show that he is involved in  supporting
         the MDC in the United Kingdom I am not satisfied that he is a  full
         member of the MDC in this country or has attended  any  rallies  or
         meetings which might attract public attention.  He  has  not  shown
         that he is a conscientious supporter of the MDC."
14.  Having lost his appeal on reconsideration the Appellant  then  made  an
    application to the Court of  Appeal.  The  Court  of  Appeal  sealed  a
    Consent Order on 20th June 2010 ordering  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the Upper Tribunal  (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  for
    the reconsideration hearing to be relisted before a Tribunal other than
    one consisting of Designated Immigration Judge   Chambers  (that  is  a
    typing error and should read Designated Immigration Judge  Garrett).

15.  Accompanying the Consent  Order  is  a  Statement  of  Reasons  and  at
    paragraph 2 it states that  the  appeal  challenges  the  second  stage
    reconsideration determination of the  AIT,  by  Designated  Immigration
    Judge Garrett promulgated on 9th October 2009. Reference is made to the
    order of Lord Justice Pill granting permission to appeal who said:-

         "The relevant  country  guidance  case  is  still  RN  (Returnees)
         Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083. Mitting J ordered a reconsideration
         in the present case for failure to address the issue of  safety  on
         return considered in RN. The  Tribunal  does  not  appear  to  have
         addressed paragraphs 237 and  238  of  RN.  The  finding  that  the
         applicant has not adopted "a significant opposition profile" in the
         UK  (a  finding  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  make)  does  not
         necessarily resolve the issue against him, given the other findings
         of fact and RN".


16.  The Statement of Reasons goes on to  indicate  that  the  Secretary  of
    State  agreed  that  Designated  Immigration  Judge   Garrett  had  not
    adequately assessed the impact of the Appellant's sur place  activities
    in the UK on his risk profile on return to Zimbabwe within the  context
    of the country guidance of RN and that further the Secretary  of  State
    agreed that the  Designated  Immigration  Judge  had  not  applied  the
    correct test to assess risk on return when finding that  the  Appellant
    was not "a conscientious supporter of the MDC."

17.  The Statement of Reasons goes on to  indicate  that  the  Secretary  of
    State also agreed that as stated in the order of Pill LJ  the  AIT  had
    failed to make full or adequate findings on the application  of  RN  to
    the Appellant's case, in particular with respect to the possible  risks
    posed to the Appellant by the various non  state  actors  described  in
    paragraphs 237 and 238 of the determination in RN.

18.  That is, after a regrettable delay, how the matter came before me.

19.  It is clear  that  the  factual  findings  made  by  Immigration  Judge
    Chambers in 2009 as to the Appellant's activities in Zimbabwe  and  the
    factual findings of Designated Immigration  Judge  Garrett  as  to  his
    activities in the UK have not been set aside. Such was agreed  by  both
    representatives. What I am tasked to do is to  look  again  at  whether
    this Appellant's profile, as found by the two  previous  Judges,  would
    place him at risk on return to Zimbabwe on the  basis  of  the  current
    country guidance case.

20.  Matters in Zimbabwe have moved on  since  RN  and  indeed  the  current
    country guidance case is CM (EM country guidance; disclosure)  Zimbabwe
    CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC). In that case the Upper Tribunal  held  that
    the evidence does not show that, as a general matter, the return  of  a
    failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC
    profile, would result in that person facing a real risk  of  having  to
    demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF. In general a returnee from  the  United
    Kingdom to rural Matabeleland North or  Matabeleland  South  is  highly
    unlikely  to  face  significant  difficulty  from  Zanu  PF   elements,
    including the security forces, even if the returnee is an MDC member or
    supporter. The Tribunal went on to say however that an Appellant may be
    able to show that his or her village or area is one that, unusually, is
    under the sway of a Zanu PF chief, or the like. A  returnee  to  Harare
    will in general face no significant difficulties, if  going  to  a  low
    density or medium density area. Whilst the socio-economic situation  in
    high-density areas is more challenging, in general  a  person  with  or
    without Zanu PF  connections will not face significant  problems  there
    (including a "loyalty test"), unless he or she has  a  significant  MDC
    profile, which might cause him or her to feature on  a  list  of  those
    targeted  for  harassment,  or  would  otherwise  engage  in  political
    activities likely to attract the adverse attention of Zanu PF, or would
    be reasonably likely to engage in such activities, but for  a  fear  of
    thereby coming to the adverse attention  of  Zanu  PF.  A  returnee  to
    Bulawayo will in general not suffer the adverse attention of  Zanu  PF,
    including the security forces, even if he or she has a significant  MDC
    profile.

21.  The new country guidance case  places  the  Appellant  in  considerable
    difficulty. He  is  from  Plumtree,  an  area  on  the  border  between
    Matabeleland North and Matabeleland South. He also has some links  with
    Bulawayo. On the basis of current country guidance he would not  be  at
    risk in either place even if he was an MDC member or supporter which he
    has been found not to be.

22.  On the Appellant's behalf Miss Rutherford did draw to  my  attention  a
    document which shows some of the recent election results in Zimbabwe to
    indicate that Matabeleland is not in fact an MDC  stronghold.  However,
    that document is incomplete and only shows  the  results  from  certain
    areas. For example it shows results  for  Matabeleland  South  but  not
    Matabeleland North. While the Matabeleland South results show  Zanu  PF
    victories they also  show  a  considerable  number  of  votes  for  MDC
    indicating a considerable level of support for the MDC in those  areas.
    Based on that incomplete information I am not able  to  find  that  the
    power base in Matabeleland has shifted such that the Appellant will  be
    placed at risk by not being a member of Zanu PF.  Miss  Rutherford,  in
    fairness, acknowledged that the most recent elections in any event have
    not been marred by the violence of those in  the  past.  Therefore  the
    evidence that I have is insufficient for me to depart from the findings
    of the country guidance case of CM which clearly  indicates  that  this
    Appellant would not be at risk.

23.  The Appellant has submitted up-to-date evidence with regard to his  sur
    place activities and membership of the Stoke and Crewe  branch  of  the
    MDC. However, the documents have the same difficulties as the documents
    produced to  Designated  Immigration  Judge  Garrett  and  despite  his
    comments that no officials had attended to support  the  Appellant  and
    give evidence none were before me either.

24.  In any event the current  country  guidance  shows  that  even  if  the
    Appellant had been a member of the MDC in  the  UK,  not  one  of  high
    prominence, he would not be at risk in his home area of Matabeleland or
    in Bulawayo where has links.

25.   I  was  provided  with  up-to-date  medical  evidence  concerning  the
    Appellant's HIV status which shows that he remains as he was  in  2009,
    well, stable and maintained on medication.

26.  No evidence has been produced with regard to Article 8 in  terms  of  a
    private or family life and it is the case that his close family members
    are not in the UK. There is no evidence that there is any  family  life
    in the UK a breach of which would render removal disproportionate.  Any
    private life he has built up since he has been in the UK has been while
    he had no legitimate reason to be here. He came to  the  UK  unlawfully
    and made a bogus asylum  claim,  seeking  international  protection  of
    which he had no need.

27.  The appeal is dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and under the ECHR.





Signed                 Dated 9th August 2013






Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
