
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09076/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 2nd February 2016                |On: 5th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     JSM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Turner, Counsel instructed by Middlesex Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on the 1st March  1945.
    She appeals with permission the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Lucas) to dismiss her asylum and human rights appeal[1].

 2. The Appellant is an Afghan Sikh, who is accepted to be a widow. She has
    a number of relatives in the United Kingdom including  her  eldest  son
    who has lived here for 12 years.  When she claimed asylum in June  2014
    she told officers that she had no one in Afghanistan to look after her.
    She is blind in one eye and has  been  living  in  a  Gurdwara.    When
    interviewed again in October 2014 she gave an account of many years  of
    harassment and persecution by persons whom she suspected to be  members
    of the Taliban. Her husband  was  killed  17  or  18  years  ago  after
    refusing to yield to their extortion demands; her sister was  similarly
    murdered about 3  years  before  she  made  her  claim.  She  has  been
    pressured to give these people money. She is alone, without protection,
    and afraid.

 3. The Respondent identified numerous inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant'
    narrative of persecution by persons supposed  to  be  the  Taliban  and
    rejected it on credibility grounds. Although the refusal letter  states
    the 'Convention Ground' to be imputed political opinion, the  Secretary
    of State does go on to consider whether the Appellant would be  at  any
    risk by virtue of the fact that  she  is  a  Sikh  and  a  lone  woman.
    Finding there to be no such risk, the claim is rejected.

 4. The Appellant appealed and the case came before the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Abebrese). In a  determination  dated  2nd  January  2015  Judge
    Abebrese dismissed the Appellant's account on the grounds that he could
    see no reason why the Taliban would possibly target her: "she has never
    been politically active or taken part in any  course  of  action  which
    would bring her to the  attention  of  the  Taliban".  The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 5. On the 5th February 2015 First-tier Tribunal RA Cox granted  permission
    to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  Judge  Abebrese
    appeared to have "completely missed the point",  that being  that  this
    was a Sikh widow with no family left in Afghanistan.  The  matter  duly
    came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb who entirely  agreed  with
    the assessment of Judge Cox, as in fact did the Respondent, who  agreed
    that the matter should be remitted de novo.

 6. So it was that the appeal came before Judge Lucas. Given the history of
    this appeal thus far it was to be hoped that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    would take care to  evaluate  all  possible  risks  to  the  Appellant,
    whether as a result of her imputed political  opinion,  or  simply  her
    identity as a lone Sikh woman.

 7. In respect of the latter the determination concludes as follows:

         "At this stage of the hearing, the Appellant has sought to  add  in
         the fact that she may be persecuted  on  the  ground  of  her  Sikh
         religion. This has not been pleaded before and is, in the  view  of
         the Tribunal, simply opportunism"

    The appeal is then dismissed on  the  ground  that  the  Appellant  has
    failed to demonstrate that she has faced any past  persecution  in  the
    past.







    Error of Law

 8. Let me begin by clearing up any confusion that the decisions  of  Judge
    Abebrese or Judge Lucas may have caused to the reader.  It  is  correct
    to say that at her screening interview the Appellant did not  elaborate
    on why she did not want  to  live  alone  in  Afghanistan.  She  simply
    pointed out that her son lived here, her husband was dead and that  she
    was a half-blind widow. It is not at all correct to  suggest  that  the
    'Sikh element' of her claim was raised belatedly or was at all  obscure
    at the date of the decision  under  appeal.  Although  the  Appellant's
    evidence was at times confused  these  extracts  from  her  substantive
    asylum interview demonstrate that it clearly formed a central  part  of
    her case from the outset:

         "Q33.    What is your religion?

         A33.     Sikh

         Q34.     Have you ever experienced any problems in Afghanistan  due
         to your religion?

         A34.     No, after the revolution they are  asking  to  convert  to
         Islam and the young girls they take them away

         Q35.     Have you  ever  personally  experienced  any  problems  in
         Afghanistan due to your religion?

         Q35.     Yes my husband was killed and my sister was killed"

 9. Although the Appellant did indicate at Q145 of that same interview  she
    had not personally experienced problems because of her religion, in the
    very next breath she  explained  how  the  "other  Muslims  are  saying
    abandon your religion". It was no doubt the totality  of  her  evidence
    which led the Respondent to very sensibly  construe  this  claim  as  a
    'mixed motivation' case, addressing both Convention grounds - political
    opinion and religion - in the  refusal  letter.  That  was  a  sensible
    approach. In the context of a group trying to enforce Wahhabi theocracy
    it would have been entirely artificial to separate the two.   Quite why
    the First-tier Tribunal has seen fit to do so on two separate occasions
    is a mystery.

10. That deals with the Appellant's first  ground  of  appeal,  namely  the
    failure to assess with  anxious  scrutiny  the  possible  risk  to  the
    Appellant as a Sikh woman. As I note above that had  formed  a  central
    plank of her asylum claim, it had been considered on that basis by  the
    Respondent, and was indeed maintained to be the main ground  of  appeal
    in the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Before  me  Ms
    Everett agreed that it was an error of fact and  law  to  dismiss  that
    claim on the grounds that it was late and opportunistic.

11. The second ground of appeal concerns the approach taken to the risk  of
    persecution. It is argued that the determination appears  to  equate  a
    lack of past persecution with there being no risk in the future.  Given
    the comprehensive rejection  of  the  Appellant's  "flimsy  and  vague"
    historical narrative it is perhaps understandable that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal could see no reason to think that the Appellant would face any
    problems in the future.  It is here that this ground of appeal melds to
    that discussed above: no assessment of future risk  would  be  complete
    without  giving  express  consideration  to  the  Appellant's  personal
    circumstances. This ground is therefore made out.

12. Finally it is pleaded on the Appellant's  behalf  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to follow the latest country guidance case  of  TG  and
    Ors (Afghan Sikhs - persecution) CG [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC). In her  Rule
    24 response the Secretary of State points out that given the chronology
    that may not have been available to the Judge. In light of my  findings
    on the foregoing grounds that is not now material. Suffice to say  that
    in the remaking the First-tier Tribunal must have regard to the  up  to
    date guidance. I say the First-tier Tribunal because the Appellant  has
    not to date had a reasonable assessment of her case at first  instance.
    It follows that in fairness, her appeal should be remitted.

    Decisions

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. I maintain the order for anonymity made in the First-tier Tribunal.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           2nd February 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] I have not been provided with a copy of the Immigration Decision but I
glean from the Respondent's bundle that it was a decision to remove the
Appellant from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and
Asylum Act 1999 dated 24th October 2014

