

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09381/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 12 November 2013                           |On 25 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     RH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Webb of Duncan Moghal Solicitors and Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 21 September  1967.
      He left Iran in August  2012  and  claimed  asylum  in  the  UK  on  4
      September 2012.  That application was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
      State in a decision dated 2 October 2012.   On  that  date  also,  the
      Secretary of State made a decision refusing  to  grant  the  appellant
      leave to enter and proposing to issue direction  for  his  removal  to
      Iran.

   3. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a
      determination promulgated on 28 November 2012, Judge  Troup  dismissed
      the appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds
      and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   4. On 2 January 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ J M Lewis) granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The appeal  was
      listed before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer on 16 April 2013.  At
      that  hearing,  the  appellant's  representative  Mr  Webb  (who  also
      represented the appellant before me) did  not  challenge  the  Judge's
      decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum  or  humanitarian  protection
      grounds.  Additionally, Mr Webb did not challenge the Judge's decision
      to dismiss the appeal under Article 8.  However, he  argued  that  the
      Judge had failed to consider the  appellant's  claim  based  upon  his
      relationship with  his  son  in  the  UK  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
      Immigration Rules  (HC  395  as  amended).   DUTJ  Mailer  agreed  and
      concluded that Judge Troup had erred in law by failing to consider the
      application of Section EX:EX.1.  To that extent, DUTJ Mailer set aside
      the decision of Judge Troup and adjourned the hearing  for  a  further
      substantive hearing in the Upper Tribunal so that the  decision  under
      Appendix FM could be remade.

   5. Following a case management hearing on 10 September 2013  (before  UTJ
      Storey), the appeal came before me in order to remake the decision.

EX.1

   6. Before me, it was common ground that the only issue which arose  under
      Appendix FM was Exception EX.1.  If  its  requirements  are  met,  the
      appellant is entitled to leave as a parent.  EX.1 provides, so far  as
      relevant, as follows:

           "This paragraph applies if

           (a)(i)      the applicant has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a child -

                       (aa)  is under the age of 18 years;

                       (bb) is in the UK;

                        ac) is a British Citizen or has  lived  in  the  UK
                            continuously for at least 7  years  immediately
                            preceding the application; and

             (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                 the United Kingdom..."

The Submissions

   7. Mr Webb submitted that Judge Troup had  found  that  the  relationship
      between the appellant and his son (whom  I  shall  refer  to  as  "A")
      amounted to "family life" for the purposes of Article 8.  He submitted
      that there was no difference in principle between that  "family  life"
      between a son and his father and a "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship" between the appellant and his son for  the  purposes  of
      EX.1(a)(i).  In addition, Mr Webb relied on the fact that the "A"  has
      been in the United Kingdom since 23 December  2005.   He  was  then  9
      years old having been born 21 April 1996.  He became a British citizen
      in August 2012 and is now 17 years of age.   He  continues  to  be  in
      education.  Mr Webb submitted, relying upon the decision in Sanade and
      Others (British Children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 0048  (IAC),
      that it would not be reasonable to expect "A" to leave the UK and live
      with his father in Iran.

   8. Mr Richards, who represented the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that
      before Judge Troup the Presenting Officer had conceded that there  was
      "a genuine subsisting relationship between the appellant and [A]" (see
      para 29 of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination).   He  candidly
      acknowledged that he was, therefore, in  some  difficulty  in  arguing
      that the appellant did not have a  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship" with "A" given that the only relationship that they have
      is that of parent and child.  Further, he accepted that in  the  light
      of Sanade it would not be reasonable to expect "A" to leave the UK and
      live in Iran.

Discussion and Findings

   9. As I have said, Mr Richards accepted that the Presenting  Officer  had
      conceded that  there  was  a  "genuine  and  subsisting  relationship"
      between the appellant and "A".  That, in my judgement is borne out  by
      the evidence in the appeal.  As part of the appellant's  documentation
      submitted to the Upper Tribunal there are two witness statements,  one
      from the appellant and another from "A" both dated 20 September  2013.
      Those statements demonstrate, in  my  judgement,  that  the  appellant
      since his return to the UK in September 2012 has maintained a "genuine
      and subsisting parental relationship" with "A".  Although the family's
      circumstances  do  not  allow  for  them  to  live  together  and  the
      appellant's limited finances has an impact on the appellant's  ability
      to travel to  see  "A",  they  remain  in  close  contact;  they  meet
      regularly and spend time together with A staying  overnight  with  the
      appellant sometimes and they remain in contact through the  telephone,
      Skype and Facebook (see para 8 of the appellant's statement and para 5
      of A's statement). In his statement, the appellant says (at para 9):

           "My relationship with [A] has changed since I arrived in the UK.
            It is much better and stronger now as  we  have  been  able  to
           spend time with each other.  The father-son bond between us  has
           grown because of this."

  10. Likewise, "A" says in his statement (at para 10):

           "The thought of my father going back to Iran makes  me  sad.   I
           feel that we have really started to bond with each  other  since
           he has been in the UK.  If he was in Iran our relationship would
           not be able to continue in the same way as it does now."

  11.  Parental  relationships  can  take  many  forms  depending  upon  the
      individuals' circumstances, for example, the age of the child and  the
      relationship (if any) between the parents.  It is not  necessary  that
      the appellant and "A" should live together for there to be a  "genuine
      and subsisting parental relationship".  Here, A's parents are divorced
      and so "A" does not live  with  his  father.   However,  the  evidence
      clearly establishes they have a close  father-son  relationship  which
      they seek to maintain  as  best  they  can  in  their  own  particular
      circumstances.  I am satisfied on a balance of probabilities that  the
      relationship between the appellant and "A" falls within EX.1(a)(i).

  12. As regards the other requirements of EX.1, clearly "A"  is  under  the
      age of 18 years; he is in the United Kingdom;  and  he  is  a  British
      citizen.  Those requirements of EX.1 are satisfied.

  13. As regards the final requirement of EX.1, Mr Richards accepted that it
      would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  "A"  to  leave  the  UK.   That
      concession is entirely properly made and is correct.  "A" is a British
      citizen and remains in full time education studying at college for a B
      Tech in Business.  He has been in the United Kingdom since  2005  when
      he was 9 years old.  He is now 17 years old.  I  am  satisfied,  on  a
      balance of probabilities, that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
      him to leave the UK.

  14. In these circumstances, the appellant has satisfied me on a balance of
      probabilities that EX.1 applies.

  15. Consequently, as it is not suggested that the appellant fails to  meet
      any other requirement of Section R  -  LTRPT  of  Appendix  FM,  I  am
      satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the appellant  meets  all
      the requirements of that provision and is entitled to limited leave to
      remain as a parent.

Decision

  16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal on  refugee  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  under
      Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR stands.

  17. However, the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law  by  failing  to
      consider the appellant's claim under Appendix FM.  To that  extent,  I
      remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  under   the
      Immigration Rules, namely Appendix FM (Section R-LTRP).



                               Signed








                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
