

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09991/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On April 24, 2015                    |On May 6, 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                       MR MOHAMED SHIHAH SEYED MOHAMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Spurling, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Parkinson (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction  and
         pursuant to Rule 14 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 and I see no reason to alter that order.

      2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. The appellant  claimed  to
         have entered the United Kingdom on a French passport  on  September
         11, 2013 and on September 13, 2013 he requested an appointment with
         the Asylum Screening Unit. He  claimed  asylum  at  a  pre-arranged
         appointment on October 9, 2013 and he was served with  form  IS151A
         as an illegal entrant.  The respondent refused his asylum claim  on
         November 1, 2013 and at the same time took a decision to remove him
         as an illegal entrant.

      3. The appellant appealed this decision on  November  5,  2013,  under
         section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

      4. The appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Handley
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on August 6, 2014 and in  a
         decision promulgated on September 11, 2014 he refused the appeal on
         all grounds.

      5. The appellant lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  September  22,  2014
         submitting the FtTJ had erred materially in law. Judge of the First-
         tier Tribunal Davies refused permission to appeal on September  29,
         2014 and the appellant renewed his grounds of appeal to  the  Upper
         Tribunal on October 16,  2014.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  gave
         permission to appeal. The respondent filed a Rule  24  response  on
         February 2, 2015 arguing there was no material error.

      6. The matter came before me on the above date and  the  parties  were
         represented as set out above. The appellant was in attendance.

         SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR IN LAW

      7. Mr Spurling adopted his grounds of appeal although he accepted that
         some of the grounds, on their own, were stronger than others but he
         invited me to have regard  to  the  totality  of  the  grounds.  He
         submitted:

               a. Ground One of  the  grounds  of  appeal  was  particularly
                  strong because the FtTJ had  failed  to  explain  why  the
                  appeal  was  rejected  and  made  numerous   findings   on
                  plausibility. The Courts frown  on  plausibility  findings
                  especially when they are made without having regard to the
                  background evidence. The FtTJ's findings on credibility in
                  relation to risk were contrary to the guidance in  GJ  and
                  others (post civil ware returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
                  UKUT 00319 and what is contained in the country evidence.

               b. Grounds Two and Four were  connected  to  each  other  and
                  linked to the first ground. The Tribunal had adjourned the
                  matter in January 2014 for the respondent  to  verify  the
                  court file. The respondent had chosen not to which was her
                  right but to then find documents  were  obtainable  easily
                  was  a  material  error.  More  weight  should  have  been
                  attached to the  evidence  submitted  on  the  appellant's
                  behalf.

               c. Ground Three  centred  on  the  FtTJ's  treatment  of  the
                  medical evidence. There was evidence of trauma within  the
                  asylum interview,  which  was  evidenced  by  the  medical
                  report. The report was from a reputable  organisation  and
                  whilst the Tribunal was not bound by  its  conclusions  it
                  should have given it more serious consideration.

               d. With regard to Grounds Four and Five he  submitted  arrest
                  warrants in Sri Lanka placed a person at risk according to
                  the decision of GJ and others and the FtTJ failed to  have
                  regard to this evidence.

      8. Mr Parkinson rejected the grounds and submitted the FtTJ  had  made
         sustainable findings based on his finding he did  not  believe  the
         appellant and he gave numerous reasons for his finding:

               a. There was no merit to Ground One because the FtTJ rejected
                  his claim that LTTE members' details would not  have  been
                  stored on his computer and he gave reasons for it. It  was
                  open to him to make the findings he did in paragraph  [35]
                  and conclude that such behaviour was simply not plausible.
                  The appellant was never tendered for cross-examination and
                  the FtTJ had  to  deal  with  the  appeal  solely  on  the
                  documents that had been submitted and his findings on  the
                  appellant's claim about him reporting to the  police  were
                  open to him. The FtTJ considered  the  appellant's  claims
                  and was entitled to find his claim that he returned to Sri
                  Lanka, after all his  problems,  lacked  credibility.  The
                  fact the Upper Tribunal had  concluded  it  was  safe  for
                  people to return to Sri Lanka did not mean  the  FtTJ  was
                  not entitled to reject his claim that  he  had  chosen  to
                  return. The FtTJ  found  the  appellant's  account  lacked
                  credibility and Ground One has no merit.

               b. With regard to Ground Two Mr Parkinson submitted  that  if
                  the authorities had a real interest in him then  no  court
                  would have released  him  as  he  claimed.  The  FtTJ  was
                  entitled to conclude the authorities had  no  interest  in
                  him.

               c. Turning to Ground Three the FtTJ  considered  the  medical
                  evidence and the adverse findings he  made  were  open  to
                  him.

               d. As regards Ground Four the  respondent  did  not  have  to
                  verify any document and the FtTJ found in paragraphs  [42]
                  and [43]  there  were  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
                  account and his  findings  were  open  to  him.  The  FtTJ
                  rejected the authenticity of the  arrest  warrant  and  by
                  inference he did not accept the court file and  considered
                  the appellant's claim in the round. The fact  an  attorney
                  claimed a document was genuine did not mean the  FtTJ  had
                  to accept that evidence as he was entitled to consider the
                  claim in the round and reject the claim as long as he gave
                  his reasons.

               e. Ground Five-the FtTJ concluded the appellant did not  tell
                  the  truth  and  that  he  was  not  at  risk.  In   those
                  circumstances the appellant would not fall within any risk
                  category.

      9. Mr Spurling responded:

               a. The medical evidence should have been  given  more  weight
                  that the FtTJ afforded it. The report went  beyond  saying
                  the appellant had scars and post traumatic stress disorder
                  as  the  author  of  the  report  discussed  his  personal
                  circumstances and the effect ill-treatment would  have  on
                  him.

               b. It was perfectly plausible that the appellant returned  to
                  Sri Lanka because the Tribunal in GJ and others said those
                  who were at low risk (as the  respondent  believes)  could
                  return and that was what he did.

               c. There was no discrepancy over  appellant's  account  about
                  his arrest warrant  because  he  corrected  the  different
                  account given in his screening interview when he  attended
                  for his  asylum  interview.  The  FtTJ  failed  to  attach
                  sufficient weight to all of the documents.

     10. I raised  with  Mr  Parkinson  whether  the  numerous  plausibility
         findings could stand taking into account the Court of Appeal's view
         on  such  findings  and  Mr  Parkinson  submitted  that   in   this
         determination plausible meant credible and the FtTJ had made  those
         findings and gave reasons  for  them.  Mr  Spurling  rejected  this
         argument and stated the FtTJ's plausibility findings were  open  to
         challenge as plausible was not the same as credible, which was what
         the respondent was arguing. It was permissible to make plausibility
         findings as long as those findings were based on the  evidence  and
         the FtTJ erred by making plausibility findings without reference to
         any evidence.

     11. I reserved my decision.

         FINDINGS ON ERROR OF LAW

     12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Allen  when  he
         found that it was just arguable the determination was  inadequately
         reasoned (Ground One) and there  was  some  force  in  Ground  Four
         namely the FtTJ had failed  to  make  any  findings  or  inadequate
         findings on the court file evidence. He did not rule out the  other
         two grounds.

     13. Ground One concerns the issue of plausibility findings. The  Courts
         (Tribunal  and  Court  of  Appeal)  have  considered   plausibility
         findings.  In MM (DRC) [2005] UKIAT 00019 the  Tribunal  said  that
         the assessment of credibility may  involve  an  assessment  of  the
         plausibility, or apparent reasonableness or  truthfulness  of  what
         was being said.  This could involve a judgement on  the  likelihood
         of something having happened,  based  on  evidence  or  inferences.
         Background evidence could assist with that process,  revealing  the
         likelihood of what was said having occurred.   Background  evidence
         could  reveal  that  adverse  inferences,  which  were   apparently
         reasonable when based on an understanding of life in this  country,
         were less reasonable when the circumstances of life in the  country
         of origin were exposed.  Plausibility was an aspect in the  process
         of arriving at a decision, which might vary from case to case,  and
         not a separate stage in  it.  A  story  could  be  implausible  yet
         credible, or plausible yet properly not believed.  Plausibility  is
         not a term of art.  It is simply that the  inherent  likelihood  or
         apparent reasonableness of a claim is an aspect of its  credibility
         and an aspect which may well  be  related  to  background  material
         which may assist when judging it.  The Tribunal went on to say that
         "the more improbable  the  story,  the  more  cogent  the  evidence
         necessary to support it, even to the lower standard of  proof."  In
         relation  to  the  contention  that  there   was   an   alternative
         satisfactory explanation for matters found to be implausible by the
         Adjudicator, the Tribunal said that it was for the claimant to  put
         forward all relevant evidence and  to  recognise  and  explain  any
         inconsistencies  and  improbabilities  and  a  conclusion  was  not
         necessarily erroneous because it did not contemplate  possibilities
         that were not raised for the Adjudicator's consideration. In  HA  v
         SSHD [2007] CSIH  65  the  Court  of  Sessions  said  that  a  bare
         assertion of incredibility or implausibility may amount to an error
         of law.  An Immigration Judge said that it was  unlikely  that  the
         father of a girl with whom an Afghan appellant was having an affair
         would treat the Appellant's brother in law as badly as he was  said
         to have done. This was said to be an error of law  because  the  IJ
         gave no reason for finding this implausible.

     14. Mr  Spurling's  submission  is  that  the  FtTJ  made  plausibility
         findings but failed  to  have  regard  to  the  country  and  other
         evidence when making such a finding and in those  circumstances  he
         erred in law.

     15. Mr Spurling drew my attention to paragraphs [34] to [36]  and  [40]
         and  submitted  that  the  FtTJ's  findings  on  plausibility  were
         unsustainable. Mr Parkinson submitted that he did give reasons  and
         therefore his findings on plausibility are both sustainable and  do
         not amount to an error in law.

     16. At paragraph [35] the FtTJ referred to the appellant's  claim  that
         he had been detained in Sri Lanka in 2008 because  he  claimed  his
         principal had  stored  files  on  his  computer  that  led  to  the
         appellant being arrested. The FtTJ found this to be implausible but
         in doing so he gave his reasons as:

               a. It seemed strange that he would have allowed his principal
                  to store files on his computer in spite of the fact  those
                  files identified people who had been sent abroad.

               b. It was implausible at all that the  appellant's  principal
                  would have shared any files with  a  third  party  because
                  this would increase the chances of detection of  both  the
                  principal and the people who had gone abroad.

               c. He claimed he had  been  detained  for  three  months  and
                  regularly  ill-treated  but  despite   the   incriminating
                  evidence being found on his computer and therefore linking
                  him to the LTTE he was nevertheless released  on  bail  by
                  the court.

               d. Even if the above was credible and plausible he  continued
                  to report as directed at which time he  was  further  ill-
                  treated and he then reported to  the  authorities  on  the
                  next occasion and faced the same ill-treatment.

               e. The number of injuries seen on him was wholly inconsistent
                  with the level of assault.

               f.  Having fled the  country  it  was  implausible  he  would
                  voluntarily return in 2013 given the interest  he  claimed
                  the authorities had in him.

     17. With regard to  the  storage  of  his  files  on  his  computer  Mr
         Spurling's submissions amount to an  alternative  finding  but  the
         finding the FtTJ made in paragraph [35] was one that  was  open  to
         him. The FtTJ gave reasons for finding the appellant would not have
         stored the files on his computer and I accept that  those  findings
         were open to him. He could have made the findings suggested  by  Mr
         Spurling but he did not and that does not amount  to  an  error  in
         law.

     18. The FtTJ's plausibility findings on the injuries were one that  was
         open to him. The appellant's claim was of  constant  beatings  both
         during his three-month detention and when he reported on bail. This
         was not a case where the FtTJ found there were no injuries  but  it
         was a case where  the  FtTJ  found  the  level  of  his  scars  was
         inconsistent with  what  he  claimed  had  happened  to  him.  That
         conclusion was open to the FtTJ.

     19. Mr Spurling argued the FtTJ failed to have regard to the background
         evidence when considering firstly whether the appellant would  have
         been released; secondly, whether he would have been ill-treated  as
         he claimed and thirdly, whether he would have returned to Sri Lanka
         in 2013. He submitted the FtTJ erred by concluding the  appellant's
         account was implausible.

     20. In paragraph [35] of his determination the FtTJ concluded that  the
         fact the appellant had been released demonstrated  the  authorities
         no longer had any interest in him. At paragraph [36] he  considered
         his claim about what happened to persons on bail and he  found  his
         account implausible. The FtTJ considered his  claims  and  rejected
         them and I am satisfied that this was a conclusion he was  entitled
         to reach. This was not a conclusion that was based on  the  country
         evidence but it did not need to be. The FtTJ  assessed  the  claims
         made and the medical evidence and concluded that  his  account  was
         inconsistent  with  his  injuries.  Having  made  that  finding  he
         considered his claim about being assaulted each  time  he  answered
         his bail and he concluded he  would  not  have  answered  his  bail
         repeatedly knowing what would happen. I do not  find  he  made  his
         findings without reasons. The findings he reached were based on his
         assessment of that part of his evidence and he did not  ignore  the
         background evidence  but  simply  concluded  that  the  appellant's
         account, for the reasons given, lacked plausibility.

     21. Following the guidance given on the approach to plausibility  I  am
         satisfied those findings were open to him.

     22. The final aspect of Ground One related to his return to  Sri  Lanka
         in 2013. The  FtTJ  had  made  findings  about  his  case  but  his
         assessment of a possible return and the risks involved had to  take
         the appellant's case at its highest. He took into account  that  he
         left  the  country  and  then  voluntarily  returned  in  2013.  At
         paragraph [40] the FtTJ considered  his  return  and  rejected  the
         submission made today that he returned because he felt it was  safe
         to return. Taking his claim at its highest the FtTJ had to consider
         whether a person who had been abused and had jumped bail would have
         returned. Mr Spurling submitted the  FtTJ's  approach  contradicted
         the guidance in the country guidance case that  the  situation  had
         improved. However, whilst the situation had improved this would not
         have affected the  appellant  if  his  account  had  been  accepted
         because on his account he was directly linked to the LTTE and  data
         about people who had fled the country and he had absconded from his
         court bail. The FtTJ was entitled to find it  was  implausible  the
         appellant would have returned and he gave his reasons.

     23. I therefore reject Ground One of the grounds of appeal.

     24. Mr Spurling submitted that the FtTJ erred by failing to distinguish
         between release  by  the  court  and  release  by  the  police.  Mr
         Parkinson countered this submission arguing that if the authorities
         had a significant interest in him  then  he  would  not  have  been
         released. In considering this submission the FtTJ had to  have  had
         regard to the appellant's whole claim.  In  Sri  Lanka  the  police
         detained people who  it  was  believed  were  of  interest  to  the
         authorities. The FtTJ rejects this claim but then goes on  to  find
         that taking the appellant's case at its  highest  he  was  released
         because he was no longer of interest. Mr Spurling submits the  FtTJ
         has combined the police and the authorities as one and by doing  so
         he erred. I am not persuaded the FtTJ  did.  He  noted  the  police
         raided his work and arrested him. At the time the  police  enforced
         the will of the governing body and persons who were acting contrary
         to the government's interests were detained and physically  abused.
         The FtTJ did not confuse  their  roles  but  concluded  either  his
         account lacked credibility or even if he was  of  interest  at  the
         time he had been released because he was deemed to be of no further
         interest. I reject Mr Spurling's  submission  that  the  FtTJ  made
         flawed findings in this regard.

     25. The third challenge related to the FtTJ's treatment of the  medical
         evidence e. I listened carefully to both submissions of  this  area
         of challenge and I have considered both the  medical  evidence  and
         the FtTJ's determination. A medical report can provide evidence  to
         back up an account of torture and to  provide  an  insight  into  a
         person's personality. The appellant was interviewed and provided  a
         detailed account of what he said happened. Mr Spurling submits  the
         FtTJ failed to have regard to the appellant's psychiatric condition
         and if he had done so then he would not have been so negative about
         the appellant.

     26. The FtTJ considered the medical evidence in paragraph [38], [45] to
         [49]. The FtTJ acknowledged that the appellant may have  been  able
         to give a more detailed  account  to  the  doctor  because  of  the
         doctor's approach but concluded the appellant should have been able
         to give a more detailed account of what happened. In paragraph [46]
         he pointed out discrepancies and considered the medical  report  in
         the round and had regard to his own account when assessing  how  he
         received his physical injuries.

     27. The real challenge to the medical evidence is based on  the  FtTJ's
         approach in paragraph [47] of his determination. However, the  FtTJ
         is clearly aware of the doctor's opinion but  for  the  reasons  he
         gave  in  his  determination  he  found  the   issues   highlighted
         outweighed the doctor's concerns. Paragraph [47] has to be read  as
         a whole. At paragraph [48]  the  FtTJ  considered  the  appellant's
         medical situation and made findings that were open to him. He  gave
         reasons for  rejecting  the  submission  that  PTSD  explained  the
         inconsistencies. The  FtTJ  sets  out  in  paragraph  [48]  why  he
         rejected the medical evidence and his conclusion in paragraph  [49]
         was open to him.

     28. The final ground of appeal related to his failure to  consider  the
         court file. The FtTJ considered this area of his claim in paragraph
         [43] of his determination. Mr Parkinson accepted the FtTJ  did  not
         make findings on the court file or have regard to the evidence from
         the Sri Lankan attorney. The FtTJ rejected the core of his  account
         and rejected his  claim  about  the  warrant  for  his  arrest.  Mr
         Parkinson's submission is  that  the  FtTJ  was  entitled  to  find
         fraudulent documents were available and  to  attach  no  weight  to
         them.

     29. Documents have to be considered in the round. The FtTJ did consider
         the  facts  and  he  rejected  the  claim.  He  made  a  number  of
         credibility findings and effectively he was left with a report from
         an attorney instructed by the appellant's representatives  balanced
         against his adverse findings on the  appellant's  account  and  the
         fact fraudulent documents were widely available in Sri Lanka.  Even
         if he should have made a finding on the documents  I  am  satisfied
         this was not material because his finding clearly would have been a
         rejection of those documents. The FtTJ says as  much  in  paragraph
         [43] and Mr Spurling's submissions  on  this  point  are  merely  a
         disagreement with his approach. The respondent did  not  check  the
         documents in  dispute  and  if  the  negative  findings  about  the
         appellant's case had not been made then the report would have taken
         on more significance but it is clear from  the  determination  that
         the appellant's claim was rejected and in the circumstances I  find
         no material error occurred in respect of Ground Four.

     30. The final ground related to the FtTJ's approach to  the  advice  in
         GJ. In light of  his  findings  there  is  no  error  as  the  FtTJ
         considered his position based on his conclusions.

     31. I find there has been no error in law.

         DECISION

     32. There was no material error. I uphold the determination and dismiss
         the appeal.



Signed:     Dated: April 24, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal was dismissed and I make no fee award.



Signed:     Dated: April 24, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
