
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09133/2012
     AA/09141/2012
     AA/09142/2012
     AA/09143/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                          |Date Sent                  |
|On 14 May 2013                                  |On 14 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     DMF
                                     GEF
                                     DFE
                                     PBF

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Johnson, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondents are nationals of El Salvador.  I  shall  refer  to  the
    respondents as "the appellants" as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and refer to the Secretary of State as the "respondent".   The
    first appellant is the husband of the second appellant  and  father  of
    the third and fourth appellant.  The children were born in January 1996
    and April 2006 respectively.  The appellants  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 30 March 2012 and were granted six months'  leave  to  enter
    expiring on 29 September 2012.  On 24 August 2012, the first  appellant
    was served with enforcement papers on the grounds that he had  employed
    verbal deception to enter the United Kingdom.  On 22 September 2012,  a
    decision was made to  refuse  to  grant  the  appellants  asylum.   The
    appellants'  subsequent  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge
    Manchester)  was  dismissed  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    Articles 2/3 ECHR grounds  but  allowed  under  Article  8  ECHR.   The
    Secretary of State appealed against that decision.  There is no  cross-
    appeal by the appellants in respect of the other decisions of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Judge Manchester first considered Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.
     He found that the conditions required by the Rules were  not  met  and
    "accordingly the appellant has no right to remain in the United Kingdom
    on account of his right to family  life  and  private  life  under  the
    Rules."  [85]. He then considered the application of Article 8 ECHR and
    found that the appellants would  suffer  disproportionate  interference
    with their private  and  family  lives  if  they  were  removed  to  El
    Salvador.  The Secretary of State's first ground  of  appeal  reads  as
    follows:

         "The Immigration Judge has allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.
          It is submitted that the Immigration Judge has erred materially in
         law.  The appellants would be removed as a family  unit,  therefore
         there would be no breach of their family life Article 8 rights.  It
         is further submitted the best interests of the children will always
         be served by being with their parents wherever  they  are  located.
         It may be that the country  situation  has  been  affected  by  the
         natural disaster that occurred there however it is  submitted  this
         is  inadequate  to  make  their  removal   disproportionate.    The
         appellants have lived in El Salvador in the  recent  past  and  the
         children  have  attended  school  there.   The  parents  would   be
         returning to  their  home  country  where  they  have  spent  their
         formative years and will be able to re-establish their  livelihoods
         and support their children to reintegrate into society there."

 3. Judge Manchester noted that the children would be "removed as a  family
    unit with the appellant and his wife" [89].  The judge noted  that  the
    family had, since leaving El Salvador, lived for some time in  the  USA
    and then Sweden.  The youngest child had been only 2 years old when she
    left El Salvador.  However, the judge noted that "both  children  would
    [have been] exposed to El Salvadorian culture and the Spanish  language
    through their parents."  The judge went on to record  that  the  family
    would return to "difficult living conditions," including "living  in  a
    part finished house."  The judge noted that there have been a series of
    earthquakes in El Salvador in 2001 and also referred to evidence  which
    indicated that "El Salvador  remains  unable,  temporarily,  to  handle
    adequately the return of its nationals."  [90].  He went on to  discuss
    the 2000 earthquakes in greater detail at [91].   The  judge  found  at
    [92] that there was "no evidence the appellant would be able to provide
    for his family's economic survival in El Salvador beyond the short term
    after their absence for such a long period  ..."   He  considered  that
    this would render the family "vulnerable".

 4. Mr Johnson, for the Secretary of State, took issue with  that  finding.
    Considering the appellants' (failed) asylum appeal, the judge had noted
    that "they have made a profit on the sale of the house in the USA  that
    they had placed in a savings  account."   It  is  not  clear  what  had
    happened to that money or why it would not  be  now  available  to  the
    appellants.  The  first  appellant  had  supported  his  family  in  El
    Salvador before they had travelled to the USA.

 5. The Upper Tribunal  should  hesitate  before  entertaining  grounds  of
    appeal which, prima face, appear to be nothing more than  disagreements
    with findings made by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   However,  I  do
    find that there is substance in Mr Johnson's  submission.   It  is  not
    clear to me, having  considered  the  determination  and  the  evidence
    carefully, why Judge Manchester  concluded  that  the  first  appellant
    would be unable to provide for his family in El Salvador.  It is  clear
    that the first appellant is an intelligent and  resourceful  individual
    who has maintained his family whilst living in  the  USA  and  also  in
    Sweden and the United Kingdom.  It is true also that the whereabouts of
    the proceeds of sale of the American house had not been made clear.  In
    brief oral evidence which he gave at the Upper  Tribunal  hearing,  the
    first appellant said that the money had all gone but I note  that  that
    evidence has been given against a background  of  negative  credibility
    findings on the asylum appeal made by the First-tier Tribunal.   It  is
    curious that Judge Manchester did not believe what the first  appellant
    told him regarding his  asylum  claim  but  appears  to  have  accepted
    everything that the first appellant said about  his  impecuniosity  and
    inability to provide for his family in El Salvador.  I find  that  part
    of the determination to be inadequately reasoned.

 6. There is also a more fundamental problem  with  the  judge's  reasoning
    regarding Article 8.  Quite properly, the judge has applied Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  and  sought  to
    establish what are the best interests of  the  children  as  a  primary
    consideration.  It is unclear, however, why he has sought to rely  upon
    ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 given that that case was concerned with the
    possibility of parents and children being separated  from  each  other;
    there is no prospect of that happening in the present appeal, as  Judge
    Manchester acknowledged.  At [93] Judge Manchester found that:

         "I conclude that it would not be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
         children and the daughter, PBF, in particular given her age  to  be
         removed at this time to El Salvador.  Equally, I find that it would
         not be in the interests of the children to be separated from  their
         parents by the removal at this time."

    The judge made that finding notwithstanding the fact that  at  [89]  he
    had found that, "the children would be removed as a  family  unit  with
    the appellant and his wife..."  His finding that  the  children  should
    not be removed "at this time to El Salvador" [my emphasis]  appears  to
    arise out of doubts which the judge had regarding  the  "infrastructure
    and  public  services"  of  El  Salvador  [91]   following   the   2001
    earthquakes, together with  his  doubts  about  the  first  appellant's
    ability to care for the family.  I have already found that  the  latter
    finding was based on inadequate evidence and reasoning and I find  that
    the  judge's  comments  regarding  the  earthquakes  in  2001  and  the
    condition of the country's infrastructure approaches a finding that the
    children in this appeal would be  exposed  to  conditions  which  would
    breach their Article 3 ECHR rights.  Notwithstanding  the  difficulties
    that  the  country  has  faced  since  the  earthquakes  in  2001,  the
    background material which was before the First-tier Tribunal  does  not
    come close to establishing such a level of risk.  Ultimately, the judge
    appears to have concluded that the children would be better off  living
    in the United Kingdom.  In reaching that finding, I find  that  he  has
    misunderstood the nature of the "best interests" test  in  Section  55.
    The application of Section 55 should not descend to a comparison of the
    material conditions in which children would live in the United  Kingdom
    and in their country of national origin.  If that were the test,  then,
    given the living conditions in many of the countries from which  asylum
    seekers come to the United Kingdom, it  is  likely  that  most  appeals
    would succeed.  I have no doubt that the children in the present appeal
    would have much easier access to services such as education and  health
    in the United Kingdom rather than in El Salvador.  However, that is not
    the point.  I consider that the grounds of appeal are correct  when  it
    is stated that, "the best interests of  the  children  will  always  be
    served by being with their parents wherever  they  are  located."   The
    children will be returning to the country of their nationality and will
    not be separated from their parents.  Those facts could and should have
    constituted the beginning and the end of the Section 55  assessment  in
    this instance; there was no need for the judge to make  any  comparison
    between conditions in El Salvador and the United Kingdom. By doing  so,
    he erred in law.




 7. I find that the judge has erred  in  law  in  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds and in his application of Section 55 of the 2009
    Act in particular.  I set aside his determination.  I have  remade  the
    decision.  I do not accept that the  first  appellant  (who  has  given
    untruthful evidence to the First-tier Tribunal)  has  not  retained  at
    least part of the proceeds  of  sale  of  his  former  home.  He  is  a
    resourceful individual who I believe will be able to access funds which
    will enable him to provide for his family  in  El  Salvador.  The  best
    interests of the children will be served by their remaining with  their
    parents. The appellants have been in the United  Kingdom  for  a  short
    period of time. They have provided no evidence which would suggest that
    their  private  or   family   lives   would   suffer   disproportionate
    interference if they now returned to their country of nationality.  The
    United Kingdom government is pursuing a legitimate aim  in  seeking  to
    remove the appellants who have,  without  just  reason,  remained  here
    without permission having employed deceit to enter the country. I  find
    that the appeals should be dismissed on all grounds.




    DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  have
    remade the decision. The appeals are dismissed on asylum grounds.   The
    appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds.  The appellants are  not
    entitled to grants of humanitarian protection.





Signed                              Date 2 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

