
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09285/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2016                   |On 5 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     ND
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford, Counsel instructed by Wick & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran  born  on  24  September  1994.   He
    entered the UK as an unaccompanied minor in October  2010  and  claimed
    asylum on 2 November 2010. His application was refused but, because  of
    his age, he was granted discretionary leave to remain  until  24  March
    2012.

 3. On 22 March 2012 he applied for further leave to remain on the  grounds
    of asylum and/or international protection. This appeal arises from  the
    respondent's  decision,  made  on  16  October  2014,  to  refuse  that
    application.

 4. The appellant claims that he would be at risk on return to Iran because
    (a) immediately before he  fled  Iran  the  government  discovered  his
    property was being used to store alcohol that was being transported  by
    smugglers and he would face arrest and execution upon return to Iran as
    a consequence; (b) he is Kurdish and  left  Iran  illegally  without  a
    passport and would be returned as a failed asylum seeker; and (c) since
    arriving in the UK he has engaged in demonstrations in support of Kurds
    including one outside  the  Iranian  embassy  where  someone  from  the
    embassy observed him.

 5. The appellant's account of his life in Iran includes, inter alia,  that
    three years before leaving Iran he was detained and beaten for stealing
    a photograph from a mosque and men  arrested  at  the  same  time  were
    executed. He also maintains that his father  was  executed  because  of
    political activity in around 2004.

 6. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account or that he  would
    be at risk on return to Iran. The appellant appealed and his appeal was
    heard by First tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Broe on  22  December  2014.
    Judge Broe's decision to dismiss the appeal was set aside by the  Upper
    Tribunal and remitted to the FtT where it was heard afresh by FtT Judge
    Amin. In a decision made on 30 September 2015, the  FtT  dismissed  the
    appeal.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal made on 30 September 2015

 7. The FtT did not find the appellant to be a credible witness. It did not
    accept that his house was used for storage of alcohol or  other  goods,
    that he was arrested and detained three years earlier  for  stealing  a
    photograph, or that his father was  executed.  It  also  described  the
    appellant as having been opportunistic in his sur place activities  and
    as someone who has come by choice to the UK as an economic migrant.

 8. With respect to sur place activities, the FtT  relied  on  Iran  CG  BA
    (demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) [2011] UKUT 36  (IAC).  The
    FtT found that the  appellant  had  attended  three  demonstrations  in
    relation to Kurds since arriving in the UK, only one of which concerned
    Iran. It did not accept that the appellant had a profile as a political
    activist or that his involvement in these  demonstrations  put  him  at
    risk.

 9. In  addition,  although  the  FtT  accepted  the  appellant  left  Iran
    illegally, following SB Iran CG (risk on return -  illegal  exit)  2009
    UKAIT 0053, it determined that this was not a significant risk factor.

Grounds and submissions

10. There are four grounds of appeal:
          a) First, that the FtT erred in respect of the standard of  proof
             given the appellant's age.
          b) Second, that the FtT erred in relation to the appellant's  sur
             place activities by: (a) not  treating  as  relevant  the  two
             demonstrations attended which were not  specifically  directed
             against Iran but which concerned support of Kurds; (b) failing
             to engage with the risk  arising  from  his  attendance  at  a
             demonstration being subject to surveillance; and  (c)  failing
             to consider the discrimination which he would face as a Kurd.
          c) Third, that the FtT failed to assess the risk of return  based
             on the appellant's Kurdish  ethnicity  despite  the  objective
             evidence before it.
          d) Fourth, that in considering the appellant's risk on return  as
             a minor of Kurdish ethnicity who left Iran illegally, the  FtT
             relied on SB Iran without considering the  current  background
             material or taking into consideration that  the  appellant  is
             likely  to  be  questioned  on  return  about  his  sur  place
             activities.

11. Mr Gaisford gave detailed submissions in respect of the  first  ground.
    The essence of his argument was that although the FtT acknowledged  the
    need to be cautious in considering the appellant's evidence because  of
    his age, no such caution was in  fact  taken  and  the  FtT  improperly
    placed  significant  weight  on   slight   (or   even   non   existent)
    discrepancies in the evidence whereas the appellant  should  have  been
    given the benefit of the doubt. For example, at paragraph [51] the  FtT
    referred to, and placed weight on, an apparent discrepancy between  the
    appellant's  comments  in  the  asylum  interview  about  his   uncle's
    involvement with illegal goods. Mr Gaisford contended that not only was
    it improper for  the  FtT  to  attribute  such  weight  to  the  asylum
    interview given the appellant's  age  and  lack  of  adult  support  or
    representation at the time,  but  that  upon  proper  scrutiny  of  the
    evidence it is apparent that there is in fact no discrepancy.

12. Mr  Gaisford  argued  that  not  only  had  the  FtT  failed  to  weigh
    inconsistencies properly given the appellant's age,  it  had  also  not
    given proper consideration to objective evidence  that  was  consistent
    with the claim. Moreover, he argued that the FtT's credibility findings
    were not safe  because  (a)  the  appellant's  account  was  internally
    consistent; (b) it was not embellished and (c) the FtT had made factual
    errors, including for example about what the appellant had  said  about
    his mother's presence when the property was raided by police.

13. In respect of Grounds 2 - 4, Mr Gaisford argued that the FtT had failed
    to take into account up to date country information  showing  the  risk
    faced by Kurds. He submitted that the Country Guidance Cases upon which
    the FtT relied - BA Iran and SB Iran - are out  of  date  and  fail  to
    address the present risk to individuals in the appellant's position and
    the  FtT  should  have  taken  into  account  the  country  information
    submitted by the appellant. His argument was that had an assessment  of
    the up to date country information been carried out, it would have been
    apparent, firstly,  that  the  appellant's  sur  place  activities  are
    sufficient to place him at risk; and secondly, that the appellant is at
    risk as a consequence of being a Kurdish failed asylum seeker who  left
    Iran illegally.

14. Ms Fijiwala argued that the pleaded grounds  differ  to  the  arguments
    submitted at the hearing. The first ground  concerns  the  standard  of
    proof but Mr Gaisford has sought to  challenge  the  FtT's  credibility
    findings. Mr Fijiwala argued that the FtT  was  clearly  aware  of  the
    appellant's age and had properly directed itself  to  the  standard  of
    proof.  At paragraph [50] the FtT referred to the  appellant  being  16
    when interviewed and stated that it was giving him the benefit  of  the
    doubt in respect of an inconsistency in  the  evidence.   At  paragraph
    [75] the FtT stated that it would not expect the  appellant  to  recall
    and understand as much as an adult asylum seeker.  In  respect  of  the
    credibility arguments made by Mr Gaisford, she argued  that  these  are
    mere disagreements with the FtT which made findings that were  open  to
    it.

15. Ms Fijiwala argued that the FtT's analysis of the risk from  sur  place
    activities was consistent with BA Iran. With respect to risk on  return
    as a Kurd, she argued that there was no  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    family facing persecution. The appellant  is  not  an  anti  government
    activist and the FtT made clear  findings  that  he  would  not  be  of
    interest to the authorities. As to the  risk  on  return  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker who left Iran unlawfully, Ms Fijiwala argued that the FtT
    was entitled to rely on SB Iran and had done so appropriately.

Consideration

16. When assessing an asylum claim by a minor,  although  the  standard  of
    proof does not differ to that which applies where an  applicant  is  an
    adult, greater caution may be appropriate and  more  weight  should  be
    given to objective indications of risk.

17. Paragraph 351 of the Immigration Rules states (emphasis added):
         '351. A person of any age may qualify for refugee status under  the
         Convention and the criteria in paragraph 334 apply  to  all  cases.
         However, account should be taken of the applicant's maturity and in
         assessing the claim of a child  more  weight  should  be  given  to
         objective indications of risk than to the child's state of mind and
         understanding of his  situation.  An  asylum  application  made  on
         behalf of a child should not be refused solely because the child is
         too young to understand his situation or  to  have  formed  a  well
         founded fear of persecution. Close attention should be given to the
         welfare of the child at all times.'

18. In KS (Benefit of the doubt) at [97] the panel commented that:
         "... for a judge to proceed to  assess  the  evidence  of  a  minor
         without any indication that he or she has considered  the  modified
         approach enjoined by paragraph 351 may often result in an error  of
         law, because under that provision more  weight  must  be  given  to
         objective evidence."

    In KS it is also stated that:
         "A child sensitive application of the lower standard of  proof  may
         still need to be given to persons if they are  recounting  relevant
         events that took place at a time when they were minors or were even
         younger minors"

19. The appellant was sixteen at the time of his screening and  substantive
    interview and considerably younger when some of the events he described
    in those interviews were said to take place.

20. The FtT made several references to the appellant's youth. At  paragraph
    [46] it described the appellant as "an anxious and inexperienced asylum
    seeker" and  directed  itself  to  be  cautious  before  rejecting  his
    account.  At paragraph [50] the FtT  stated  that  it  was  giving  the
    appellant the benefit of the doubt in respect of  a  discrepancy  about
    his involvement in the sale of alcoholic drinks because of his age.  At
    paragraph [75] the FtT stated that it accepted the appellant was  young
    when some of the events he recounted are alleged to have  occurred.  It
    is clear, therefore, that the FtT was  aware  that  claimant  was,  and
    attached some significance to the claimant being,  a  minor  both  when
    interviewed upon arriving in the UK and when the events that formed the
    substance of his claim were said to have transpired. However,  although
    the FtT identified the issue of  the  appellant's  age,  it  failed  to
    consider - or follow  -  the  modified  approach  under  paragraph  351
    whereby greater weight should be given to objective evidence.

21. The FtT reached its conclusion that the  appellant's  account  was  not
    credible without making any reference to, or findings  in  respect  of,
    objective evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant to  corroborate
    his account and focused  solely  on  apparent  inconsistencies  in  the
    accounts given by the appellant. For example, the FtT  did  not  accept
    that the appellant's house was used  for  storage  of  smuggled  goods,
    which was a core element of the appellant's claim, on  the  basis  that
    there were inconsistencies in the accounts the appellant  gave  of  his
    uncle's involvement. However, the FtT did not  take  into  account,  in
    making this finding, the objective evidence before  it  concerning  the
    appellant's village being on a known smuggling route. Likewise, the FtT
    did not accept that the appellant's  father  was  executed  because  in
    cross examination the appellant accepted there was no evidence  and  he
    was relying on what his mother had  told  him.  But  the  FtT  made  no
    reference  to  the  objective  evidence  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant purporting to show evidence of  the  treatment  of  Kurds  at
    around the time the appellant's father was said to have been killed.

22. It is also apparent that the FtT, although it acknowledged the  greater
    caution that may be required because of the appellant's  age,  has  not
    applied a child sensitive approach in respect of the standard of proof.
     At paragraph [57], for example, the FtT sets out what it describes  as
    an inconsistency that undermines the  appellant's  credibility  and  on
    which, to a not insignificant extent, it appears to  base  its  finding
    that the appellant's account of being apprehended and  tortured  cannot
    be accepted. The inconsistency identified by the FtT  is  that  in  his
    earlier statement the appellant stated that three men with whom he  was
    apprehended in around 2007 were sentenced to the death penalty  whereas
    at the hearing he said he believed they were executed  because  he  was
    told about this. It is difficult to  see  where  there  is  a  material
    inconsistency between the  two  accounts  or  to  reconcile  the  FtT's
    credibility finding made in consequence of this inconsistency with  the
    lower standard of proof in asylum claims, irrespective of  whether  the
    appellant was a child. In any event, it is clear that the FtT  has  not
    taken into account, in determining the weight to be  attached  to  this
    inconsistency that the appellant was only around 13 when the event  was
    said to take place.

23. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the FtT erred in  law  by  failing  to
    properly apply the lower  standard of proof in  asylum  appeals  having
    regard to the appellant's age both at  the  time  his  application  was
    processed and to his age when the events under scrutiny  were  said  to
    have taken place.  This error is such that the  decision  must  be  set
    aside.

24. The remaining three grounds of appeal can be  considered  together,  as
    they raise the same fundamental issue. It is clear  from  the  decision
    that the FtT determined the appellant's  risk  on  return  to  Iran  by
    relying on and following the current Iranian Country Guidance cases  of
    BA and SB.  However, the appellant submitted to the FtT several  up  to
    date reports addressing the risk he might face. These  included,  inter
    alia, the UK Home Office Country Information on Kurds in Iran dated  19
    August 2015, the US Department of State 2014  Country  Report  on  Iran
    dated 25 June  2015  and  an  Amnesty  International  Report  dated  25
    February 2015.  In my judgment, the FtT erred in law by failing to take
    into consideration this up to date country evidence that was before it.



25. BA and SB are authoritative to the extent that an appeal turns  on  the
    same or similar evidence, but this is not such a case. Firstly, the FtT
    had before it recent evidence that indicated a departure from BA and/or
    SB might be appropriate.  Secondly,  neither  BA  nor  SB  address  the
    specific issue that was before the FtT, which  is  the  risk  faced  by
    ethnic Kurds on return to Iran. Accordingly, I find that the FtT  erred
    in law by failing to take into account the objective evidence before it
    pertaining to the risk the appellant may face on return to Iran  as  an
    ethnic Kurd who left Iran illegally and who  would  be  returned  as  a
    failed asylum seeker.

26. Given the extent to which further fact finding will be required to  re-
    make this appeal, the proper course is for this matter  to  be  reheard
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.  In light of there being  a  pending
    Country Guidance case which will likely be of relevance  to  issues  in
    this appeal, the de novo hearing of this appeal should take place after
    that Country Guidance case has been promulgated.

Decision
      a) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error
         of law such that it should be set aside in  its  entirety  and  the
         appeal heard afresh.
      b) The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
         afresh before a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Amin  or
         First tier Tribunal Judge Broe.
      c) An anonymity direction is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 2 February 2016               |

