

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09748/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport, Cardiff                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2014                              |On 7th April 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                         Vice-President Arfon-Jones


                                   Between

                                     YQL
                       (ANONIMITY DIRECTION EXTENDED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

Appellant:    Mr N Taeharne (of Counsel), instructed by Migrant Legal
                  Project
Respondent:       Mr  Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. By a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of State dated 9 October
      2013  the  Appellant's  application  for  asylum  was  refused.    The
      Appellant's ensuing appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT")  was
      dismissed.  The Appellant appeal's with permission to this Tribunal.

   2. The issue lying at the heart of  this  appeal  relates  to  the  FtT's
      treatment of the expert evidence adduced on behalf of  the  Appellant.
      Part of the Appellant's asylum claim entailed assertions that  in  the
      course of earning her livelihood  as  bookseller  she  sold  so-called
      "Falun Gong" literature, attracting adverse attention from the Chinese
      authorities in consequence.  She claimed to have been arrested by  the
      police on two occasions and that,  on  the  first,  this  involved  an
      arrest warrant.  She further claimed that the police had  visited  and
      questioned her on multiple occasions, threatening her with  arrest  if
      she failed to identify the supplier of the offending literature.   Her
      decision to leave China and her subsequent claim for asylum were based
      on these repeated  incidents  of  unwelcome  and  intimidating  police
      conduct.

   3. The report of the expert witness, Dr Sheehan, is to be  considered  in
      the context outlined immediately above.   It's  title  is  noteworthy:
      "Authentication of Detention Warrant for Ms [YQL]".  In her report  Dr
      Sheehan stated

     "The layout font and wording of the Detention  Warrant  are  all  as  I
           would expect and there is nothing about it  which  leads  me  to
           doubt its authenticity.  I have seen genuine versions  of  these
           documents in the Police Museum in Beijing .....

     The Chinese police (the Public Security Bureau) do not use any  special
           or watermarked paper for these documents, so  the  paper  itself
           gives no indication of authenticity or otherwise ........

     The document bears the stamp of the Fuqing City Public Security  Bureau
           .... This official stamp gives the document its validity .......
           The stamp is in the correct font and is in the red ink used  for
           the police and other government departments in China, with a red
           star  in  the  centre.   The  document  also  bears   a   unique
           identifying number".

     Dr Sheehan further stated that the terms of the warrant confirmed  that
      it has been approved by the Court.  Furthermore, it identified the two
      PSB Officers who were to execute it and the Appellant's home  address.
      It also contained  the  Appellant's  signature,  certifying  that  the
      warrant had been served on her on the date of issue by the Court.   Dr
      Sheehan continues:

         "Since these police issued [documents] are not produced on  special
           paper, it is in theory possible for someone with influence  with
           the Fuqing police to issue a fake detention warrant.  However, I
           think it is relatively unlikely  .........  and  overall  I  see
           nothing in this document to indicate that it is not genuine".

   4.  In  her  report  Dr  Sheehan  conducted  an   impressively   detailed
      examination and  assessment  of  the  document  under  scrutiny.   Her
      opinions were expressed firmly and without  qualification.   Moreover,
      at the hearing at first instance, there was no challenge on behalf  of
      the Secretary of State to her report.

   5. In a detailed Determination,  the  findings  of  the  Judge  begin  at
      paragraph [62].  They commence with the uncompromising statement:

     "I find the Appellant is not a credible witness".
      The Judge then elaborated on this overarching finding.  In  doing  so,
      she stated further:

     "I do not accept that she was arrested or being [sic] charged".
     This was the preface to the immediately following passage:

         "Considering the inconsistencies in the Appellant's case  and  also
           the surrounding circumstances, I  place  little  weight  on  the
           arrest warrant.  Dr Sheehan states the police issue  warrant  is
           not on special or watermarked paper.  Taking into  consideration
           the  whole  of  the  evidence,  especially  the  Appellant   not
           mentioning in her screening and asylum interviews that  she  was
           detained for one month, I find little credence can be placed  on
           any of the Appellant's evidence".

     Considered in its full context, we readily construe this passage  as  a
      clear rejection of Dr Sheehan's expert opinion.   However,  the  Judge
      failed to deal with Dr Sheehan's evidence that no special or watermark
      paper is used by the Chinese police for  arrest  warrants.   Based  on
      this evidence, the fact that the warrant produced by the Appellant was
      not on paper of this nature did not  undermine  her  case.  The  Judge
      appears to have disregarded this.   Furthermore,  the  Judge  gave  no
      explicit consideration to any of the other  material  passages  in  Dr
      Sheehan's report, the most salient whereof we  have  rehearsed  above.
      We consider that, fundamentally, the Judge failed to  engage  with  Dr
      Sheehan's expert opinion.  This was an indelible duty  which  was  not
      discharged.

   6. The finding that the Judge committed an error of  law  by  failing  to
      give any or proper  consideration  to  a  crucial  piece  of  evidence
      follows  readily.   We  consider  the  materiality   of   this   error
      indisputable, since it undoubtedly contributed to the Judge's  adverse
      credibility assessment of the Appellant.  The Determination of the FtT
      must be set aside accordingly.

   7. The effect of  our  analysis  and  conclusion  is  that  there  was  a
      significant shortcoming in the consideration and determination of  the
      Appellant's case at first  instance.   Both  parties'  representatives
      submitted that the appropriate course would be to remit the  case  for
      the purpose of remaking.  We accede to this joint submission.

   8. Accordingly, we set aside the decision of the FtT and remit  the  case
      to a differently constituted FtT  for  the  purpose  of  remaking  the
      decision.

                            Signed:
                                [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                    Date:    27   March 2014
