
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09631/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 December 2016                           |On 25 January 2017            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A R
                         (anonymity direction MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kerr of Karis Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    R (who now appears as  the  respondent  but  to  whom  I  shall  refer
    hereafter as the appellant as he was before the  First-tier  Tribunal),
    appealed to that Tribunal against the decision of the now appellant but
    to whom I shall refer hereafter as the respondent, refusing  his  claim
    for asylum and refusing his human rights claim also.

2.   The judge dismissed the asylum appeal but  allowed  an  appeal  outside
    the Rules on the basis of the appellant's private and family life.  The
    allowing of the appeal was limited to granting leave  to  remain  until
    the outcome of the appeal by VX, said to be his partner, and the mother
    of their two children.

3.   The Secretary of State challenged the judge's  decision  on  the  basis
    that the judge had used Article 8 as a general dispensing  power  which
    was contrary to the findings of the Supreme Court in Patel [2013]  UKSC
    72 at paragraph 57, and that the proportionality  assessment  that  had
    been made in favour of the appellant had  been  incorrectly  determined
    despite all the mandatory public interest factors outlined  in  section
    117B of the 2002 Act weighing against the appellant.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    who noted that the Presenting Officer at the hearing had applied for an
    adjournment of the appeal so it could be heard on the same day  as  the
    appeal of VX.  The judge  considered  it  was  not  clear  whether  the
    respondent was arguing that the First-tier  Judge  at  the  appeal  was
    wrong to refuse the adjournment request but noted that  the  respondent
    had referred to the fact that the judge found it was necessary to await
    the outcome of the partner's appeal, and the general complaint that the
    judge had erred in law.

5.    In  his  submissions  Mr  Whitwell  mentioned  that  the   appellant's
    partner's appeal had now been heard  and  allowed.   He  accepted  that
    eventually the appellant's family  and  private  life  required  to  be
    considered by the Tribunal.  He relied on the  grounds.   The  fairness
    issue had been raised by the judge granting permission and Mr  Whitwell
    sought to rely on that albeit that it was not in the grounds.   It  had
    been unfair of the judge to fail to  grant  the  Secretary  of  State's
    adjournment request.  That application had  not  been  opposed  by  the
    appellant who had sought an  adjournment  for  other  reasons.   Having
    refused an adjournment to enable the two appeals to  be  heard  on  the
    same date, the judge had then allowed the appeal on the basis that  the
    appellant be granted leave to remain until the outcome of his partner's
    appeal.  There was unfairness in the circumstances as  adverted  to  in
    Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

6.   Mr Whitwell argued that the judge had ducked the  question  and  fudged
    any proper assessment of Article  8  which  was  to  be  considered  by
    agreement outside the Rules only.  The judge noted at paragraph 33  the
    obligation to take into account the best interests of the children  but
    had  made  no  finding  on  that  point.   If  there  was  insufficient
    information an adjournment would be required, and  in  this  regard  Mr
    Whitwell referred to MK [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC).  The judge had  stated
    at paragraph 35 that the appellant had provided very little information
    on his relationship with his partner and child and that they no  longer
    lived together  and  went  on  to  remark  that  he  had  virtually  no
    information as to the  relationship  the  appellant  enjoyed  with  the
    children and the role he played in their lives and the partner had  not
    attended to give evidence as she had a doctor's appointment.  This left
    him questioning whether their relationship was ongoing and whether  the
    appellant  played  an  active  and  positive  role  in  the  children's
    upbringing.  The decision was  inconsistent  with  these  findings  and
    these matters needed to be assessed at  some  point  and  the  decision
    should  be  set  aside  and  re-listed,  preferably  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

7.   In his submissions Mr Kerr argued that the matter should be  looked  at
    practically.  If the Secretary of State could implement the decision by
    seeking up-to-date information if there were an error of  law  then  he
    agreed the matter would need to be remitted but it would be  better  if
    it went back to the First-tier rather than being  heard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

8.   As regards the grounds, the analogy with Patel was a false one.   There
    had been an examination of the Human Rights Act it was not  a  question
    of mopping up at the fringes of the Immigration  Rules  and  there  was
    nothing in the point.  As regards the  second  ground,  the  judge  had
    properly structured his approach and said why he considered the  matter
    outside the Rules and set out the  Razgar  guidelines  and  noted  that
    Article 8 was engaged and considered section 117B.  The  children  were
    not removable, a  claim  having  been  made  for  them  and  they  were
    dependants on their mother's claim.  The appellant's Article  3  rights
    would be breached if he was removed pending that outcome  according  to
    the judge and that was a sensible conclusion.

9.   By way of reply Mr Whitwell  argued  that  the  judge  had  refused  an
    adjournment for a month for the claims to be tied up and  then  allowed
    the appeal essentially on that basis.  Neither had  given  evidence  in
    the other's claim  yet  it  had  been  allowed  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his family.

10.  I reserved my determination.

11.  The judge set out the five stage Razgar test,  and  accepted  that  the
    proposed removal of the appellant  represented  an  interference  by  a
    public authority with the exercise of his rights to private and  family
    life and that this interference had consequences  of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to  engage  the  operation  of  Article  8.   He  was  also
    satisfied that the interference was in accordance with the law and  was
    necessary in a democratic society.  The issue therefore requiring to be
    determined was whether the interference was proportionate.   The  judge
    set out the provisions of section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  He noted that the appellant had no difficulty  in
    giving evidence in English.  There was no information to indicate  that
    he was financially independent.  He accepted that he had established  a
    private life in the United Kingdom but noted that that private life was
    established on the basis that he had lied as to his true identity,  the
    country from which he had come and the circumstances in  which  he  had
    fled his home country and that he had maintained that deception  for  a
    period of more than ten years.  As a consequence during this period  he
    had been in the United Kingdom either unlawfully or with  a  precarious
    immigration status.  In light of his  deception  the  judge  considered
    that very little weight could be attached to the private  life  he  had
    established during that period.

12.  He noted that the appellant claimed to be in  a  relationship  with  VX
    who  had  provided  a  statement  in  which  she  said  she  was  in  a
    relationship with  the  appellant.   There  are  two  children  of  the
    relationship, both Albanian citizens and dependants on  their  mother's
    appeal.  The judge said that he recognised the obligation imposed  upon
    the  respondent  by  section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009, and accepted  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children were a primary consideration.

13.  He went on to note that there were aspects of the evidence that  caused
    him to question the strength of the relationship between the appellant,
    his partner and the two children.   The  appellant  had  provided  very
    little information on his relationship with his partner and  child  but
    it was clear that they no longer lived together.  His partner suggested
    in her statement that they saw each other every day but the judge  said
    that he had  virtually  no  information  as  to  the  relationship  the
    appellant enjoys with his children and  the  role  he  plays  in  their
    lives.   He  also  noted  that  the  appellant's  partner  was  not  in
    attendance to give evidence as she  had  a  doctor's  appointment.   He
    considered that her failure to give evidence made him question  whether
    their relationship was ongoing and  whether  the  appellant  played  an
    active and positive role in his children's upbringing.

14.  The judge went on to say that he had serious misgivings  regarding  the
    nature of the relationship  between  the  appellant,  VX  and  the  two
    children.  He accepted  that  the  appellant  was  the  father  of  the
    children with whom he appeared to have regular ongoing contact and  did
    not consider it would be appropriate to remove him  before  a  decision
    was made on the appeal of VX and proposed that the appellant be granted
    leave to remain until the outcome of that appeal.

15.  The grounds do not raise the point which was one of the matters  relied
    on by  Mr  Whitwell  that  of  unfairness  to  the  respondent  in  not
    adjourning.  There was no application to apply to  amend  the  grounds,
    and I do not consider that the point can be taken at this  stage.   Nor
    can any account be taken of the decision in  VX's  appeal,  since  that
    took place of course some time after this appeal.  Although the context
    is different, I consider there is some force in the point made  by  the
    respondent, borrowing from paragraph 57 of Patel, that Article 8 is not
    a general dispensing power before but  is  concerned  with  private  or
    family life not, as referred to at paragraph 57, education.   There  is
    however greater force in the second ground.  Although the judge set out
    the relevant tests for an assessment of proportionality, including  the
    obligation to give consideration to the best interests of the children,
    I do not consider that he can be said properly to have given effect  to
    that.  The only basis for allowing the appeal on the limited basis upon
    which  that  was  done  was   the   conclusion   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate to remove the appellant prior to the determination  of
    VX's appeal.  This has to be seen however in the context of the judge's
    noting that he had virtually no information as to the relationship  the
    appellant enjoyed with his children and the role  he  played  in  their
    lives albeit noting that he appeared to have  ongoing  regular  contact
    with them.  There was no evaluation of what the best interests  of  the
    children actually were in the instant case.  In light  of  the  judge's
    concerns about the role the appellant played in his children's lives, I
    consider that there is a lack of any or any proper reasoning as to  the
    conclusion the judge reached as to the disposition of the appeal.

16.  Accordingly I find that the decision is infected by an  error  of  law.
    There requires to be made a proper evaluation of the Article  8  issue,
    and that in my judgment can only be done by the matter  being  remitted
    for a re-hearing before a different First-tier Judge at  Taylor  House.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
