
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09722/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 8 May 2014                                 |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     MIN
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms A. Radford, Counsel instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This appeal comes before us following a grant  of  permission  by  a
       judge of the Upper Tribunal in relation to a decision of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Cameron who dismissed the appellant's appeal  against
       a decision to refuse to vary leave to remain.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan,  born  on  24  September
       1994. He arrived in the UK on 14 November 2009 and claimed asylum on
       26 November 2009. His application was refused  but  on  12  February
       2010 he was granted discretionary leave to  remain  until  24  March
       2012, albeit that the notice of decision refusing further  leave  to
       remain wrongly states that he was granted leave until 24 March 2010.
       That discretionary leave was granted on the basis  that  he  was  an
       unaccompanied minor seeking asylum.

    3. The appellant appealed against the decision to refuse to  grant  him
       asylum (presumably under section 83 of the Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002) and his appeal came  before  Immigration  Judge
       R.G. Walters on 7 June 2010. Judge  Walters  dismissed  the  appeal.
       Following a grant of permission  to  appeal  the  matter  next  came
       before Senior Immigration Judge Jordan  and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Dawson on 4 October 2010. That Panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       concluded that there  was  no  "material"  error  of  law  in  Judge
       Walters' decision, in fact finding no error of law at all.

    4. An application made to the Upper Tribunal for permission  to  appeal
       to the Court of Appeal, in relation to the  decision  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal, was refused. We are not aware of whether  the  application
       was renewed to the Court of Appeal. If it was, the application  must
       have been refused since we  have  not  been  informed  of  any  such
       successful application.

    5. The appellant then made an application on 23 February 2012  to  vary
       his leave to remain. The  application  was  refused  and  First-tier
       Judge Cameron heard his appeal on 22 November  2013.  Permission  to
       appeal was granted by a judge of the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis
       that it was "just" arguable that in reaching a decision as  to  risk
       on return as a 19  year  old  the  judge  failed  to  make  adequate
       findings, which may have had an impact on the Article 8, refugee and
       humanitarian protection grounds. Other  grounds  were  not  however,
       excluded from the grant of permission.

Submissions

    6. Ms Radford relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It
       was submitted that  this  was  an  unusual  case  in  terms  of  the
       'tracing' requirement because the appellant was in contact with  his
       parents when he arrived but there were practical  difficulties  with
       the mobile phone contact.

    7. The Respondent had  failed  to  undertake  tracing.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal was wrong to conclude that the  Respondent  had  undertaken
       tracing. The Red Cross had attempted tracing in 2012  but  that  was
       years too late. In the asylum interview  the  appellant  had  stated
       that he had the telephone number for his family but  the  Respondent
       never sought to ask for the number. Had an effort been made to trace
       the appellant's family, information could have  been  provided  that
       was relevant to the asylum claim. The  result  of  the  Respondent's
       failure was that the appellant had lost  contact  with  his  family,
       which could not be regained.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal's decision was based on the assumption  that
       his family could meet him  in  Kabul.  The  decision  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal in relation  to  the  determination  of  Immigration  Judge
       Walters  was  based  on  the  decision   in   LQ   (Age:   immutable
       characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005  but it is now  clear
       from KA (Afghanistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 that the policy  was  not
       to  undertake  the  duty  to  trace,  or  help  trace  relations  of
       unaccompanied minor asylum-seekers. The appellant was  dependent  on
       the State to help him with contact with his family. If the  Tribunal
       had been aware that he was not going to get that help, he would have
       been recognised as a refugee in accordance with LQ.

    9. The failure to trace has meant that there is no durable solution  in
       relation to the situation regarding the  appellant's  family.  As  a
       result  of  the  failure  of  the  Respondent  the   appellant   had
       established a life in the UK for a period of four years.  Return  to
       Afghanistan now would be significantly more difficult.

   10. As was said in KA, the difficulties that a young person  would  face
       do not cease on a person reaching the age of 18 years. The appellant
       would be at risk of destitution, exploitation,  lack  of  access  to
       education and indiscriminate violence.

   11.  In  relation  to  humanitarian  protection,  there  is  a  risk  of
       indiscriminate violence in the  appellant's  home  area.  There  was
       background evidence in relation to Laghman Province. In relation  to
       relocation to Kabul, there was a different test of 'reasonableness'.



   12. As to Article 8, the judge had been wrong to take into account  that
       the appellant did not meet the requirements of the 'new'  Article  8
       rules. The First-tier judge  did  not  spell  out  what  the  public
       interest in the appellant's removal was.  There  was  a  significant
       delay of 20 months before the Respondent made the decision to refuse
       to vary leave to remain. The Respondent bore the burden  of  proving
       that his removal was necessary for the  enforcement  of  immigration
       control, taking into account the unlawful acts of the Respondent  in
       terms of failure to trace and delay.

   13. Mr Melvin submitted that the tracing issue was based on hypothetical
       assumptions,  in  terms  of  what  could  or  could  not  have  been
       established. The fact that the appellant's family obviously spent  a
       large sum of money sending him to the UK suggests that it  would  be
       unlikely that any tracing would have been of assistance, since  they
       would not have wanted to jeopardize their investment by facilitating
       his return to them. The failure to trace should be balanced  against
       the over five years that he has been in the  UK  and  the  education
       that has been provided to him.

   14. As indicated in KA  there  is  support  provided  to  failed  asylum
       seekers returning  to  Afghanistan.  The  argument  in  relation  to
       destitution and  exploitation  is  not  borne  out  by  the  country
       guidance.

   15. As regards Article 8, the  judge  had  made  an  assessment  of  his
       private life in the UK. He was  now  an  adult  and  his  underlying
       asylum claim was not accepted. It would be safe for him to return to
       Kabul as a young, able-bodied adult. Any error of law in relation to
       the issue of delay was not material.



Our assessment

   16.  The duty on the Secretary of State to  endeavour  to  trace  arises
       from Article 19(3) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC as implemented by
       the Asylum Seekers (Reception  Conditions)  Regulations  2005  ("the
       2005 Regulations"). Often referred to in shorthand as 'the  duty  to
       trace', it is more accurately described as a duty  to  endeavour  to
       trace. However, we adopt the common shorthand expression.


   17.  It is apparent from  [84]-[86]  of  his  determination  that  Judge
       Cameron concluded that the Respondent had  attempted  to  trace  the
       appellant's family. At [84], referring to the original  reasons  for
       refusal letter dated 12 February 2010 at [41], he stated  that  "the
       respondent must have made some attempt to  contact  the  appellant's
       family members in Afghanistan". The refusal letter states  that  "we
       are unable to make contact with your family members in Afghanistan".
       At [85] the judge repeated that it appeared that there had  been  an
       attempt to trace and at [86] stated  that  he  did  not  accept  the
       submission that there had been a failure to  exercise  the  duty  to
       trace.


   18. We are satisfied that Judge Cameron was wrong in his conclusion that
       the Respondent had undertaken any tracing duty. As is pointed out in
       Ms Radford's grounds,  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  14
       October 2013 makes it clear that there was no effort on the part  of
       the Respondent to undertake any tracing. At [55] it states that "You
       are now over 18 and family tracing has not been  conducted  in  your
       case." At [57] the letter states that "Consideration has been  given
       as to whether you have been disadvantaged due to the Home Office not
       initiating family tracing at this time." Paragraphs 61 and 62 of the
       refusal letter contain similar remarks.

   19. In submissions at the  hearing  before  Judge  Cameron  it  was  not
       suggested on behalf of the Respondent that there had been any effort
       to undertake tracing. Mr Melvin was similarly not able to provide us
       with any information on the point. Given the extent  to  which  this
       has been a live issue at least ever since the hearing  before  Judge
       Cameron, and taking into account what is said in the refusal  letter
       to which we have  referred,  we  are  entirely  satisfied  that  the
       respondent did fail to undertake the tracing duty  required  of  her
       under the 2005 Regulations, and in concluding otherwise there was an
       error of fact in the judge's decision amounting to an error of  law.
       However, it does not necessarily follow that it is an error  of  law
       requiring the decision to be set aside.

   20. Ms Radford submits that the failure of the respondent's duty in this
       regard may have had an impact on the  determination  of  the  asylum
       claim, and as an unaccompanied minor he would have been entitled  to
       refugee status.

   21. The  Court  of  Appeal  in  EU  (Afghanistan)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  32
       considered issues concerning cases where there was such a failure of
       the Secretary of State's duty. At [5] a passage from the judgment of
       Maurice Kay LJ in KA (Afghanistan) was cited, as follows:
             "There is a hypothetical spectrum. At one end is  an  applicant
             who gives a credible  and  cooperative  account  of  having  no
             surviving family in Afghanistan or of having  lost  touch  with
             surviving family members and having failed, notwithstanding his
             best endeavours, to re-establish contact. It seems to me  that,
             even if he has reached the age of 18 by the time his appeal  is
             considered by the tribunal, he may, depending on  the  totality
             of the established facts, have the basis of a successful appeal
             by availing himself of the Rashid/S principle and/or section 55
             by reference to the  failure  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
             discharge the duty to  endeavour  to  trace.  In  such  a  case
             Ravichandran would not be an insurmountable  obstacle.  At  the
             other end of the spectrum is an applicant whose claim  to  have
             no surviving  family  in  Afghanistan  is  disbelieved  and  in
             respect of whom it is found that he has been  uncooperative  so
             as to frustrate any attempt to trace  his  family.  In  such  a
             case, again depending on the totality of established facts,  he
             may have put himself beyond the  bite  of  the  protective  and
             corrective principle. This would not be because the  law  seeks
             to punish him for his mendacity but because he  has  failed  to
             prove the  risk  on  return  and  because  there  would  be  no
             causative link between the Secretary of State's breach of  duty
             and his claim to protection. Whereas, in the  first  case,  the
             applicant may have lost the opportunity  of  corroborating  his
             evidence  about  the  absence  of  support  in  Afghanistan  by
             reference to a negative result  from  the  properly  discharged
             duty to endeavour to trace, in the second case he can establish
             no such disadvantage."

   22. That  passage,  at  least  in  terms  of  what  is  said  about  the
       "protective and corrective  principle,  needs  to  be  read  in  the
       context of what is said in  [6]  of  EU  about  the  limits  of  the
       principle. There the Court said this:

             "I have to say that, like the Court of  Appeal  in  S,  I  have
             great difficulties with the judgments in Rashid. In cases  that
             are concerned with claims for asylum, the purpose of the  grant
             of leave to remain is to grant protection to someone who  would
             be at risk, or whose Convention rights would be  infringed,  if
             he or she was  returned  to  the  country  of  nationality.  Of
             course, breaches of the duty  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in
             addressing a claim may lead to an independent justification for
             leave to remain, of which the paradigm is the Article  8  claim
             of an asylum seeker whose  claim  has  not  been  expeditiously
             determined, with the result that he has been in this country so
             long as to have established private and family life  here.  But
             to grant leave to remain to someone who has no risk on  return,
             whose Convention rights will not be infringed  by  his  return,
             and who has no other independent claim to remain here (such  as
             a claim to be a skilled migrant), is to use the power to  grant
             leave to remain for a purpose other than that for which  it  is
             conferred. In effect, it is to accede to a claim to remain here
             as an economic  migrant.  The  principle  in  Rashid  has  been
             referred to as  "the  protective  principle",  but  this  is  a
             misnomer: the person seeking to rely on this principle needs to
             do so only because he has been found  not  to  be  in  need  of
             protection. I do not think that the  Court  should  require  or
             encourage the  Secretary  of  State  to  grant  leave  in  such
             circumstances either in order to mark the  Court's  displeasure
             at her conduct, or as a sanction for her misconduct."

   23. Returning to the relevance of the "hypothetical  spectrum"  referred
       to at [5] of EU, Judge Cameron set out the credibility findings made
       by Judge Walters as long ago as June 2010. In essence he found  that
       the appellant had not given a credible account of his brother having
       been abducted by the Taliban and of  the  appellant  himself  having
       been the subject of an attempted abduction or recruitment. The Panel
       of the Upper Tribunal found that there was no error of law in  Judge
       Walters' decision. Judge Cameron found in favour of the appellant in
       terms of his evidence of contact with his family.

   24. Following the principles  established  in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
       00702 Judge Cameron took  as  his  starting  point  the  credibility
       findings made by Judge Walters. He made his findings  in  line  with
       the decision of Judge Walters. He referred at [77] to the submission
       that "the respondent's duty to trace the appellant's  family  should
       enable me to go behind [Judge Walters'] finding given  that  it  was
       based on Judge Walters' view in relation to the  appellant's  family
       and his current contact with them."

   25. He referred to and quoted from various authorities relied on by  the
       appellant, including the two we have cited above.  He  made  further
       findings, at [90], that the appellant has no family with whom he  is
       in contact and at [92] that he had no family to whom he  could  turn
       for assistance in Afghanistan.

   26. Although Judge Cameron proceeded on the premise that the  Respondent
       had at least attempted tracing, a false premise as we have found, he
       considered  whether  the  failure  to  have  actually   traced   the
       appellant's family resulted in any prejudice or disadvantage to  the
       appellant. At [87] he stated that he did not accept that  "the  duty
       to trace" would have interfered with  Judge  Walters'  findings.  He
       concluded that the appellant had not suffered a disadvantage "by the
       respondent's inability to trace his family."

   27.  Whilst  therefore,  Judge  Cameron  wrongly  concluded   that   the
       respondent had at least attempted to trace the  appellant's  family,
       in our view his assessment of the asylum ground of appeal would  not
       have rendered any different outcome even had he concluded that there
       was a failure in the duty to endeavour to trace. The result in  both
       cases on Judge Cameron's analysis would have been the same.

   28. Of course, the  argument  before  us  depends  for  its  success  in
       establishing that had the respondent  in  fact  done  what  she  was
       required to do, and used her resources to  endeavour  to  trace  the
       appellant's family, at least using the contact details that he  had,
       the outcome might have been different. The appellant's family  might
       have provided information that would have supported  his  claim  for
       asylum.

   29.  However,  we  agree  with  Mr  Melvin's  submission  that  this  is
       speculative. In the first place, we bear in mind, as  Judge  Cameron
       did because he quoted the passage, what was said at [10]  of  EU  as
       follows:

             "Lastly, I should mention a point  made  by  the  Secretary  of
             State  which  I  consider  to  have  substance.   Unaccompanied
             children who arrive in this country from Afghanistan have  done
             so as a result of someone, presumably  their  families,  paying
             for their fare and/or for a so-called agent  to  arrange  their
             journey to this country. The costs incurred by the family  will
             have been considerable, relative to the wealth of  the  average
             Afghan family. The motivation for their incurring that cost may
             be that their child faces risk if he or she remains  with  them
             in Afghanistan, or it may simply  be  that  they  believe  that
             their child will have a better life  in  this  country.  Either
             way, they are unlikely to be happy to cooperate with  an  agent
             of the Secretary of State for the  return  of  their  child  to
             Afghanistan, which would mean the waste of their investment  in
             his or her journey here. "

   30. The point was  repeated  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  SHL  (Tracing
       obligation/Trafficking) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00312 (IAC) at [29].

   31. Secondly, and related, is  the  question  of  what  the  credibility
       findings were, first by Judge Walters  and  then  adopted  by  Judge
       Cameron. At [33] Judge Walters found that if any of the young men in
       the appellant's village had been forcibly abducted by the Taliban it
       would have been common knowledge within a few  hours  and  the  news
       would have spread amongst the appellant's school friends.  It  would
       appear, he concluded, that the appellant's family were the only ones
       targeted in this way,  the  appellant  having  said  that  this  was
       because the family are wealthy (at least comparatively).

   32. Building on that background at [37] he said that he did  not  accept
       as credible that the Taliban, with their assumed local knowledge and
       ability to penetrate the population, would have been unable to  find
       the appellant at his uncle's house during the one or two weeks  that
       he was hiding there. On the basis of the appellant's account, he did
       not find it credible that the appellant would have had to  undertake
       the long and dangerous journey to the UK when safety was  apparently
       available at his uncle's house. He did not accept that  the  family,
       whom the appellant described as wealthy, would not have been able to
       find a home to move to in Kabul.

   33. At [42], dealing with  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  was  in
       contact with his father by phone on his journey to the UK  and  that
       he failed  to  claim  asylum  in  Italy  or  France,  Judge  Walters
       concluded that the evidence suggests that the  appellant's  father's
       primary motive was to get the appellant to the UK,  rather  than  to
       the first safe country where he could claim asylum.

   34. What was said at [42] by Judge Walters is significant in the context
       of the passage we have quoted from [10] of EU. That, and  the  basis
       of  the  adverse  credibility  findings  made   by   Judge   Walters
       (undisturbed on appeal to the UT), lead to the conclusion  that  the
       failure of the Secretary of State to fulfil her  tracing  obligation
       would not have affected the outcome of the asylum  appeal.  Even  if
       the respondent had been able to make contact  with  the  appellant's
       family, it is not reasonably likely that any information would  have
       been forthcoming that would have provided any credible  support  for
       the appellant's claim. That conclusion itself is not speculation. It
       is rooted in the adverse  credibility  findings  to  which  we  have
       referred and is consistent with authority.

   35. We do not consider that there is  any  scope  for  any  "corrective"
       grant of leave as a result of the respondent's failure  of  duty  in
       relation  to  tracing.  The  appellant  is  not  a  person  who  has
       established that he is in need of protection in  the  terms  of  his
       claim for asylum, being a fear of the Taliban.

   36. It is to be remembered that the appellant is now 19 years of age, as
       he was at the time of the hearing before Judge Cameron.  There  was,
       and is, nothing to indicate that he is particularly  vulnerable.  We
       accept that there is no bright line  in  terms  of  age,  whereby  a
       person under 18 could be said to be vulnerable to  exploitation  and
       other dangers yet not so simply by reason of being just over 18. The
       Upper Tribunal has more than once concluded that  it  is  reasonable
       and not unduly harsh for a person in the  appellant's  situation  to
       relocate to Kabul.

   37. The UNHCR guidelines to  which  we  have  been  referred  themselves
       indicate that relocation to an area without family support would not
       cause undue hardship for single able-bodied men and married  couples
       without identified vulnerabilities who may in certain  circumstances
       be able to subsist without family and community support in urban and
       semi  urban  areas  that  have  the  necessary  infrastructure   and
       livelihood opportunities to meet the basic necessities of  life  and
       are  under  effective  government  control.  Kabul,  to  where   the
       appellant would be returned, is such a place.

   38. We do not consider that the evidence put before the First-tier judge
       establishes that in the appellant's home area there is a  threat  to
       the appellant's life  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  with
       reference to Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.  The
       skeleton argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal does refer
       at [21] to Laghman Province but only in terms of the COI report  for
       February 2013 at paragraphs 8.40-8.42, which does not  establish  an
       Article 15(c) risk.

   39. Judge Cameron did not accept that the appellant would be at risk  in
       his home area. Even if as has been suggested the background evidence
       does indicates a risk of indiscriminate violence in his  home  area,
       he would be able to live in Kabul, which is what the judge found. We
       do not consider  that  there  is  anything  in  the  evidence  which
       indicates that it would be unreasonable to expect him to do so.  The
       UNHCR guidelines do not reveal that it would be unreasonable for him
       to relocate to Kabul even without family support.

   40. We do not accept that Judge Cameron failed to take into account  the
       appellant's particular circumstances in assessing the reasonableness
       of internal relocation. At [101]  he  referred  to  the  appellant's
       "profile". There he refers to the appellant's age, then 19. At  [96]
       he  refers  to  the  appellant  being  an  intelligent  young   man,
       concluding that there was  no  reason  why  he  could  not  use  his
       education that he has obtained in the UK to assist him with work  in
       Afghanistan. At [97] he concludes that it would not be  unreasonable
       to expect the appellant to relocate to Kabul. He took into  account,
       referred to, and quoted from, various authorities that  were  relied
       on on behalf of the appellant  in  relation  to  the  situation  for
       returning children and young persons in Afghanistan.

   41. So far as Article 8 of the ECHR is concerned, it is clear from  [56]
       of the determination that the issue  of  delay  was  raised  at  the
       hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. The delay is said  to  arise
       in terms of the date of the application for further leave to  remain
       (23 February 2012) and the decision to refuse further leave which is
       dated 4 October 2013. That is period of almost 20 months. On  behalf
       of the appellant it is submitted that the  delay,  as  well  as  the
       unlawful failure in relation to the tracing duty, has an  impact  on
       the legitimate aim.

   42. On the point of pure delay alone, in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41, the
       House of Lords said this:
             "14. It does not, however, follow that delay in the  decision-
             making process is necessarily irrelevant to  the  decision.  It
             may, depending on the facts, be relevant in any  one  of  three
             ways. First, the applicant may during the period of  any  delay
             develop closer personal and social ties  and  establish  deeper
             roots in the community than he could have  shown  earlier.  The
             longer the period of the delay, the  likelier  this  is  to  be
             true. To the extent that it  is  true,  the  applicant's  claim
             under  article  8  will  necessarily  be  strengthened.  It  is
             unnecessary  to  elaborate  this  point  since  the  respondent
             accepts it.
             15.  Delay may be relevant in a second, less obvious, way.  An
             immigrant without leave  to  enter  or  remain  is  in  a  very
             precarious situation, liable to be removed  at  any  time.  Any
             relationship into which such an applicant enters is  likely  to
             be, initially, tentative, being entered into under  the  shadow
             of severance by administrative order. This  is  the  more  true
             where the other party to  the  relationship  is  aware  of  the
             applicant's precarious  position.  This  has  been  treated  as
             relevant to the quality of the relationship. Thus in R (Ajoh) v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 655,
             para 11, it was noted that "It was reasonable  to  expect  that
             both [the applicant] and her husband  would  be  aware  of  her
             precarious immigration status". This  reflects  the  Strasbourg
             court's listing of factors relevant to the  proportionality  of
             removing an immigrant convicted of crime: "whether  the  spouse
             knew about the offence at the time when he or she entered  into
             a family relationship" see Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR
             1179, para 48; Mokrani v France (2003) 40 EHRR 123, para 30.  A
             relationship so entered into may well be imbued with a sense of
             impermanence. But if months pass without a decision  to  remove
             being made, and months become years, and year succeeds year, it
             is to be expected that this sense of impermanence will fade and
             the expectation will grow that if the authorities had  intended
             to remove the applicant they would have taken steps to  do  so.
             This  result  depends  on  no  legal   doctrine   but   on   an
             understanding of how, in some cases, minds may work and it  may
             affect the proportionality of removal.
             16. Delay may be relevant, thirdly,  in  reducing  the  weight
             otherwise to be accorded to the requirements of firm  and  fair
             immigration control, if the delay is shown to be the result  of
             a dysfunctional system which yields unpredictable, inconsistent
             and unfair outcomes..."

   43. Although the point was raised before the First-tier judge he did not
       refer to it in his assessment of proportionality under Article 8. We
       are satisfied that in failing to do so he erred in law. However,  we
       do not consider that this is an  error  of  law  that  requires  the
       decision to be set aside because we are not satisfied that it is  an
       issue which could have affected the outcome of  the  appeal.  Twenty
       months delay is not a delay of such magnitude as to fall within  the
       first two categories described in EB, even taking into  account  the
       appellant's age at the date of decision or the length of  time  that
       he had been in the UK, which was about four years. Similarly, we  do
       not consider that the delay could be shown to be  the  result  of  a
       dysfunctional system which yields  unpredictable,  inconsistent  and
       unfair outcomes.

   44. The skeleton argument on behalf  of  the  appellant  emphasises  the
       importance of the tracing obligation in  terms  of  finding  durable
       solutions for separated children with a minimum of delay. It is said
       that  the  appellant's  private  life  was  established  whilst  the
       Secretary of State postponed  the  search  for  a  durable  solution
       through failing to trace the appellant's  parents,  and  during  the
       period of delay in dealing with the application which is the subject
       matter of this appeal.

   45. We do not accept that the combination of delay and  the  failure  of
       the Secretary  of  State  in  relation  to  the  tracing  obligation
       undermines the legitimate  aim,  expressed  in  shorthand  by  Judge
       Cameron as the maintenance of  immigration  control.  In  the  first
       place, for the reasons we have given we  do  not  regard  the  delay
       between the making of the application and  the  decision  to  refuse
       further leave to remain as being 'unlawful'. That it took  about  20
       months for a decision to be made in relation to the application  for
       further leave to remain does not mean that, once it was decided that
       the appellant had no basis for  being  granted  further  leave,  the
       respondent was not entitled to conclude that  he  should  leave  the
       country.

   46. We note the authorities referred  to  in  the  appellant's  skeleton
       argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal on the question  of
       what is described as "historic injustice". The first  of  the  cases
       cited is NH (India) [2007] EWCA Civ 133, said to relate to  Gurkhas.
       That citation however, is incorrect.  The  passage  quoted  in  fact
       comes from NH (Female BOCs, exceptionality, Art 8, para 317) British
       Overseas Citizens [2006] UKAIT 00085 which has nothing  to  do  with
       Gurkhas.  The other decision relied on is Patel,  Modha  and  Odedra
       [2010] EWCA Civ 17. However, in terms of the historical  wrong  that
       those cases were concerned with, those appellants would  potentially
       have been permitted settlement in the  UK  but  for  the  historical
       wrong. We do  not  consider  that,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  this
       appellant would, or even  might,  have  had  an  appeal  allowed  on
       Article 8 grounds or qualified for settlement, had the tracing  duty
       been undertaken.

   47.  The  further  contention  in  relation  to  Article   8   and   the
       determination of the First-tier Tribunal concerns the application of
       the 'Article 8' Immigration Rules. It is argued that the  First-tier
       judge impermissibly took into account that the appellant  failed  to
       meet the requirements of the 'Article 8' Rules. We were referred  to
       the decision in Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402 which  deals  with  the
       transitional  provisions   and   their   relationship   to   certain
       applications made before 9 July 2012. The  application  for  further
       leave to remain in the appeal before us  was  made  on  23  February
       2012.

   48. For present purposes we accept that the Article 8 Immigration  Rules
       did not apply to the appellant's case because  his  application  was
       made before 9 July 2012. However, we do not accept that  the  First-
       tier judge took into account in his  assessment  of  proportionality
       that the appellant was not able to meet the  requirements  of  those
       Rules. Under the sub-heading "Human rights and the 1950  Convention"
       Judge Cameron dealt in the first paragraph with  Article  3  of  the
       ECHR, concluding that the appellant was not able  to  succeed  under
       Article 3 in the light of his conclusions on the  asylum  ground  of
       appeal.

   49. In the next paragraph, [103], he stated that "With regard to article
       8 the appellant cannot meet the requirements under  the  immigration
       rules." There is then an assessment in 'pure' Article  8  terms  but
       without any reference to  the  appellant's  inability  to  meet  the
       requirements of the Article 8  Immigration  Rules.  At  [104],  when
       embarking on the 'pure' Article 8 assessment  the  paragraph  begins
       with the words "In relation to article 8  generally...".  That,  and
       the fact that there is no further reference to the inability to meet
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules makes it plain  that  when
       stating that the appellant was unable to meet those requirements the
       judge was simply stating a fact and thus no further consideration of
       the  Immigration  Rules  was  required.  Even  accepting  that   the
       Immigration Rules did not apply in any event, we do not accept  that
       the judge fell into error by taking  into  account  the  appellant's
       failure  to  meet  those  Rules.  That  formed  no   part   of   the
       proportionality assessment.

   50. In summary, whilst we are satisfied that the  First-tier  judge  did
       err in law in the respects to which we have referred,  those  errors
       of law are not such as to require the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to be set aside.

Decision

   51. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       however, is not set aside and the decision to dismiss the appeal  on
       all grounds therefore stands.







Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

We continue that order (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008)   and   consequently,   this   determination
identifies the appellant by initials only.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                     15/05/14
