
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09764/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 May 2015                       |On 29 May 2015                       |
|Prepared on 14 May 2015              |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. D.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins, Counsel, instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who travelled to the  United
         Kingdom on 22 February 2012 by air, using a  genuine  passport  and
         visa. He had been granted entry  clearance  as  a  family  visitor,
         following a successful appeal to the Tribunal. He claimed asylum on
         the last day of his leave on the basis that he was a homosexual who
         had experienced  persecution  in  Zimbabwe  on  the  basis  of  his
         sexuality in the past, and feared that in  the  event  he  were  to
         return he would experience a repeat of that behaviour.

      2. On 24 October 2014 the Respondent refused the asylum claim  and  in
         consequence made a decision to refuse to vary his  leave  to  enter
         the UK, and to remove him to Zimbabwe. The Respondent  accepted  on
         the applicable low standard of  proof  that  the  Appellant  was  a
         homosexual.

      3. The Appellant lodged an appeal with the First Tier Tribunal against
         those immigration decisions, which was heard and dismissed by Judge
         Lloyd in a decision promulgated on 15 January 2015.

      4. The Appellant applied to the First Tier Tribunal for permission  to
         appeal, which was granted by Judge Chambers on 17 February 2015. It
         was  considered  arguable  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  apply
         concessions of fact made by the Respondent, and in turn had  failed
         to properly apply the guidance to be found in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC
         31.

      5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on 12 March 2015  and  argued
         that the Judge directed himself appropriately and properly  applied
         the country guidance case of LZ (homosexuals)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]
         UKUT 487.

      6. Thus the matter comes before me.

         Concessions by the Respondent?

      7. The first ground asserts that the Judge  failed  to  adopt  and  to
         apply concessions of fact made by the Respondent, and that he  went
         behind them in his evaluation of the  evidence.  Three  concessions
         are said to have been made.

      8.  The  first  concession  asserted  is  that  the  Appellant  is   a
         homosexual, as accepted by the Respondent in paragraph  31  of  the
         letter giving her reasons for her decisions. There is no  merit  in
         the complaint that the  Judge  failed  to  adopt  this  concession,
         because the Judge expressly accepted the concession  and  that  the
         Appellant was a homosexual at paragraph 38 of his decision.

      9. The second concession asserted is that the Appellant  had  suffered
         past persecution in 2004 (as a schoolboy), and in 2010 in Bulawayo,
         on account of his sexual identity. No such concession  was  however
         made by the Respondent. She  accepted  only  that  there  had  been
         isolated  incidents  of  discrimination  and  violence  whilst   in
         Zimbabwe at paragraphs 30, 31, and 43  of  the  letter  giving  her
         reasons for her decisions. Neither in advance of the  hearing,  nor
         at  the  hearing,  were  any  further  concessions  made   by   the
         Respondent. Thus the draftsman of  the  grounds  (not  Ms  Wilkins)
         significantly overstates the concession that was actually made.

     10. There is no merit in the complaint that the Judge failed to  accept
         or adopt the concession that was actually made. It is  quite  clear
         from the decision that he did accept the concession in the terms in
         which it was made. The Judge  considered  with  adequate  care  the
         evidence concerning the nature of the incidents relied upon by  the
         Appellant, who was responsible for them, and the  circumstances  in
         which they had occurred in the context of the exercise that he  was
         bound  to  undertake.  That  was  not  to  consider  whether  these
         incidents had occurred (because  that  was  not  in  dispute),  but
         whether the fact that  they  had  occurred  demonstrated  that  the
         Appellant had experienced persecution in the past, and faced a real
         risk of persecution in the event he should return to his home area.
         If so, whether it was reasonable to expect him to  relocate  within
         Zimbabwe to avoid  that  risk.  That  is  the  exercise  the  Judge
         conducted in paragraphs 38 and 39 of the decision and there  is  no
         basis for the complaint that he was going behind the concession  of
         fact that had actually been made. On the contrary when the decision
         is read as a whole, it is perfectly  clear  that  the  Judge  quite
         properly took the concession that the Respondent had actually  made
         as his starting point.

     11. The third concession asserted is said to be  a  concession  to  the
         effect that the Appellant would live an openly gay life in Zimbabwe
         in the event of his return. Put shortly the Respondent  never  made
         such  a  concession.  Paragraph  39  of  the  letter   giving   the
         Respondent's reasons for her decision, which is relied upon by  the
         Appellant as the location of the concession asserted, simply states
         in terms the  Respondent's  view  that  an  openly  gay  person  in
         Zimbabwe would not be liable to a level of harm that  would  amount
         to persecution.

     12. Accordingly there is no merit in the first ground as drafted.

     13. Before turning to the  second  ground  I  should  add  that  in  my
         judgement there is no basis for the criticisms that  were  advanced
         by the draftsman of ground one (albeit not by Ms  Wilkins)  of  the
         Judge's approach to  the  credibility  of  either  the  Appellant's
         mother, or indeed the Appellant himself. The Appellant's mother was
         upon her own admission an unreliable witness, perfectly prepared to
         tailor what she said to the Tribunal on  different  occasions,  and
         for different purposes [30]. Nor was the Appellant entitled to have
         all that he might say in evidence accepted without question. On  my
         judgement  the  Judge  did  no  more  than  take  the  Respondent's
         concessions of primary fact as his starting point and then go on to
         consider the weight that could be given to the rest of the evidence
         relied upon. Whilst  he  made  no  express  reference  to  it,  his
         approach was entirely consistent with the guidance to be  found  in
         Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318. I accept as Ouseley  J  did
         in CJ (on the application of R) v  Cardiff  County  Council  [2011]
         EWHC 23, the  importance  of  the  approach  referred  to  therein.
         Documentary evidence along with its provenance needs to be  weighed
         by the Tribunal in the light of  all  the  evidence  in  the  case.
         Documentary evidence does  not  carry  with  it  a  presumption  of
         authenticity, which specific evidence must  disprove,  and  failing
         which its content must be accepted. Nor does the oral evidence from
         a witness called in support of an  appeal  carry  with  it  such  a
         presumption. What is required of the Tribunal is  an  appraisal  of
         the weight that can be given  to  the  different  elements  of  the
         evidence relied upon, in the  light  of  its  content,  provenance,
         timing, the background evidence and in the light of all  the  other
         evidence in the case.

         The HJ (Iran) point

     14. The second ground criticises the Judge for  following  the  country
         guidance case of LZ (homosexuals)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]  UKUT  487,
         apparently on the basis that it was promulgated in January 2012 and
         that there was evidence before the Judge which would have permitted
         him to conclude that the situation in Zimbabwe for  homosexual  men
         had deteriorated significantly since that date.

     15. The headnote in LZ reads as follows;

             (i)  There  has  been  much  public  expression   of   extreme
             homophobia at the highest levels in recent years.

             (ii)  Male   homosexual   behaviour   is   criminalised,   but
             prosecutions are very rare. Lesbianism is not criminalised.

             (iii) Some homosexuals suffer discrimination,  harassment  and
             blackmail from the general public and  the  police.  Attempted
             extortion, false complaints and unjustified detentions are not
             so prevalent as to pose a general risk. There are  no  records
             of any murders with a homophobic element. "Corrective rape" is
             rare, and does not represent a general risk.

             (iv) There is a "gay scene," within limitations.

             (v) Lesbians, living  on  their  own  or  together,  may  face
             greater difficulties than gay men.

             (vi) GALZ (Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe)  takes  a  realistic
             view: Zimbabwe is "not the worst place in the world to be  gay
             or lesbian even though the President, government officials and
             church  leaders  have  whipped  up  a  climate  of  hysterical
             homophobia."

             (vii) Applying HJ & HT [2010] UKSC  31,  [2010]  Imm  AR  729,
             there is no  general  risk  to  gays  or  lesbians.   Personal
             circumstances place some gays and lesbians at risk.   Although
             not decisive on its own, being openly gay may  increase  risk.
             A  positive  HIV/AIDS  diagnosis  may  be   a   risk   factor.
             Connections with the elite do not increase risk.

             (viii) The police  and  other  state  agents  do  not  provide
             protection.

             (ix) A homosexual at risk in his or  her  community  can  move
             elsewhere, either in the same city or to another part  of  the
             country.  He or she might choose to relocate to where there is
             greater tolerance, such as Bulawayo, but the choice of  a  new
             area is not  restricted.   The  option  is  excluded  only  if
             personal circumstances present risk throughout the country.

     16. The Appellant does not put his case so high as to suggest that  the
         Judge was bound not to follow that country guidance, and indeed  he
         could not do so. This was not a situation for example in which  one
         or more of the various NGOs who had given  evidence  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal in LZ had provided further evidence to the Judge either to
         withdraw, or, to significantly qualify, the evidence that they  had
         given to the Upper Tribunal in LZ. In particular  the  report  that
         was said to have been produced by GALZ into incidents in the Harare
         area in the period 2012-3 did not seek to do so  [ApB  p174-],  and
         nor did the report into incidents in 2011  [ApB  p233-].  Curiously
         those reports made no reference at all to  the  evidence  that  had
         been given by GALZ to the Upper Tribunal in LZ.

     17. I have gone through all of the  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
         placed before the Judge, and which had been  relied  upon  to  show
         that  the  situation  faced  by  homosexual  men  in  Zimbabwe  had
         deteriorated to a material extent  since  the  decision  in  LZ  in
         October 2011. I accept that this evidence was  entirely  consistent
         with the sadly all too typical picture  of  an  increase  in  anti-
         homosexual rhetoric in the period immediately prior  to  Zimbabwean
         elections. Elections were held in Zimbabwe on 31 July 2013, but the
         hearing of this appeal occurred in January 2015 when there were  no
         elections imminent.

     18. GALZ was one of the  NGOs  that  provided  evidence  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal in LZ, and a group with whom Dr Oliver Phillips  had  been
         connected, and its ability  to  operate,  and  the  nature  of  the
         support it provided to individuals in Zimbabwe  seeking  help  were
         the subject of the expert evidence of Dr Oliver Phillips [8,  32-4,
         41, 44-7, 54-7, 67-72, 82-3, 104-110, and 116]. Since GALZ did  not
         provide evidence in this appeal to update the evidence  offered  in
         LZ the Judge was entitled, and indeed probably obliged, to consider
         in the light of the evidence as a whole that there was no change to
         the evidence reviewed in LZ. The evidence that  was  placed  before
         him did not indicate that GALZ were  no  longer  able  to  organise
         social events for its members in Harare, or that  the  9  different
         regional groups and associations affiliated to  it  had  ceased  to
         function. Moreover there was no reason to alter the conclusion that
         public expressions of homophobia remained politically inspired, and
         as GALZ itself has always stated, a political tool. The finding  in
         LZ  was  that  the  background  to  these  public  expressions   of
         homophobia was public indifference to  homosexuality,  rather  than
         societal homophobia, and that there was a clear distinction  to  be
         drawn with the culture of other countries such as Jamaica,  whereas
         the applicant's case in LZ was that societal attitudes were similar
         to those in Jamaica.

     19. There was no evidence before the Judge that suggested either  WOZA,
         or Dr Oliver Phillips had been asked to review, or  to  alter,  the
         evidence that they had offered to the Tribunal in LZ.

     20. The Tribunal's conclusion in LZ [106] was that there was an absence
         of evidence to suggest that either the Zimbabwean  authorities,  or
         non state agents, persecuted homosexuals to any significant extent.
         Extortion,  sometimes  with  police  connivance,   was   the   best
         documented risk, but even that was not very  common,  and  GALZ  in
         particular had developed effective strategies for dealing  with  it
         when its assistance was sought. The formality of the law,  and  the
         vehemence of some of the public rhetoric were not  matched  by  the
         reality. Whilst GALZ had always been careful to operate within  the
         law, if the authorities had wished to  close  GALZ  down  no  legal
         impediment would have prevented them from doing so.  Thus  although
         it led an uncertain existence, GALZ was able to continue to operate
         within a degree of tacit official and social tolerance. It is plain
         from the material before the Judge that it continued to  do  so  at
         the date of the hearing of the appeal.

     21. Without repeating the summary of the evidence set out in LZ, it  is
         plain that the evidence that was placed before  the  Judge  in  the
         course of this appeal did not come close to establishing that there
         had been  a  significant  deterioration  in  the  position  of  the
         homosexual  community   within   Zimbabwe   since   October   2011.
         Accordingly there was no error of law in the  Judge's  decision  to
         apply the guidance of LZ to the evidence before him.

     22. Ultimately Ms Wilkins' argument was no more than that the Judge had
         disposed of the objective evidence too briefly,  and  that  had  he
         considered it in greater depth, he might have come to  a  different
         view. This is in reality no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
         conclusions that the Judge did reach. His  decision  shows  clearly
         that he did engage with the evidence relied upon  of  incidents  of
         homophobic assaults, and he gave adequate reasons for the  decision
         that he reached.

     23. Indeed what is plain is that the  Appellant  singularly  failed  to
         address in the course of his appeal the direct  evidence  that  was
         before the Tribunal in LZ from the various NGOs in  Zimbabwe  about
         the attitudes within Zimbabwe towards homosexuality, the ability to
         live without fear of persecution as a homosexual, and  the  ability
         to live as an openly gay person in Zimbabwe. Ms  Wilkins  confirmed
         that there was no expert evidence relied upon, and no authoritative
         evidence from the NGOs concerned. Instead the Appellant relied upon
         a series of news  articles,  said  to  have  been  taken  from  the
         internet. The decision shows that the Judge had a proper regard  to
         that evidence, and considered its reliability. He concluded that it
         did not add to, or change, the overall picture formed by the  Upper
         Tribunal in LZ [33]. That was a decision he was entitled to  reach,
         and he was not obliged to set out each and every document  produced
         by the Appellant in doing so.

     24. It is abundantly clear from a fair reading of  his  decision  as  a
         whole that the Judge had well in mind the guidance to be  found  in
         LZ and the evidence upon which that guidance had been based.

     25. The remainder of the second  ground  relies  upon  the  Appellant's
         assertion that the Respondent made a third concession in the  terms
         that were asserted by the draftsman of  ground  one.  As  explained
         above there was no such concession. The Respondent  never  conceded
         that the Appellant would choose not to lead an openly gay life  out
         of fear. The Judge reviewed the evidence  and  also  rejected  that
         assertion for the reasons that he gave, which  were  adequate.  The
         Judge was perfectly entitled to have regard to the Appellant's  own
         evidence about how he behaved at church, and with fellow members of
         his congregation [18]. The Appellant had said that when  with  that
         group he chose not to act or dress in such a way as to  flaunt  his
         sexuality, not out of fear, but because of a desire for  acceptance
         by that community and a desire to  avoid  embarrassment.  That  was
         significant evidence which went to the heart of how  the  Appellant
         was genuinely likely to behave in the event of return, and  how  he
         behaved generally when living in Bulawayo.

     26. The Judge was entitled on the evidence before him to conclude  that
         the Appellant's evidence as to how he behaved  when  at  Church  or
         with members of his congregation was at odds with his  evidence  of
         how he behaved generally [18]. He was entitled to conclude that  he
         had not told the truth about how he behaved,  and  his  mannerisms,
         that would allow his identification as a  gay  man  [38].  He  gave
         adequate reasons for both findings.

     27. The Appellant has never had been an  activist  for  gay  rights  in
         Zimbabwe, and he did not claim to have become one in  the  UK.  The
         Judge therefore gave adequate reasons for his decision  to  decline
         to accept that he would become  one  in  the  event  of  return  to
         Zimbabwe.

     28. Given the credibility difficulties identified by the Judge, he  was
         perfectly entitled to reach the conclusions that he did  about  the
         level of  incidents  of  verbal  and  physical  violence  that  the
         Appellant had actually experienced in the  past  in  Bulawayo,  his
         home area, and that it was a group of  only  six  non-state  agents
         known to the Appellant who were principally  responsible  for  them
         [38]. That left the Appellant  able  to  relocate  within  Bulawayo
         itself to avoid that group of individuals,  since  it  is  a  major
         city, or to do so more generally within  Zimbabwe.  The  Judge  was
         entitled to reach the conclusion that it was  not  unreasonable  to
         expect him to do so. Moreover the Judge was entitled to  reach  the
         conclusion that the evidence suggested strongly that in  truth  the
         Appellant's approach to his sexuality would by inclination continue
         to be one of discretion by personal choice, and not  out  of  fear,
         notwithstanding the evidence that he had given to the  effect  that
         he would wish to live as an openly gay man. The Judge gave adequate
         reasons for his findings, and the Appellant's  criticisms  of  them
         are in reality  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
         assessment of the evidence.

DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    15 January 2015 therefore contained no error of law in the dismissal of
    the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 14 May 2015

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.



Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 14 May 2015

