
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09905/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination  Sent        |
|On 16th June 2014                               |On  14th July 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                                MISS AWA JOBE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Akindele
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st January 1968 is a citizen of the Gambia.  The
    Appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  Akindele.   The   Respondent   was
    represented by Mr Harrison, a Home Office Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2001  and  thereafter
    remained unlawfully until she claimed asylum on 24th  July  2012.   The
    Respondent had refused the Appellant's application for asylum  and  had
    also refused her discretionary leave  to  remain.   The  Appellant  had
    appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ennals on 13th March 2014.  The judge had allowed her  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.  The Respondent had made application for permission  to
    appeal on grounds which are contained on  file  and  dated  26th  March
    2014.  Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Williams on 10th April 2014 on the basis that the matters raised by the
    Respondent had merit and arguably raised an error of law.   The  matter
    comes before me in accordance with directions to firstly  consider  the
    question of error of law.

The Respondent's Submissions

 3. Mr Harrison relied upon the Grounds  of  Appeal.   Essentially  it  was
    submitted that the judge had  found  that  close  relatives  of  people
    involved in the coup were likely to  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    Gambian authorities but that the findings  made  in  the  determination
    were findings that it was simply those involved in the coup  who  would
    be at risk.  It was further submitted that the judge had failed to give
    reasons or adequate  reasons  for  findings  made  and  had  failed  to
    consider the position of the Appellant's four children who had lived in
    Gambia throughout the time and was still there.

The Appellant's Submissions

 4. It was submitted that no error had been made by the  judge  and  I  was
    referred to documents within the Appellant's bundle and also paragraphs
    within the determination where it was submitted that adequate  findings
    had been made based on the evidence available and that no error of  law
    had been made by the judge.

 5. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider  this  matter.   I
    now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. It was agreed evidence that there had been an  attempted  coup  in  the
    Gambia in March 2006 and that the coup had been organised by a group of
    army officers led by Colonel Chan, former Chief of Defence  staff.   It
    had further been  noted  that  information  to  that  effect  had  been
    available from 22nd March 2006 onwards.

 7. The Respondent in paragraphs 15 to 24 of the  refusal  letter  had  not
    explicitly accepted the Appellant was the second wife of  Colonel  Chan
    or related to two others allegedly arrested and detained.  Neither  had
    the Respondent explicitly rejected  that  claim.   The  Respondent  had
    however  raised  a  number  of  factors  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility generally and specifically had  placed  no  weight  on  the
    documents that had been provided by her that allegedly went to proof of
    the marriage and family relationship and had referred to  the  case  of
    Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 at paragraph 23 of the refusal letter.
      Further it had specifically not been accepted that there was credible
    evidence to demonstrate that even if related as claimed family  members
    would be at risk and in that respect note had been made of the fact the
    Appellant had come to the UK and remained unlawfully from as  early  as
    2001, had made no application for asylum in  March  2006  and  although
    claimed to have gone to various solicitors was unable  to  provide  any
    such details, had not reported a passport allegedly lost in 2003  until
    2012.  The evidence also disclosed that the  Appellant  had  apparently
    gone to the Gambian Embassy in 2012 to obtain a  new  passport  despite
    her claim to have a fear of persecution.  It  had  further  been  noted
    that articles that Colonel Chan had been arrested with his  first  wife
    and family although no evidence had been provided  that  the  wife  and
    family had been arrested.  There had also been evidence provided by the
    Appellant herself that she had four children  in  the  Gambia  who  had
    remained throughout this period of time.

 8. The credibility of the Appellant  and  her  claim  were  therefore  not
    insignificant and perhaps even central features to the determination of
    this case.  The documents provided by the Appellant particularly  those
    that allegedly demonstrated the family relationships  as  claimed  were
    documents that  needed  to  be  examined  in  the  round  as  to  their
    reliability or otherwise.

 9. There were clearly a not insubstantial number of matters that  required
    resolving by the judge by an examination of that evidence in the round.
     The assessment of the  evidence  and  conclusions  in  this  case  are
    relatively brief and whilst that in itself may not necessary reflect  a
    difficulty or a lack of scrutiny there  were  matters  of  significance
    highlighted by the Respondent that were not dealt with adequately or at
    all.

10. The Appellant had made reference to  the  arrest  of  her  brother  who
    allegedly was  the  Accountant  General  for  the  Government  and  was
    intended to be the next President  of  Gambia  if  the  coup  had  been
    successful.  On the face of it that would place  him  in  an  extremely
    significant  position  alongside  Colonel  Chan  and  would   therefore
    logically put at risk his family i.e. members of  the  Appellant's  own
    family.  The Appellant within her interview record  had  recorded  that
    within the Gambia she had her  parents,  three  other  brothers  and  a
    sister.  There appears to have been no reconciliation of whether or not
    they had suffered as a result of the alleged family ties.

11. It is also noteworthy that in paragraph 25 of the determination  whilst
    acknowledging  that  the   Respondent   had   raised   several   issues
    inconsistent or unsatisfactory about the Appellant's  case  which  were
    then listed by the judge, she did not specifically address and  comment
    on those aspects of the  Appellant's  account  having  already  made  a
    decision on the case itself.  Those matters  listed  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph  25  were  not  insignificant  matters  on  the  question  of
    credibility of the Appellant's account and by extension reliability  of
    documents  provided  and  whilst  not  an  exhaustive  list   certainly
    indicated the judge was aware of a number of  credibility  issues  that
    had been raised both within the refusal letter and at  the  hearing  by
    the Presenting Officer.

12. In a case of this nature upon which  credibility  was  central  and  in
    light of which documents needed to be examined as to reliability it was
    incumbent upon the judge to have considered those matters  clearly  put
    in dispute in an examination of the evidence in the round.  Her failure
    to consider those matters in that way and not to  have  resolved  those
    matters when examining the evidence as a whole was an error of law.  If
    those matters had been examined in the round it may well have presented
    a different view on credibility and plausibility and in turn  may  have
    led to a different conclusion.  To that extent the failure to deal with
    significant and contentious issues and a failure to  consider  them  in
    the round when assessing credibility generally amounts  to  a  material
    error of law.

Decision

13. I find the judge made a material error of law in this  case  such  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and that  decision
    needs to be remade.






Signed                          Date 20.06.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

