
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09457/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 July 2019                             |On 10 July 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DLR
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr C Howells Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mrs M Chaggar instructed by Central England Law Centre



                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Butler who on  15  February  2018  allowed  DLR's
       appeal on human rights grounds.




Background


    2. DLR is a citizen of Iraq born on 1 February 1986.

    3. The Judge notes at [2] of  the  decision  under  challenge  that  DLR
       entered the UK illegally on 28  September  2003  and  claimed  asylum
       which was refused. On or around 26 September 2005 DLR  was  convicted
       of robbery and  sentenced  to  20  months  imprisonment  in  a  Young
       Offenders Institution. An order for DLR's  deportation  was  made  in
       2008 after which removal directions were set  for  29  November  2010
       which was aborted. This matter has a long  procedural  history  which
       need not be repeated in full for the purpose of this decision.

    4. In early 2017 DLR claimed he will face a real risk on return to  Iraq
       as a result of having converted to Christianity which was  considered
       as a fresh claim by the Secretary of State. The Judge dismissed  that
       aspect of the claim on the basis it was not found that any conversion
       was genuine or that the appellant had  established  a  real  risk  on
       return entitling him to a grant of international protection.

    5. The Judge thereafter considered submissions regarding the appellant's
       psychiatric condition but did not find there would  be  a  breach  of
       article 3 ECHR. Neither the dismissal of  the  protection  claims  or
       rejection of the claim  on  medical  grounds  has  been  successfully
       challenged by DLR.

    6. In relation to article 8 the Judge found DLR was  unable  to  succeed
       under the Immigration Rules for although it is accepted he  is  in  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife, who is  a  British
       citizen and in the UK, the relationship was not formed at a time when
       DLR was in the UK lawfully -  paragraph  399(b)  of  the  Immigration
       Rules refers.

    7. In relation to article 8 ECHR, the Judge sets out  relevant  findings
       from [39 - 50] of the  decision  under  challenge.  Based  upon  such
       analysis and findings the Judge allowed the appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds at [51].

    8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was  granted
       on a renewed application by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  who  also
       dismissed DLR's renewed application  for  permission  to  appeal  the
       protection findings. The operative part of the grant of permission is
       in the following terms:

           "2.    The Respondent's grounds are in essence  that  the  Judge
                has failed properly to apply  the  test  of  whether  it  is
                unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife to remain  in  the  UK
                without him. There is no challenge the Judge's finding  that
                she could not return with him to Iraq. It is  accepted  that
                the Judge refers to it being "very harsh" for her to  remain
                without him but it is submitted that this does not  disclose
                a proper assessment of  the  Article  8  rights  versus  the
                public interest having particular regard to section 117C  of
                the 2002 Act.

           3.     To  have  regard  to  the  period  since  the  Appellants
                offending. It is also the case that the Appellant's wife has
                medical issues (although as  the  Respondent  notes  in  his
                grounds, the  Judge  accepted  that  she  has  other  family
                members who can assist the and there  was  limited  evidence
                about the extent to which the Appellant is involved  in  her
                care).

           4.     The Judge does mention  section  117C  and  the  case  of
                Hesham Ali  in the section  leading  up  to  his  assessment
                ([38]  -  [39]).  However,  when  it  comes  to  making  the
                assessment in particular at [49] of the Decision, the  Judge
                expressly  leaves  section  117C  entirely  out  of  account
                because he considers that  the  Appellant  is  no  longer  a
                threat to public order. That ignores that the Appellant is a
                "foreign criminal" for the purposes of  section  117D,  that
                the Judge is directed by section 117A to take  into  account
                section 117C where that applies  and  that  section  117C(1)
                provides that deportation of a foreign criminal  is  in  the
                public interest. Whilst it may be open to a  Judge  to  find
                that the public interest in deportation is diminished by the
                passage of time  and  the  threat  of  level  posed,  it  is
                arguably not open to the Judge  to  disregard  that  section
                completely as he has done. What  is  said  at  [49]  of  the
                decision in particular,  therefore,  discloses  an  arguable
                error of law."

Error of law


    9. It is important to consider the actual findings  made  by  the  Judge
       relevant to the issues in hand. At [39] the Judge writes:

           "39.   A deportation order has been made against  the  appellant
                and section 117C(1) provides that the deportation of foreign
                criminals  is  in  the  public  interest.  Section   117C(3)
                provides that in the case of a foreign criminal who has  not
                been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of more than four
                years, the public interest requires his deportation  unless,
                inter alia, he has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
                with a qualifying partner and the effect of his  deportation
                on that partner would be unduly harsh."

   10. The Judge was clearly aware of  the  specific  provision  of  section
       117C(1) and the weight to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  when
       considering  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.  It   is   not
       established that having recorded an awareness of such  provision  the
       Judge then completely  ignored  it  when  undertaking  the  necessary
       proportionality assessment.

   11. The Judge finds at [43], when considering the medical evidence,  that
       "it would be totally unrealistic to assume that  the  appellant  does
       not assist his wife greatly with her various problems. She  confirmed
       in evidence that she is dependent upon him and panics if she wakes in
       the night and he is not by her side. There is also evidence that  she
       is considered to be disabled for benefit purposes." At [49] the Judge
       finds DLR's wife's evidence to be genuine and sincere.

   12. The  Judge  finds  this  is  a  family  splitting  case  which  is  a
       sustainable finding on the evidence. The Judge also  deals  with  the
       issue of delay noting that as a result of the respondent's  delay  in
       removing DLR his relationship with his wife became  more  established
       [49].

   13. The Judge notes that whilst the  number  of  factors  fall  in  DLR's
       favour it was born in mind he never has had leave to  remain  in  the
       United Kingdom and has frustrated attempts to remove him [48].

   14. At [49] the Judge writes:

           "49.   The legitimate aim in this appeal is the  maintenance  of
                effective immigration controls and the need to  act  in  the
                economic interests of the country. I  do  not  consider  the
                appellant to be a threat to public order of  any  kind.  The
                appellant's wife's  evidence  was  genuine  and  sincere.  I
                consider she would suffer very  harsh  consequences  if  the
                appellant was deported."

   15. Mr Howells refers  to  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
       (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and the decision of the Upper Tribunal in RA
       (s. 117C: "unduly harsh";  offence:  seriousness)  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT
       00123 in support of his submission that the "unduly harsh" test has a
       threshold and that when assessing whether this had  been  crossed  it
       was necessary that the guidance provided in  the  case  law  must  be
       followed.

   16. Mr Howells submitted that at [49] of the decision under challenge the
       Judge specifically states that removal of DLR  will  result  in  very
       harsh consequences which is said not to be the correct test.

   17. The Supreme Court found  that  "unduly  harsh"  introduces  a  higher
       hurdle than one of "reasonableness" found in section  117B  and  that
       "unduly" goes beyond the level of "harshness" that may be  acceptable
       or justifiable in the relevant context.

   18. The seriousness of DLR's offending  is  recognised  by  the  sentence
       passed upon him in 2005 of 20 months at a Young Offenders  Institute.
       The Judge accepts the offence  was  serious  but  recognised  it  was
       committed when DLR was much younger [47]. The Judge  notes  that  DLR
       has not reoffended and that there was no evidence that he was  likely
       to offend again in the future. The Upper Tribunal in RA  specifically
       comment upon the issue of rehabilitation at  [33]  in  the  following
       terms:

           "33.   As a more general point, the fact an individual  has  not
                committed further offences, since release from prison, it is
                highly unlikely to  have  a  material  bearing,  given  that
                everyone is expected not  to  commit  crime.  Rehabilitation
                will therefore normally  do  no  more  than  show  that  the
                individual has returned to the place where  society  expects
                him (and everybody else) to be. There is, in other words, no
                material weight  which  ordinarily  falls  to  be  given  to
                rehabilitation  in  the  proportionality  balance  (see   SE
                (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
                [2014] EWCA Civ 256, paragraphs 48 to 56). Nevertheless,  as
                so  often  in  the  field  of  human  rights,   one   cannot
                categorically say that rehabilitation will never be  capable
                of playing a significant role (see LG (Colombia) v Secretary
                of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1225).  Any
                judicial departure from the norm would, however, need to  be
                fully reasoned."

   19. Although RA was not  handed  down  until  after  the  decision  under
       challenge the  authorities  relied  upon  in  support  of  the  above
       proposition are those that would have been available to the Judge  at
       the date of promulgating the decision under challenge.

   20. I do not find the Judge has materially  erred  in  relation  to  this
       matter for although  clearly  taking  into  account  the  appellant's
       history the Judge's  observation  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
       appellant had reoffended or was likely to offend in the future  is  a
       statement which, based on the material made available,  is  factually
       correct. The Judge may have erred at [48] when  indicating  that  the
       lack of offending and other matters set out our matters which fall in
       the appellant's favour but it is not made out  that  disproportionate
       weight was given to the same  such  sufficient  to  have  an  adverse
       impact upon the lawfulness of the decision under challenge.

   21. As noted above, the Judge refers to section 117C(1) of the  2002  Act
       and I do not find it made out  in  the  submissions  that  the  Judge
       placed inappropriate weight upon the same as part  of  the  balancing
       exercise. Whilst the Judge's statement at [49]  that  the  legitimate
       aim was the maintenance of effective immigration control or  need  to
       act in the economic interests of  the  country,  which  is  factually
       correct in relation to straightforward article 8 assessment,  may  be
       too simplistic as there  are  additional  factors  in  a  deportation
       appeal reflected in section 117C(1) and  in  some  circumstances  the
       deterrent factor, it is not made out those  additional  factors  were
       not properly considered.

   22. Mr Howells further submitted the Judge erred in law as greater weight
       should have been given to the fact DLR's wife has family  members  in
       the United Kingdom to whom she would be able  to  turn  for  help  if
       required.

   23. The Judge noted the issue of family and is important to consider  the
       nature of DLR's wife's medical condition and  the  specific  findings
       regarding the family set out at [41 - 43] in the following terms:

           "41.   When the previous the first-Tier  Tribunal  decision  was
                set aside, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede noted that there  was
                no evidence that the appellant's life was dependent upon him
                for her care. The appellant has produced at page 36  of  his
                latest bundle a medical report from his wife's  GP  dated  9
                June  2017.  This  report  was  written  by   reference   to
                electronic records from 2008. It records  that  she  suffers
                from anxiety and depression  for  which  she  is  prescribed
                antidepressant  medication.   Whilst   the   symptoms   were
                initially related to her first partner is suicide, they  are
                now reported as relating to fears that the appellant will be
                deported and persistent stress from the uncertainty  of  his
                immigration status. His deportation would be likely to  have
                a significant negative impact on her mental health. She also
                suffers from hypertension which is stable on the  medication
                she  currently  takes  for  it.  She   also   suffers   from
                haemorrhoids, anal fissure and  previous  anal  fistula  for
                which she had surgery in 2014. She remains under the care of
                a colon rectal surgeon and reports ongoing difficulties with
                anal pain and faecal urge. The final medical issue noted  in
                the GPs report is alpha trait thalassaemia.

           42.    Commenting on  the  appellant's  wife's  various  medical
                conditions, the GP states that the hypertension, alpha trait
                thalassaemia and fistula are major problems and the rest are
                described as minor problems.

           43.    But the report is completely  silent  on  the  extent  to
                which the appellant gives personal care to  his  wife.  This
                was an issue before the Upper Tribunal which  has  not  been
                addressed  in  the  appeal  before  me.   Indeed,   in   his
                submissions, Mr Vokes makes reference to  her  close  family
                members in the UK (which excludes the  appellant)  and  upon
                whom she relies. Having acknowledged that, it is clear  that
                the  appellant's  wife   suffers   from   debilitating   and
                embarrassing medical problems.  There  is  evidence  in  the
                bundle of a special toilet facility being installed in their
                home and it would be totally unrealistic to assume that  the
                appellant does not assist his wife greatly with the  various
                problems. She confirmed in evidence that  she  is  dependent
                upon him and panics if she wakes in the night and he is  not
                by her side. There is also evidence that she  is  considered
                to be disabled for benefit purposes."

   24. The Judge was clearly aware of the existence of family members in the
       United Kingdom and the  evidential  shortfalls  in  relation  to  the
       specific issue of the extent upon which the appellant gives  personal
       care to his wife. The finding of the Judge is, however, that he found
       DLR's wife's evidence genuine and sincere [49] in  which  she  stated
       she was dependent upon her husband. It is not arguably necessary  for
       the Judge to do more in light of accepting the evidence of dependency
       especially in light of the specific nature of  DLR's  medical  issues
       and the type of personal assistance she will require.

   25. I find any error in relation to  the  determination  under  challenge
       relates to the issue  of  format.  It  would  have  assisted  if  the
       decision had set out a clearer analysis of the manner  in  which  the
       Judge weighed up the competing factors and had  stated  at  [49]  the
       weight given to the Secretary of State's argument by reference to the
       relevant statutory provision. The advocates  were  asked  during  the
       hearing whether if this was the case whether it was material  to  the
       decision to dismiss the appeal. Understandably Mr Howells  submission
       is that it is whilst Mrs Chaggar submitted that it was not  and  that
       had the matter been assessed in the manner suggested  by  Mr  Howells
       the outcome would have been the same.

   26. Returning to KO (Nigeria), the threshold set out by the Supreme Court
       related to the significance of "unduly" going  beyond  the  level  of
       harshness that may be  acceptable  or  justifiable  in  the  relevant
       context. It is necessary to show that the consequences of a  person's
       deportation for the relevant family member will therefore be over and
       above those one ordinarily would expect as a result  of  the  foreign
       criminals removal. The use by the Judge of the words "very harsh" are
       clearly  not  the  same  as  "unduly  harsh"  but  I  find  when  the
       determination is read as a whole, which it is important to do in this
       matter, that  the  Judge  was  finding  that  the  harshness  of  the
       consequences to DLR's wife as result  of  his  deportation  from  the
       United Kingdom would not be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant
       context of the facts as found, including the nature of the  offending
       and section 117C(1) of the 2002 Act. I find it not made out that  the
       decision to allow the appeal falls  outside  the  range  of  findings
       reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence. As such, any error
       identified in the structure of the determination has not  been  shown
       to be material to the decision to allow the appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds.

Decision

   27. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   28. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 July 2019
