
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09268/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On November 30, 2016            |On December 1, 2016             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR GORDEN [N]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant     Mr Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent    Ms Manning, Counsel, instructed by JM Wilson


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent in these proceedings was  the  appellant  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. From hereon I have referred to the  parties  as
       they were in the First-tier Tribunal so that for  example  reference
       to the respondent is a reference to the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department.

    2. I do not make an anonymity order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

    3. The appellant is a national of Cameroon. On September 22,  2013  the
       appellant entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)  Student.
       On March 5,  2014  his  leave  was  curtailed  because  his  sponsor
       withdrew sponsorship.

    4. On December 2, 2014 he was arrested on the basis he  was  attempting
       to enter into a sham marriage. Removal directions  were  issued  for
       December 5, 2014 but he claimed asylum  on  December  8,  2014.  The
       respondent refused his application on June 5, 2015  and  a  decision
       was taken to remove him by way of directions under paragraph 10A  of
       Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

    5. The appellant appealed that decision on June 19, 2015 under  Section
       82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  his
       appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Meyler
       (hereinafter referred to as "the  Judge"  on  July  4,  2016.  In  a
       decision promulgated on July 13, 2016  she  allowed  his  appeal  on
       asylum grounds and human rights grounds.

    6. The respondent appealed the Judge's decision on July  25,  2016  and
       permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Dineen on August 4, 2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
       renewed to the Upper Tribunal and Upper Tribunal Judge C  Lane  fund
       there was an arguable error in law on September 5,  2016.  He  found
       that it was arguable that given the doubts expressed  by  the  Judge
       about the appellant's account and some of the  documentary  evidence
       the Judge may have erred in her analysis of the newspaper article as
       it was inconsistent with her consideration of the other evidence.

    7. The matter came before me on the above date and on that  occasion  I
       heard submissions from both representatives.

SUBMISSIONS

    8. Mr Bates adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted the finding  in
       paragraph [55] was flawed because the newspaper article referred  to
       the appellant to  being  a  youth  leader-something  the  Judge  had
       previously rejected. The Judge had rejected  virtually  all  of  his
       account and this newspaper article should have been looked at in the
       round.

    9. Miss Manning submitted the Judge had looked at all the evidence  and
       the respondent's submission was nothing  more  than  a  disagreement
       with the Judge's findings.  She accepted the  finding  at  paragraph
       [55] was at odds with the remainder of the  decision  but  submitted
       the Judge had clearly attached weight to this document and there was
       no error.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   10.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Lane
       identified one possible arguable error in law.

   11. In paragraph [55] the Judge considered a newspaper article that  had
       been produced by the  appellant.  This  document  was  in  both  its
       original format and an online version. The latter made no  reference
       to the appellant's name whereas the former did. That article  stated
       the appellant was a noted youth leader but this was  something  that
       the Judge had already rejected in  paragraph  [34].  She  had  given
       detailed  reasons  for  rejecting  this  claim  and  her  subsequent
       acceptance of the newspaper article is at odds with the rest of  her
       decision. Her acceptance of the content of this report  led  her  to
       allowing the appeal.

   12. The newspaper article should have been considered in the round  with
       all the other evidence on the issue. The fact there appeared  to  be
       two versions of the article and the judge had already rejected other
       documentary evidence brought the finding into question.

   13. I am satisfied that her  approach  to  this  document,  against  the
       background of an otherwise detailed consideration, fell  into  error
       as she considered  it  in  isolation  despite  having  made  adverse
       findings on his position earlier in her decision.

   14. In the circumstances I find there is an error  in  law.  This  error
       affected both decisions and I set aside the decision.

   15. Both representatives agreed that the case should be remitted to  the
       First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

   16. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

   17. The appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  these
       issues to be addressed hearing under Section 12  of  the  Tribunals,
       Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

   18. The matter should not be  listed  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Meyler.

   19. I direct that the appellant's solicitors do file and  serve  on  the
       Tribunal and respondent any additional statements and  evidence  not
       less than five days before the hearing of this matter.

   20. No interpreter is required as the appellant stated none was needed.


Signed:  Dated: December 1, 2016

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
