

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09589/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 21 May 2015                       |On 26 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Rendle, Counsel (instructed by Wai Leung)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  on  10  March  2015
         against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Braybrook made in
         a decision and reasons promulgated on 19 February 2015 allowing the
         Respondent's asylum appeal.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of Albania, born on 22  July  1998.
         Her asylum application had been refused by the Secretary  of  State
         on 31 October 2014, but the Respondent had been granted  DLR  under
         paragraph 352ZC as an  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  minor.   The
         Respondent feared return to  Albania  because  of  her  father  who
         considered that she had brought shame on  their  family.   She  was
         vulnerable as a lone female.

    3.     When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Parkes considered that it was arguable  that  Judge  Braybrook  had
         erred in her approach to the evidence relating to the  position  of
         women in Albania and whether they formed a particular social group.
          The judge had also arguably erred in her treatment of the  various
         inconsistencies in the Respondent's evidence and the  consideration
         of the possibility of internal relocation.

    Submissions

    4.     Miss Savage for the Appellant relied on the grounds  of  onwards
         appeal submitted with the permission  to  appeal  application.   In
         short, as the grant of permission to  appeal  had  identified,  the
         decision was inadequately reasoned in its treatment of the  Refugee
         Convention ground, i.e., particular social group.  Women were not a
         particular social group in Albania.   What  the  particular  social
         group found by the judge wase had not been resolved.   The  judge's
         credibility findings  were  also  inadequately  reasoned.   Serious
         inconsistencies had been found in the Respondent's evidence and her
         expert's evidence had been rejected.  The judge's explanation as to
         why she had decided to give the  Respondent  "the  benefit  of  the
         doubt" was insufficient.  The judge did  not  sufficiently  explain
         her  finding  about  the  impossibility  of  internal   relocation,
         particularly in view of her finding that  the  Respondent  had  not
         been subjected to physical  violence.   The  decision  and  reasons
         should be set aside and the appeal reheard before a different First-
         tier Tribunal judge.

    5.     Mr  Rendle  for  the  Respondent  submitted  that  the  decision
         disclosed no material error of law.  As to  the  particular  social
         group issue, the Appellant had cast its net too  wide.   The  issue
         had not been women in general in Albania,  but  a  narrower  group,
         women at risk of honour killings.  Fornah [2006] UKHL 46  and  Shah
         and Islam [1999] 2 AC 629 were relevant and  provided  illuminating
         discussion of the subject.  The Respondent had been disobedient  to
         her father which was an immutable characteristic which could not be
         undone.  The decision and reasons at [12] showed that the judge had
         had that issue in mind and had found in  the  Respondent's  favour.
         Mr Rendle candidly recognised that it could be said that there  had
         been a lack of full reasoning but the finding  remained  clear  and
         was adequate.

    6.     As to inconsistencies in the evidence which it was said that the
         judge had not sufficiently addressed, it  was  important  that  the
         judge had found the Respondent's witness  Mr  Hoda  credible.   The
         issue had been the family's choice of spouse, not whether or not he
         had been from Macedonia: see  [8]  and  [9]  of  the  decision  and
         reasons.  There had been proper findings reached in accordance with
         the lower standard.

    7.     As to internal relocation, the judge had sufficiently considered
         the issue.  Her finding was open to  her,  namely  that  relocation
         would be unduly harsh, even  before  section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Immigration and Citizenship Act 2009  was  factored  in.    If  the
         tribunal found material errors of law, the appeal should be reheard
         before another judge in the First-tier Tribunal.

    8.     In reply, Miss Savage  reiterated  that  the  particular  social
         group conflict had not been resolved.  The judge had  not  accepted
         an honour killing scenario: see [18] of the decision and reasons.

    9.     The tribunal reserved its determination, which now follows.

    The material error of law finding

    10.    An appeal tribunal should  always  hesitate  before  interfering
         with a decision of an experienced first instance judge who has seen
         and  heard  the  witnesses.  Regrettably,  even  after   such   due
         hesitation, the  tribunal  has  concluded  that  the  decision  and
         reasons cannot stand.  The Secretary of State is entitled  to  know
         why the appeal was allowed, and that her  arguments  were  properly
         addressed.  That did not happen here.

    11.    The first issue was whether or not the Respondent's  claim  fell
         within the Refugee Convention at all, particularly as this  was  an
         "upgrade" appeal.  It had been accepted on the Respondent's  behalf
         that women were not a particular social group  in  Albania  on  the
         basis of DM (Albania) CG [2004] UKIAT 00059. The  judge  identified
         that there was a particular social  group  issue  at  [12]  of  the
         decision, but failed to resolve it in a way which can  be  regarded
         as sufficient or satisfactory.  This is particularly marked by  the
         judge's wholesale and fully reasoned rejection of the  Respondent's
         expert evidence: see [19] to [21].  The judge rejected  the  honour
         killing  thesis.   The  judge  found  that  the  problem  was   the
         Appellant's family not society in general, and  failed  to  explain
         how that made the Respondent a member of particular  social  group,
         and indeed what particular social group consisted of.

    12.    Mr Rendle very properly accepted that the judge's  reasoning  on
         this critical issue was open to challenge, and sought to bolster it
         by reference to Fornah [2006] UKHL 46. But despite  his  attractive
         argument, it is not possible to derive from  the  judge's  decision
         how the claim related to the Refugee Convention, particular as  the
         judge had rejected the "honour scenario" which had been advanced.

    13.     In  the  tribunal's  view,   the   judge's   error   (doubtless
         inadvertent) was compounded by the judge's incomplete and  somewhat
         wavering analysis of the evidence.  The judge  frankly  stated  the
         difficulties she found when assessing  the  Respondent's  evidence,
         noting serious inconsistencies, including  inconsistency  with  the
         country background evidence: see [14] and  [15]  of  the  decision.
         The tribunal  has  already  noted  the  judge's  rejection  of  the
         Respondent's expert evidence.  It is not at all easy to see why, in
         the face of serious credibility and  serious  plausibility  issues,
         the judge nevertheless felt it appropriate to give  the  Respondent
         the benefit of the doubt.   The standard of proof  was  the  asylum
         standard, but the reality of  the  judge's  reasons  was  that  the
         Respondent  had  not  managed  to  reach  even  that   modest   and
         undemanding level.

    14.    That problem can be seen in the judge's analysis of what on  its
         face the highly improbable story  of  the  Respondent's  unassisted
         journey to the United Kingdom.  To say  simply  that  it  was  "not
         impossible" was to fail to factor  the  improbabilities  the  judge
         identified  alongside  the  other   serious   problems   with   the
         Respondent's  evidence.   The  weight  the  judge   gave   to   the
         Respondent's demeanour was a matter for her, but in the context  of
         the problems which the judge herself had identified, it was  hardly
         a compelling reason for accepting the  Respondent's  account.   The
         tribunal finds that the judge's credibility analysis was  defective
         and insufficiently reasoned.  That amounts to a material  error  of
         law.

    15.    In view of those findings, it is scarcely necessary to  consider
         whether the judge dealt adequately  with  the  internal  relocation
         issue.  The appeal turned on the Respondent's credibility.  But  as
         the judge had found (it seems against  her  own  better  judgement)
         that the Respondent had managed an  arduous  pan  European  journey
         entirely on her own, her  finding  that  the  Respondent  would  be
         unable to rely on her own  initiative  and  resources  in  her  own
         country  is  inconsistent  with  that  finding.    It   also   sits
         uncomfortably with the judge's impressions of the Respondent  which
         informed her decision.

    16.    Because of the inadequacy of the decision as  a  whole,  it  was
         neither possible nor practical to attempt to preserve any  findings
         of fact from so superficial an analysis.  The decision and  reasons
         is accordingly set aside.  The  appeal  must  be  reheard  de  novo
         before another First-tier Tribunal judge, on a date to be fixed, at
         Taylor House.

    DECISION

    The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed

    The tribunal finds that  there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    original decision, such that it cannot stand and must therefore set  be
    aside.  No findings can be preserved. The appeal will be reheard  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal judge (any judge except First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Braybrook) at Taylor House hearing centre on a date to be fixed.






    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
