

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09294/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|on 27th February 2014                         |on 4th June 2014             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A J H
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Richards - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Mr Sinfield  instructed under the Direct Access
provisions.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Trevaskis  promulgated  following  a
        hearing at Newport on 6th November 2013 in which he  allowed  AJH's
        appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds against  the  refusal  of  further
        leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


     2. AJH is an Afghan national born in 1995 and was therefore  an  adult
        at the date of the hearing.  On 25th  March  2010  he  was  refused
        asylum but granted discretionary leave to remain in accordance with
        the Secretary  of  State's  policy  for  accompanied  minor  asylum
        seekers until 24th May 2011.  On 19th October 2011 he  was  refused
        further leave to remain against  which  he  appealed  and  on  15th
        December 2011 his appeal was  allowed,  resulting  in  a  grant  of
        further leave until be attained the age of seventeen and a half  on
        1st July 2012.  At that time the Secretary of State refused further
        leave to remain which was the decision challenged before the First-
        tier Tribunal.


     3. Having recorded the evidence and submissions the Judge set out  his
        findings relevant to the Secretary of State's challenge  which  can
        be summarised as follows:


     i.   There are no new grounds which would justify considering  a  fresh
     claim for asylum by [AJH]. He  has  referred  to  having  made  contact
   with   Hafeez Ullah but has produced no evidence of  contact  or  of  any
     of the facts he claims to have been told [36].


     ii.  The SSHD has not taken any steps to trace [AJH's] family. She  has
          failed to comply with her duty at the time of  his  asylum  claim.
   The            steps taken in 2013 do not fulfil that duty [37].


     iii. AJH will be returned as  an  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  child
     having been granted discretionary  leave  as  there  were  no  adequate
   reception  arrangements  for  him  as  a  minor.  There  is  no  credible
   evidence the situation has changed [38].


     iv.  The SSHD's  reasons  for  refusal  letter  does  not  address  the
   negative            impact of persons leaving the  country,  claiming  he
   has family                   support on return. There is no evidence such
   family support exists or              that he will not suffer the adverse
   treatment referred to in para 39              of the determination. If he
   has no family support he is likely to                   become  a  street
   child   at   risk   of   exploitation   as   mentioned   in   the    COIR
   [40].


     v.   AJH has been living in the United Kingdom for almost 4  years  and
     presents as  somebody  who  has  become  "westernised".   He  has  been
   educated in this country. All his activities will mark him out  from  his
     contemporaries in Afghanistan and he will not  be  able  to  assimilate
      into  Afghan  culture  without  encountering  the  kind  of  hostility
     referred to earlier  in  the  determination,  particularly  if,  as  is
     suggested by SSHD he tries to establish  independent  living  in  Kabul
     [41].


     vi.  The reasons for refusal letter  contains  ample  evidence  of  how
          dangerous life is in Kabul. Such danger will be  increased  for  a
           homeless,  unsupported,   westernised   returning   unaccompanied
     asylum seeking child such as [AJH] [42].


     vii. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, AJH has not enjoyed family life  in
          the United Kingdom "because there is no evidence that she has been
              to the United Kingdom  or  is  there  any  evidence  that  her
   sponsor  is  in            the  United  Kingdom.  The  refusal  of  entry
   clearance to the Appellant            is not an  interference  with  that
   relationship which potentially                engages Article  8  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights"          [47].


     viii.    AJH has made many friends in the United Kingdom, including his
              carers, and removal would amount to an interference with  such
          rights [48].


     ix.  The Judge was not satisfied that the removal is  proportionate  to
   the            legitimate aim relied upon as he  is  a  vulnerable  young
   person who              has led a blameless life in the  United  Kingdom,
   who has bettered             himself academically, and  absorbed  Western
   culture.  He has spent           most  of  his  formative  years  in  the
   United Kingdom and been                   educated away from the cultural
   norms of society from which he            fled. The level of  danger  and
   hostility he is likely to face in                  Afghanistan if removed
   will  place  the  Secretary  of  State  in  breach  of                her
   obligations    under    Article     8.     Considering     JS     (former
   unaccompanied  child   -  durable  solution)  Afghanistan    [   2013   ]
   UKUT 00568 the factors mentioned in  note  (4)  militates  against  AJH's
     removal under Article 8 [50].


     4. Ground one on which permission  to  appeal  was  sought  alleges  a
        misdirection of law in failing to have regard  to  the  Immigration
        Rules as part of the Article  8  assessment.  Ground  two  asserts,
        amongst other matters, a  failure  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
        findings on  material  matters  specifically  in  relation  to  the
        finding in paragraph 37 that the Secretary of State had  failed  to
        take steps to trace AJH's family when there  was  evidence  he  had
        been in contact with his family until recent months and so he  knew
        of their whereabouts, the SSHD had written to him advising  him  of
        other organisations that could assist  in  tracing  his  family  in
        Afghanistan, he was asked to contact the SSHD by 15th July 2013  to
        confirm he was content for them to assist him in undertaking family
        tracing  although  no  response  was  received  from  him  or   his
        representatives, and that in line with her  obligations  under  the
        relevant  case  law  the  SSHD  contacted  the  British  Foreign  &
        Commonwealth Office in Kabul with the details of AJH's  family  and
        where he claimed to live although they informed the SSHD that  they
        did not have facilities to carry out tracing  of  the  families  of
        unaccompanied asylum seeking children from  Afghanistan.  The  SSHD
        attempted to trace but to no avail.



Error of law finding


     5. There are a number of legal errors in the determination  such  that
        it cannot stand. These include the reference  in  paragraph  36  to
        there being no new grounds  which  would  justify  considering  the
        matter as a fresh claim asylum when the Secretary of State accepted
        the further submissions as a fresh claim but rejected the claim  on
        its merits on the basis that nothing had changed from the  original
        refusal of his asylum claim. It was, however,  accepted  the  claim
        for asylum, humanitarian protection, and under  Articles  2  and  3
        fell by the wayside and could not be substantiated  as  AJH  is  no
        longer a child but an adult who has been in contact with his family
        and who had not substantiated his claim to  face  a  real  risk  on
        return in the whole of Afghanistan.


     6. Mr Sinfield's submission that this case was, in effect,  an  active
        review in which it was only ECHR that was relevant when considering
        the human rights elements and policies at the date of the grant  of
        leave  was  accepted  by  Mr  Richards  who  conceded  he  was   in
        difficulties in  relation  to  the  first  ground.   Correspondence
        referred to Article 8 ECHR only although  he  submitted  there  was
        sufficient merit in the second ground.


     7. In relation to the Article 8 assessment; paragraph 47 is clearly an
        example of  a  'cut  and  paste'  insertion  as  it  relates  to  a
        completely different case involving a  female  applicant,  UK-based
        sponsor, and the refusal of entry clearance.


     8. I find legal error in any reference to  AJH  being  returned  as  a
        child as this is not the case.  He is a  young  adult  and  it  was
        accepted by the Judge that he could safely return to Afghanistan in
        relation to the protection provisions.


     9. I also find a further material error in that even if this issue was
        being considered under the provisions of ECHR only it was necessary
        for the  Judge  to  undertake  a  proper  balanced  proportionality
        assessment in paragraph 50 of the determination.  Although  factors
        in AJH's  favour  are  outlined  there  is  no  assessment  of  the
        Secretary of State's case. Although the Judge refers to  head  note
        (iv) of JS he fails to adequately assess the issues. That head note
        states "Where the appellant is no longer a minor, the duty  on  the
        Secretary of State under  s.55  of  the  Borders,  Immigration  and
        Citizenship  Act  1999  no  longer  arises  but  when  making   the
        assessment of whether removal  would lead to a breach of article  8
        all relevant factors must be  taken  into  account  including  age,
        background, length of residence  in  the  UK,  family  and  general
        circumstances including any particular vulnerability and whether an
        appellant will have family or other adult support on return  to his
        home country appropriate to his particular needs."


    10. As a result of these legal errors I find the determination must  be
        set aside and remade although findings relating  AJH's  immigration
        history, circumstances in the United Kingdom, and those relating to
        there being no  basis  for  granting  leave  to  remain  under  the
        protection provisions, shall be preserved findings.



Discussion



    11. In JS (Former unaccompanied child - durable  solution)  Afghanistan
        [2013] UKUT 00568 (IAC) it was held that (i) A   local  authority's
        obligations to an appellant as an unaccompanied  child  and  asylum
        seeker and his status as a former relevant child after  he  becomes
        18 do not of themselves determine the outcome of a decision  on  an
        appellant's immigration status but may provide evidence relevant to
        those issues; (ii) The failure of the Home Office to  endeavour  to
        trace family members of a child asylum seeker  is only relevant  to
        an immigration appeal after the appellant ceases  to  be  a  child,
        where he is able to show a causal link  between  that  failure  and
        issues relevant  to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal;  (iii)  For  an
        unaccompanied asylum seeking child, the best durable solution is to
        be reunited with his own family unless there are  good  reasons  to
        the contrary.  Where reunification is not possible and there are no
        adequate reception facilities in the home country,  an  appropriate
        durable solution may be to grant  discretionary  leave  during  the
        remaining years of minority  and  then  arrange  a  return  to  the
        country of origin. Where the child is of a young  age  on  arrival,
        cannot be reunited with his family and will spend many years in the
        host state during his minority a durable solution may  need  to  be
        found in the host state; (iv) Where the appellant is  no  longer  a
        minor, the duty on  the  Secretary  of  State  under  s.55  of  the
        Borders, Immigration and Citizenship Act 1999 no longer arises  but
        when making the assessment of whether  removal   would  lead  to  a
        breach of article 8 all relevant factors must be taken into account
        including age, background, length of residence in  the  UK,  family
        and general circumstances including  any  particular  vulnerability
        and whether an appellant will have family or other adult support on
        return  to his home country appropriate to  his  particular  needs;
        (v) In the context of Afghanistan it is also necessary to take into
        account the guidance in AA  (Unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG
        [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) about the risks to unattached  children  in
        the light of the reminder in KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State
        for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1014  in  the  judgment  of
        Maurice Kay LJ at [18] that there is no bright  line  across  which
        the risks to and the needs of a child suddenly disappear.


    12. No causal link between any alleged failure to trace family relevant
        to the outcome of the appeal in relation to the  protection  issues
        has been established although the evidence indicates that the  SSHD
        did endeavour to undertake tracing and discharged  her  obligations
        in relation to AJH on the facts. It has not  been  shown  that  the
        SSHD's alleged  failure  to  comply  with  the  statutory  duty  to
        endeavour to trace the family has caused AJH such prejudice that it
        would be unfair now to remove him to Afghanistan.


    13. It is  accepted  AJH  has  many  friends  in  the  United  Kingdom,
        including his carers, and has been educated here. He may have led a
        blameless life in this country but it is not  established  that  he
        should  receive  additional  reward  for  doing  what  is  lawfully
        expected of him. It is claimed that he is a vulnerable young person
        but this is not substantiated on the evidence and, in any event, he
        has been in regular contact with his family in Afghanistan  and  it
        has not been substantiated or established that he could not  return
        to his family who can provide adequately for his ongoing needs.  He
        claims to have lived in Afghanistan until aged 13 and  it  has  not
        been substantiated that he is not able to  return  and  reintegrate
        into life in that country. He is a Dari speaker.


    14.  Although  the  Judge  referred  to  the  level  of  hostility   in
        Afghanistan it is accepted that individuals can return  and  indeed
        many  have  in  considerable  numbers  according  to  the   country
        material. The reasons for refusal letter sets out the Secretary  of
        State's position regarding the weight to be given  to  the  various
        factors and the legitimate aim  being  relied  upon.  AJH  has  not
        substantiated his claim that he cannot be returned.


    15. AJH is now an adult living an independent life. He  came  here  and
        made a false claim for asylum but was accommodated  by  the  United
        Kingdom government during his minority.   I  reject  Mr  Sinfield's
        submission that conditions in Afghanistan are so appalling that AJH
        cannot be returned as if so he would  have  a  credible  claim  for
        protection, which he does not.


    16. The legitimate aim relied upon by the Secretary  of  State  is  the
        right to have valid and workable immigration  controls  to  protect
        the economic interests/welfare of the  United  Kingdom,  which  has
        been found to fall within Article 8 (2)  see  FK  and  OK  Botswana
        [2013] EWCA Civ 238 in which Sir Stanley  Burnton  said  that  "The
        maintenance of immigration control is not an aim  that  is  implied
        for the purposes of article 8.2. Its maintenance  is  necessary  in
        order to preserve or to  foster  the  economic  well-being  of  the
        country, in order  to  protect  health  and  morals,  and  for  the
        protection of the rights and freedoms of others. If there  were  no
        immigration control, enormous numbers of persons would be  able  to
        enter this country, and would be entitled to claim social  security
        benefits, the benefits of the National Health Service, to be housed
        (or to compete for housing with  those  in  this  country)  and  to
        compete for employment with  those  already  here.  Their  children
        would be entitled to be educated at  the  taxpayers'  expense...All
        such matters (and I do not suggest that they are the only  matters)
        go to the economic well-being of the country. That the  individuals
        concerned in the  present  case  are  law-abiding  (other  than  in
        respect of immigration controls) does not  detract  from  the  fact
        that the maintenance of a generally applicable  immigration  policy
        is, albeit indirectly, a legitimate aim for the purposes of article
        8".


    17. As an Afghan national AKH can only remain in the United Kingdom  if
        the SSHD is willing to grant him such leave.  Article  8  does  not
        enable an individual to choose a country which they wish to live in
        and it has not been established that the connections  he  has  made
        are such as to make the  decision  disproportionate.  There  is  no
        evidence friendships formed in the  United  Kingdom  could  not  be
        maintained at arm's-length or that AJH will not be able to form new
        ties and friendships in Afghanistan within the  protection  of  his
        family unit or elsewhere if required.  It has not been  established
        that  the  effect  of  removal  in  relation  to  the   change   in
        relationships and/or circumstances in general is such  as  to  make
        the decision disproportionate.


    18. Although AJH has established a private life recognised by Article 8
        ECHR I find the Secretary of State has  discharged  the  burden  of
        proof upon her  to  prove  that  the  decision  to  remove  AJH  to
        Afghanistan where he has family support,  as  an  adult  living  an
        independent life, is proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  relied
        upon. Accordingly the appeal must fail.


Decision

    19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    20. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27th May 2014












