
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/09676/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2016                            |On 14 December 2016           |
|Extempore                                     |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                 Getahun [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Iteva. Solicitor, Duncan Lewis solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Russell promulgated  on  27  September  2016.   The
    appellant's case is that he is a national of Eritrea  born  on  1  June
    1995 but is not, contrary to the Secretary of State's case,  a  citizen
    of Ethiopia.  It is also the appellant's case that he is  a  member  of
    the Pentecostal Christian faith and that in consequence he has a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on return on that that basis and/or at  the
    risk of being forced to undergo military service in Eritrea

 2. The appellant states that he was brought up by his parents albeit  that
    they spoke only to him in Amharic and that is the reason why he  speaks
    Amharic but not Tigrinya which is the more common language in  Eritrea.
    He appears also on his own account to have spent some time in  Ethiopia
    and says that he has been to Eritrea for two  particular  periods  from
    2000 onwards and again as from 2000 to 2003  and  again  from  2005  to
    2008.

 3. The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim to be Eritrean  for
    a number of reasons which are set out in the refusal  letter  primarily
    the inability to speak Tigrinya there were also  doubts  regarding  his
    claim to how he travelled to the United Kingdom and also  his  lack  of
    knowledge of the Pentecostal faith which he professes to be a member.

 4. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor  House  on  23
    June 2016.  The judge stated [1] that the appellant's nationality is  a
    matter which needs to be decided and concluded  having  heard  evidence
    from the appellant and a Miss Bereket  that  he  was  not  an  Eritrean
    national.

 5. The judge was not satisfied:

          i) by the explanation by the appellant or his inability to  speak
             Tigrinya,

         ii) by the documentary evidence put before him that  weight  could
             be attached to it;

        iii) that he could attach weight to the evidence of  Miss  Bereket;
             and

         iv) by the appellant's ability to  leave  the  country  given  the
             restrictions that were placed on both leaving even as young as
             7 as is set out in MO Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190; or.

          v) on the basis of the evidence provided that the appellant is  a
             Pentecostal Christian although  he  did  accept  that  he  did
             attend services in Leeds.

 6. The principal grounds of challenge to the decision as set  out  in  the
    grounds are, as they developed in the submissions before me,  that  the
    judge erred:

          i) In failing properly to attach weight  to  a  letter  from  the
             Eritrean community in Lambeht;

         ii) In  failing  properly  to  attach  weight  to  Miss  Bereket's
             evidence;

        iii)  In  misconstruing  the  appellant's  ability  to  speak  some
             Tigrinya as being that he spoke no Tigrinya.

 7. Dealing with the first ground I note that the  judge  appears  to  have
    confused letters from the Eritrean Community in Lambeth  and  from  the
    Eritrean Pentecostal Church in Leeds.

 8. At paragraph 35 of his decision the judge refers to a letter  from  the
    "Eritrean Pentecostal Church in Leeds".  Given the description  of  the
    content, I can only assume that the reference  to  a  letter  from  the
    Eritrean Pentecostal Church was a slip of the  pen  as  paragraph  only
    makes sense if the  reference  is  to  the  letter  from  the  Eritrean
    community in Lambeth as that does deal with the methodology applied  to
    a person who  places  themselves  before  them  saying  that  they  are
    Eritrean.  That is not a matter dealt  with  in  the  letter  from  the
    Pentecostal Church nor would it be likely that they would make  such  a
    statement.

 9. As Ms Iteva submitted, the judge said that the letter does not say  how
    that methodology was applied to the appellant or what he told them  and
    that he finds the letter of no  value.   The  difficulty  is  that  the
    letter does indeed refer to the methodology and what was asked  of  the
    appellant albeit in summary form.  It states

         "we called elders that were indigenous of this  particular  region.
         The elders asked the claimant's family history, names  as  well  of
         relevant relatives who were domiciled in Eritrea.  They  have  told
         us his family belonged to the city and  they  have  confirmed  that
         these particular families have previously dwelled in their city and
         by this methodology we have managed to  authenticate  his  Eritrean
         nationality.

10. Given that the judge referred to this  methodology  as  careful  it  is
    difficult  to  see  that  his  failure  to  attach  weight  to  it  and
    misinterpreting what was dealt with on  the  facts  of  this  case  was
    anything other than an error which I consider potentially material.

11.  Further I consider that the  judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    inability to speak Tigrinya is flawed by his reference to or assumption
    in the decision that the appellant spoke only Amharic and did not speak
    Tigrinya at all when that is contrary  to  the  evidence  both  of  the
    appellant and which the judge had  recorded  at  paragraph  12  of  his
    decision.

12. Turning to the evidence of Miss Bereket what was reasonable or  far  is
    defined by context. In this context it would have been sensible if  not
    reasonable to  have  expected  the  appellant  or  his  representatives
    properly to have addressed how it was that Miss  Bereket  was  able  to
    recognise the appellant after such a period of time and when  they  had
    grown considerably in age.

13. That said, I consider that the decision did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law. The error is in respect of the letter from  the  Eritrean
    community in Lambeth is material in that the judge has ruled  that  out
    of his consideration improperly  and  without  giving  proper  reasons.
    That, taken together with the error  as  to  the  appellant's  language
    ability, renders the judge's decision as to the appellant's nationality
    which is central to the appeal, unsustainable.

14. I therefore set the decision aside.

15. Given that the errors  identified  go  clearly  to  the  assessment  of
    credibility, it will be necessary to make fresh findings in respect  of
    all relevant matters.  I therefore consider  that,  in  line  with  the
    relevant Practice Direction, that the appeal should be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for it to make a fresh decision, given  the  extent
    of the fact-finding that will be necessary.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  on
    all relevant matters. For the avoidance of doubt, none of the  findings
    of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal are preserved.


Signed                                  Date:  13 December 2016

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
