

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09863/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Date Sent                    |
|On 6 May 2014                                 |On 29 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     AJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration and Asylum
                 Practitioners Ltd
For the Respondent: Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who  was  born  on  18  August
      1961.  He arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2002.   On  10  September
      2008, he claimed asylum.  On 15 October 2013, the Secretary  of  State
      refused the appellant's application for asylum and on that date made a
      decision to remove him by way of directions to Sri Lanka.

   3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 4  December  2013,  Judge  A  Cresswell  dismissed  the
      appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights
      grounds.  The Judge found that, taking the appellant's account "at its
      highest" that the appellant had failed to establish that he  would  be
      at risk of persecution or serious harm if returned to Sri Lanka.

   4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   On
      31 December 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cruthers) granted the
      appellant permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

   5. The sole ground of appeal relied upon both in the  grounds  of  appeal
      and by Mr McGarvey at the hearing was that the Judge had been wrong to
      dismiss the appellant's appeal simply on the basis that the  appellant
      did not fall within any of the risk categories set out in the  country
      guidance case of GJ and Others (Post-Civil War: Returnees)  Sri  Lanka
      CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) at [356(7)].

   6. Mr McGarvey relied upon the grant of permission by the Court of Appeal
      in MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka) (dated 13  November  2013)  where
      the order of the Court of Appeal states that:

           "Pending the final determination of this appeal or until further
           order, individuals who fall outside  the  said  risk  categories
           should not for that reason alone have their  claims  for  asylum
           rejected, whether by the Respondent or on appeal to  the  First-
           tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal."

      Mr McGarvey submitted that the Judge had  fallen  into  error  because
      that was precisely what he had done.

   7. On behalf of the respondent, Mr  Hibbs  submitted  (relying  upon  the
      respondent's  Rule  24  Notice  dated  16  January  2014)  that  Judge
      Cresswell had not dismissed the appellant's appeal solely on the basis
      that the appellant did not fall within the risk categories set out  in
      GJ and Others.  He submitted that at para  25  of  his  determination,
      Judge Cresswell had considered  whether  the  appellant  was  at  risk
      outside of those categories.  Mr Hibbs submitted  that  there  was  no
      evidence before the Judge that a person with the  appellant's  profile
      would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

Discussion

   8. In his determination, Judge Cresswell approached the issue of risk  to
      the appellant on return to Sri Lanka on the basis that his account was
      to be accepted: as Judge Cresswell put it at para 21(i), he  took  the
      appellant's account "at its highest".

   9. At para 21(i) Judge Cresswell stated:

           "At worst, the appellant described  ill  treatment  by  the  Sri
           Lankan army based solely upon the fact that he was a Tamil.   He
           does not suggest any opposition or political involvement on  his
           part in either Sri Lanka or the UK or that he would be suspected
           of any such involvement on return."

  10. At para 21(v), Judge Cresswell set out the factual basis for assessing
      any risk to the appellant as follows:

           "He is, however, a Tamil as has been accepted by the Respondent.
            He does have injuries consistent with assaults upon  him.   The
           objective information would support a hostile  attitude  by  the
           Sri Lankan army to Tamils at the time described.  The  Appellant
           was not cross-examined at the hearing as to the veracity of  his
           account.  I have decided,  therefore,  that  I  should  properly
           treat the Appellant as someone of Tamil ethnicity  who  was  the
           subject of violent assaults by the Sri Lankan  army  at  various
           times solely because he was a Tamil  and  because  other  Tamils
           were  involved  in  an  armed  opposition  to  the  Sri   Lankan
           government."

  11. At para 21(vi), Judge Cresswell added that:

           "The Appellant told me that he has not taken part in  any  anti-
           Sri Lankan regime demonstrations in the UK."

  12. Having set out the headnote of GJ and Others in full at para 24 of his
      determination, Judge Cresswell reached the following findings at  para
      25.

           "I have considered the matters put forward by the  Appellant  in
           support of his claim for asylum in  the  light  of  the  country
           guidance and conclude that the Appellant's account, even at  its
           highest, does not lead to a real risk of mistreatment such as to
           require international protection of any kind.  He is unlikely to
           be of any interest to the Sri Lankan authorities,   There was no
           other evidence brought to my attention which  could  lead  to  a
           different conclusion.  Accordingly, I do not find  that  he  has
           established  a  well-founded  fear  of   persecution   for   any
           Convention reason or at all.  I do not find that  he  has  shown
           that he is eligible for Refugee Protection (Asylum)."

  13. For present purposes, the salient risk categories set out  in  GJ  and
      Others are summarised at para (7) of the  headnote  (and  set  out  at
      [356(7)] of the determination) in GJ and Others as follows:

           "7.    The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
                 persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether
                 in detention or otherwise, are:

                    a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                       to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single  state
                       because  they  are,  or  are  perceived  to  have   a
                       significant role in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil
                       separatism within the diaspora and/or  a  renewal  of
                       hostilities within Sri Lanka.

                    b) Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                       human rights activists, who,  in  either  case,  have
                       criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular
                       its human rights record, or who are  associated  with
                       publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.

                    c) Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                       Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the
                       Sri Lankan security forces, armed forces or  the  Sri
                       Lankan authorities  in  alleged  war  crimes.   Among
                       those who may have witnessed war  crimes  during  the
                       conflict, particularly in the No-Fire  Zones  in  May
                       2009,  only  those  who   have   already   identified
                       themselves by giving such evidence would be known  to
                       the Sri Lankan authorities and  therefore  only  they
                       are at real risk of adverse attention or  persecution
                       on  return  as  potential  or   actual   war   crimes
                       witnesses.

                    d) A person whose name appears on a computerised  "stop"
                       list accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of
                       those against whom there is an extant court order  or
                       arrest warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on  a
                       "stop" list will be stopped at the airport and handed
                       over to the appropriate Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
                       pursuance of such order or warrant."

  14. It is clear that the appellant's personal circumstances  (as  accepted
      by the Judge at paras 21(i), (v) and (vi) of his determination) do not
      bring the appellant within one of the risk categories set  out  in  GJ
      and Others.  Indeed, Mr McGarvey did  not  suggest  otherwise  in  his
      submissions.  He maintained, however, that in failing  to  follow  the
      order of the Court of Appeal in MP and NT, decided shortly before  the
      hearing before Judge Cresswell, the Judge had erred in law.

  15. For the purposes of this appeal, I will assume that a failure to apply
      the order of the Court of Appeal in MP and NT would amount to an error
      of law by the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.  I put it  in
      that way because it is not, in my judgement, entirely free from  doubt
      that the order has the effect of requiring (as a matter  of  law)  the
      First-tier Tribunal or Upper Tribunal to disregard a  binding  country
      guidance case such as GJ and Others unless, and until,  the  Court  of
      Appeal overrules it.  For example in  SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ
      940 the Court of Appeal concluded that a grant of permission  to  that
      court did not affect binding nature of CG case.

  16. However, it is clear that Judge Cresswell did not fall into the  error
      Mr McGarvey seeks to attribute to him in para 25 of his determination.
       There, he first determined that the appellant on the facts  which  he
      accepted, could not succeed in bringing himself within a risk category
      within GJ and Others.   However,  he  went  on  to  consider  whether,
      nevertheless, there was any evidence which, as he put it, "could  lead
      to a different conclusion", namely that the  appellant  was  at  "real
      risk of mistreatment such as to require  international  protection  of
      any kind".  He concluded there was "no other evidence".

  17. Mr McGarvey accepted that there appeared to be no background  evidence
      before Judge Cresswell.  That may well be because the  appellant  was,
      at that time, not legally represented.  Nevertheless, the Judge  could
      only determine the appeal on the basis of the evidence  relied  on  by
      the parties.  No evidence  was  drawn  to  my  attention  which  would
      establish that the appellant would be at  risk  on  return  today,  as
      someone who had no LTTE connections or any  political  involvement  in
      Sri Lanka or the UK, but was of  Tamil  ethnicity  and  who  had  been
      detained and ill treated by the Sri Lankan army (but not  since  1999)
      solely because Tamils were involved in an armed conflict with the  Sri
      Lankan government.  There was not, as Judge Cresswell pointed  out  at
      para 25 of  his  determination,  any  evidence  before  him  that  the
      appellant,  in  these  circumstances,  would  be  at  real   risk   of
      persecution or serious ill treatment on return to Sri Lanka.

  18. For these reasons, I reject Mr McGarvey's submission  that  the  Judge
      erred in law by dismissing the appellant's appeal simply on the  basis
      that he did not fall within the risk categories  set  out  in  GJ  and
      Others at para 356(7) of  that  determination.   Judge  Cresswell  was
      alive to the issue  of  whether  any  objective  evidence  placed  the
      appellant at risk outside the risk of the categories in GJ and Others.
       In the absence of any evidence that the appellant was  at  risk,  the
      appellant's appeal inevitably failed.

Decision

  19. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  dismiss  the
      appellant's appeal on all grounds did not involve  the  making  of  an
      error of law.  Its decision stands.

  20. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.










                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















