
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/09381/2013
     Aa/09422/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard: Birmingham hearing centre     |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 11 November 2014                  |On 12 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     FS
                                     SK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Vokes, instructed by Britannia Law Practice LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. An anonymity direction is made pursuant to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of documents or information relating to the proceedings  or
    any matter likely to lead members of the public to be able to  identify
    the appellants or any members of their family.

 2. The appellants are husband and wife. The second appellant's appeal,  at
    least insofar as this decision is concerned, is accepted to be entirely
    dependent upon the  outcome  of  first  appellant's  appeal.   For  the
    purposes of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal I shall refer to  the
    first appellant as "the appellant".

 3. The appellants are nationals of Iran and they  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom together on 30 June 2013. The first appellant claimed asylum on
    the same date.  This application was refused by  the  respondent  in  a
    decision of 25 September 2013 (the second appellant also being named on
    the respondent's decision titled "Determination of Asylum Claim"). Both
    appellants were refused leave to enter the United Kingdom in  decisions
    also dated the 25 September 2013, but not served until the 27 September
    2013.  The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the
    latter decisions.

 4. These appeals were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Sommerville  and
    dismissed in a determination signed on 4 December 2013.  Permission  to
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Macdonald in a decision of 20 June 2014.

Summary of Refugee Convention claim

 5. The appellant claims to be at real risk of suffering  from  persecutory
    treatment upon return to Iran for two reasons.  He, first, asserts that
    he would be at risk upon return to Iran as a consequence of  the  anti-
    regime activities he undertook whilst he  was  living  there.  In  this
    regard he states, in summary, that whilst living in  Iran  he  and  his
    friends disseminated anti-regime material via CD.  On one  occasion  in
    2009, when he was distributing CDs, he intervened  when  plain  clothes
    officers were beating a 14 year old boy; this led  to  his  arrest  and
    detention  -  during  the  course  of  which  he  was  stabbed  by  the
    authorities.  He was subsequently arrested on numerous occasions by the
    authorities for, inter alia, demonstrating  against  them.  During  the
    course of his detentions he has been burnt with cigarettes and had  his
    arms slashed with broken glass.  In 2012 his shop and flat were  raided
    and 300 anti-regime CDs, as well as his computer, were removed  by  the
    authorities.  The police also searched his father's house  -  arresting
    his father. At this time the appellant fled the country with  his  wife
    and came to the United Kingdom.

 6. As to the second limb of his claim, the appellant states  that  he  has
    converted to Christianity since his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    having been baptised on 22 September 2013, and that as a consequence of
    either the fact of his conversion, or the fact he is now Christian,  he
    will be at risk in Iran

First-tier Tribunal's determination

 7. In paragraphs 29 to 38 of its  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    analysed the first limb  of  the  appellant's  case  and  concluded  as
    follows:

         "38.     I note that in his witness statement he says that  he  was
             detained twenty times.  In his screening interview at  5.1  he
             was arrested ten times.  In oral evidence before me he says he
             was arrested 'sixteen or seventeen times, maybe more'.   Given
             the seriousness of being arrested in Iran it is reasonable  to
             expect the appellant to have been more precise.  This together
             with the foregoing leads me to find  that  this  appellant  is
             capable of inaccuracy and exaggeration.

         39.      Having considered the entirety of the evidence I find that
             the appellant has failed to satisfy  me,  even  to  the  lower
             standard of proof, by way of cogent and corroborated  evidence
             that he is at real risk on return to Iran as  a  deserter  and
             because he was engaged in anti-regime activities."

 8. As to the second limb of the appellant's  claim,  i.e.  that  he  is  a
    Christian convert; the First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  appellant's
    evidence in this regard, concluding in paragraph 41 that:

             "[t]he appellant's adoption of the Christian faith  was  not  a
             belated attempt to bolster a weak asylum claim".

8.   The Tribunal thereafter set out a brief summary of the decision of  the
    Tribunal in SZ and JM (Christians FS confirmed) Iran  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
    0082 and quoted from the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  HJ  (Iran)
    UKSC 31. Having done so the Tribunal concluded:

        "44.      As to the second question I accept from  a  consideration
             of  the  country  background  material  that  those  who  have
             converted to Christianity and openly follow that religion will
             be liable to persecution in Iran.

         45.  As to the third question, the difficulty is that  there  is  a
             dearth of evidence as to what he would do if returned to Iran.
              There is some brief and vague reference in paragraphs  20  to
             23 to him evangelising in the UK but it is clear from his oral
             evidence and that of Pastor Jones that it amounted to no  more
             than bringing one Iranian friend along to a service.  The only
             reference as to what would happen in Iran is at  paragraph  21
             where he says 'I wanted to share what I was feeling with  many
             other people and I began to evangelise  so  people  would  see
             what I do.  In Iran this would not be  allowed  and  I  regret
             that no one could teach me openly about  Christianity  and  so
             now I have the chance to teach others'.  At  paragraph  23  he
             states 'Christianity for me is a way of life and  there  is  a
             serous violation of human rights, if I was to return to  Iran,
             I  will  be  killed   and   prosecuted   for   converting   to
             Christianity'.

         46.  As to the fourth question, for the reasons given above in  the
             context of the first reason for claiming asylum, I found  that
             he exaggerates risk.   I find that even having regard  to  the
             lower standard of proof the appellant has failed to satisfy me
             that he would openly practice Christianity on return  to  Iran
             and I conclude that he would not be at risk for  that  reason.
             In view of this finding it is not necessary for me to consider
             the remaining questions."

Decision on Error of law

 9. Having carefully considered the submissions of both  Mr  Smart  and  Mr
    Vokes I prefer Mr Vokes' submissions and conclude that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in respect of its  conclusions  on  both  limbs  of  the
    appellant's claim.

10. As to the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that the appellant would not
    be at risk as  a  consequence  of  having  converted  to  Christianity,
    although the  Tribunal  finds  that  the  appellant  would  not  openly
    practice Christianity upon return to Iran, there are no findings as  to
    why this is would be so.

11. This is significant given the terms of  the  decision  of  the  Supreme
    Court in HJ Iran, and in particular  the  approach  commended  by  Lord
    Rogers at paragraph 82 of that decision:

         "If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby be  exposed
         to a real risk of persecution then he has a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution - even if he could avoid the risk by living discretely.

         If, on the other hand, the Tribunal concludes  that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discretely and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so.

         If the Tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose  to  live
         discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e.g. not wanting to  distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
         be rejected.  Social pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them ...

         If, on the other hand,  the  Tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discretely on his return will be  a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted such a person as a well-founded fear
         of persecution."

12. In the instant case I observe that the Tribunal record in paragraph  41
    of its determination that whilst the appellant was living  in  Iran  he
    only attended  church  twice  "because  the  priest  said  it  was  too
    dangerous".  This behaviour by the appellant  supports  the  contention
    that he would not openly practice  Christianity  upon  return  to  Iran
    because of the risk attached to doing so.   This  issue  was  a  matter
    which the First-tier Tribunal was  required  to  determine  and  in  my
    conclusion it failed to do so.  Such a failure is  plainly  capable  of
    having an affect on the outcome of the appeal  and,  consequently,  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination ought to  be  set  aside  for  this
    reason alone.

13. In any event, in my conclusion the First-tier Tribunal also  materially
    erred in law in its consideration of the first limb of the  appellant's
    claim.  It is impossible to ascertain from paragraphs 29 to 38  of  the
    determination, where this limb of the claim is considered, what if  any
    of the appellant's evidence was accepted by the Tribunal.   Whilst  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  capable  of
    inaccuracy and exaggeration in his evidence, it did not state that as a
    consequence the whole of such evidence was rejected.

14. In particular, I agree with paragraph 7 of the appellant's  grounds  of
    application to the Upper Tribunal i.e. that the First-tier Tribunal did
    not identify whether it accepted or rejected the  appellant's  evidence
    that:

      a) he collected and disseminated anti-regime material;

      b) he was detained in 2009 and ill-treated;

      c) he was involved in anti-regime protests in 2010;

      d) he was detained in 2010;

      e) two of his friends were arrested in 2012;

      f) his father's home had been searched and his father arrested.

15. These are all important features of the appellant's case  and  even  if
    not all but some of these aspects of his  claim  were  accepted,  there
    would need to be a reasoned assessment as to whether such events led to
    there being an interest by the authorities in  appellant,  and  whether
    that interest would  put  the  appellant  at  real  risk  of  suffering
    persecutory treatment upon his return.

16. Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded,  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that it did accept, that the appellant would not be at risk  -
    absent the appellant being able identify what evidence was accepted  he
    is not  able  to  bring  proper  challenge  to  such  conclusion.   The
    appellant is entitled to know what features of his case  were  accepted
    and which were rejected in order that he may  bring  challenge,  if  so
    advised, to the ultimate conclusion based on those findings.

17. In my conclusion this error is capable of affecting the outcome of  the
    appeal; indeed I observe that at paragraph 46 of the determination  the
    First-tier Tribunal relies on its findings  made  in  relation  to  the
    first limb of the  appellant's  claim  as  a  matter  relevant  to  the
    determination of the second limb.

18. For these reasons I set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

19. Both parties agreed that the  appropriate  course  was  to  remit  this
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing - with the
    conclusion that the appellant is a  genuine  Christian  convert  to  be
    preserved.  Having considered paragraph 7  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Directions of 2012, I  agree  that  this  is  the  appropriate
    course and I so direct.

20. For the sake of completeness I observe at this stage, in order that the
    First-tier Tribunal may properly case  manage  this  matter,  that  the
    second appellant is said to have now made an independent asylum  claim.
    Unfortunately, neither of the representatives were able to provide  any
    further details as to the progression of this claim.  It may be that in
    these  circumstances  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  think  it
    appropriate to hold a Case Management Hearing prior to any  substantive
    rehearing of this appeal. This, though, is entirely a  matter  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to determine.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 26 November 2014

