
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09398/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8th September 2014                         |On 8th  October 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                    SAKA
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Heywood, instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1st January 1983.  He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  25th  September
    2013 to remove him from the UK following a refusal to grant him asylum,
    humanitarian protection and protection under the European Convention.

 2. The appellant claimed that his father was a commander  for  the  Itihad
    Islami for fifteen years, he fought against the Russians and after they
    left the Taliban approached his father and  asked  him  to  join.   His
    father did not wish to but was threatened by them.  His  father  joined
    the Taliban as a commander and was put in charge of 65 men.  After  his
    father joined he asked the appellant to assist him as his bodyguard and
    the appellant did so as he was afraid someone would kill his father.

 3. During his time with the Taliban he saw a  leader,  MD,  behead  a  man
    because he believed him to be a spy.  After this  incident  his  father
    decided to leave the Taliban.  He and his father and the  three  elders
    under his father's command left.

 4. Whilst crossing the desert the appellant and his father  were  arrested
    and placed in detention.  The appellant was accused of killing MK,  the
    son of the governor of Herat.  The appellant claims he then spent  four
    years in Sarpoza Prison in Kandahar and was never formally convicted or
    tried.  He claimed he was tortured and his head was covered and he  was
    beaten.

 5. He managed to escape from the prison and went  with  a  fellow  Taliban
    member to his home in Kunduz where he remained with him for six  months
    in hiding.

 6. His father was shot dead whilst trying to escape from the prison.

 7. After six months he returned home to Kunar Province where he stayed for
    one night before he fled as the Taliban came to his house  looking  for
    him.

 8. The next day his mother told him that the government  were  coming  for
    him and he ran away and stayed with his maternal uncle for two  months.
    His uncle's house was bombed and he decided to leave Afghanistan.

 9. There was considerable correspondence between the  respondent  and  the
    appellant's solicitors as to whether the appellant had  been  convicted
    of a final judgment of a particularly serious crime and further whether
    his continued presence in the UK constituted a danger to the community.
     Not least there was consideration as to whether the  appellant  should
    be excluded from protection in line with Articles 1F(a) and (c) of  the
    Geneva Convention.

10. It was submitted by the appellant's representative in a letter of  24th
    August 2013 further to Al-Sirri & DD (Afghanistan) v the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 54  that  the  appellant  had
    never been convicted of an offence in a court of law despite being held
    by the  Afghan  authorities  for  some  four  years  and  that  he  had
    consistently denied having any knowledge of the crime of which  he  was
    verbally accused but never charged with (the killing of the son of  the
    governor of Herat, MK).  It was submitted that his involvement with the
    Taliban disclosed nothing to seriously suggest that he  had  personally
    committed an act that would  constitute  a  crime  against  peace,  war
    crime, or a crime against humanity (Article 1F(a)), nor one that  could
    be classed as being contrary to the  purposes  and  principles  of  the
    United Nations (Article 1F(c)).

11. It was submitted that there were not sufficiently serious  reasons  for
    considering  Articles  1F(a)  and  (c)   applied   to   the   appellant
    particularly in view of the higher standard required following Al-Sirri
    which identified that the exclusion clauses in the  Refugee  Convention
    should be restrictively interpreted and cautiously  applied  and  there
    must be serious reasons to consider the exclusion clauses applied based
    on clear and credible or strong evidence and further the decision maker
    should be "satisfied that it is more likely than not that the applicant
    has not committed the crimes in question or has not been guilty of acts
    contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations"  and  in
    effect  "the  decision  maker  can  be  satisfied  on  a   balance   of
    probabilities that the applicant is guilty.

12. In the event the refusal letter of the Secretary of  State  dated  25th
    September 2013 did not indicate that the appellant was considered to be
    excluded from the  protection  of  either  the  Refugee  Convention  or
    humanitarian protection and  it  is  on  this  basis  that  Judge  Obhi
    proceeded and in a  determination  promulgated  on  15th  January  2014
    dismissed the appellant's appeal in  respect  of  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and protection under the Human Rights Convention.

13. An application for permission to appeal was  made  by  the  appellant's
    representatives on the following grounds.  The judge failed to  address
    Article 3 and the prospect of the appellant facing inhuman or degrading
    treatment and conditions in prison if he were returned.  The judge made
    various positive findings and at paragraphs 36 and 37 the judge  stated
    "he may be wanted by the authorities in relation  to  his  escape  from
    prison  but  that  would  not  place  him  in  need  of   international
    protection".

14. No account was taken  of  the  objective  evidence  in  particular  the
    respondent's own evidence of the Country of Origin  Information  Report
    at  3.16.10  and  3.1.6.12  which  states  that  prison  conditions  in
    Afghanistan were likely to reach the Article 3 threshold.   The  matter
    was before the judge and it was  incumbent  upon  her  to  address  the
    matter.  The  expert  opinion  of  Dr  Giustozzi  paragraphs  8  and  9
    evidenced that he would be at risk of mistreatment and physical harm if
    he were arrested on account of merely being a suspected Taliban.

15. A second ground challenging the determination was  that  there  was  an
    irrational or insufficiently reasoned rejection of credibility.  Whilst
    the judge accepted that the  appellant  was  imprisoned  as  a  Taliban
    combatant it was not accepted that he was tortured whilst in  detention
    prior to escaping prison and did not accept that the father was  killed
    during the breakout from prison.

16. This was irrational as the judge accepted the Medical Foundation Report
    by Dr Bennett whom the judge recorded at paragraph 30  confirmed  "that
    the injuries to the feet could have been caused by falaka  and  in  his
    opinion are more likely to have been  caused  that  way  and  that  the
    flashbacks and general mood of the appellant is attributable to PSTD".

17. It was asserted that  Dr  Bennett  was  careful  to  use  the  Istanbul
    Protocol and categorised the injuries to the soles of the feet  to  the
    second  highest  degree  of  certainty  within  the  Istanbul  Protocol
    classification.  The use of typical meant "this is an  appearance  that
    is usually found with this type of trauma but there are other  possible
    causes".  The judge failed to have regard to the  significance  of  the
    term typical.

18. The judge also gave an irrational  rejection  of  torture  owing  to  a
    purported lack of evidence of torture at Sarpoza Prison.

19. The principal reason the  judge  gave  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    account of torture at  Sarpoza  was  that  the  appellant's  claims  of
    torture were not supported by objective evidence.  In  fact  there  was
    evidence of torture at Sarpoza Prison at page 201  of  the  appellant's
    bundle from the  United  Nations  Assistance  Mission  in  Afghanistan,
    UNAMA, Treatment of Conflict-Related Detainees in Afghan  Custody:  One
    Year On dated 21st January 2013.   This  referred  to  torture  in  the
    prison  in  Sarpoza  which  documented  48  sufficiently  reliable  and
    credible cases of torture.

20. It was thus not rational of the judge to conclude  that  the  appellant
    was not credible due to the alleged absence of such evidence  which  in
    any event was based on a mistake of fact.

21. Similarly the judge erred in failing to take account  of  the  evidence
    regarding the incidents of falaka in several parts of the evidence.

22. The judge was  also  mistaken  in  implying  that  Sarpoza  Prison  was
    actually controlled by Canadians and there was no evidence of the same.
     The prison was in control of Afghan wardens and employees.

23. It was also irrational of the judge to find that the appellant was  not
    tortured and that his father was not killed  at  the  point  of  prison
    breakout because there was no objective evidence, it was a misdirection
    to hold that such corroboration was required.

24. The third ground was that there was  an  irrational  rejection  of  the
    expert report in relation to the reasons for the appellant's detention.
     The judge had accepted Dr Giustozzi's evidence that it  was  plausible
    that the appellant had been accused of the murder of MK.  Dr  Giustozzi
    evidenced at paragraphs 7 (p44)  and  9  (p47)  that  although  it  was
    unlikely the authorities believed he had any role  such  an  accusation
    was useful in seeking to justify his detention.

25. The judge stated, however, as the appellant was a member of the Taliban
    actively engaged in combat with the Afghan army and  allies  there  was
    reason enough for him to be imprisoned.  The reasoning was perverse  as
    it assumed without evidence the  authorities  had  sufficient  evidence
    against him that he was a Taliban  combatant  to  justify  holding  him
    rather than mere suspicion.

26. The fourth ground was that the judge was mistaken that Dr Giustozzi did
    not have the SEF interview before him when the judge thought he did not
    and secondly that the judge assumed that Dr Bennett did  not  have  the
    reasons for refusal letter before him when he did.

27. Application for permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Ievins.  He found that it was arguable that  the  judge  did  not
    attach sufficient weight to the experts' reports,  those  being  of  Dr
    Giustozzi and Dr Bennett, and further it was arguable  that  the  judge
    made a mistake of fact when she found that claims of torture at Sarpoza
    Prison were not supported by objective evidence.

28. The judge had a  difficult  task  when  required  to  make  credibility
    findings in an asylum appeal where the appellant did not give evidence.

29. At the hearing I raised the issue of the possibility  of  exclusion  of
    the appellant  from  the  protection  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    humanitarian protection.  Mr Bramble submitted that the appellant was a
    low level member of the Taliban and the Secretary of State  had  chosen
    not to pursue this aspect.  The case had been  placed  before  the  war
    crimes section and they had chosen not to take the matter further.

30. Mr Heywood submitted that if this once again became a live issue as  it
    was not taken by the judge the matter would have to be re-canvassed.

31. In the event Mr Heywood submitted  that  there  was  a  material  error
    outlined as above in the written application for permission to appeal.

32. The judge had accepted that the appellant had symptoms of torture  from
    the use of falaka.  There was controversy in Canada about the  problems
    in the prisons but nonetheless within the evidence  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal there was evidence of torture in the Sarpoza Prison.   In
    the light of the clear findings made by the judge there was an error of
    law.

33. Mr Bramble agreed that the judge had found at  various  points  of  the
    determination that the appellant was imprisoned and it did  not  matter
    the basis on which he imprisoned but she  had  failed  to  address  the
    Article 3 detention conditions.  Dr Bennett had recorded  the  injuries
    to the appellant and she had  accepted  his  report  was  measured  and
    balanced.  Dr Giustozzi's report had  been  given  insufficient  weight
    bearing in mind the positive findings.

34. Mr Bramble confirmed  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    findings within the Rule 24 response.

35. If the appellant's representative was arguing that the judge's findings
    regarding whether the appellant was associated with the  murder  of  MK
    and the father was shot in attempting to escape there would need to  be
    a de novo hearing.

36. If not pursuing those aspects the sole issue was whether in  the  light
    of the findings that had been made regarding the prison and that he was
    wanted by the authorities the matter should be considered with  respect
    to Article 3.

37. Mr Heywood  submitted  that  humanitarian  protection  should  also  be
    considered and he should not be excluded from  the  protection  of  the
    Refugee Convention.

38. Under the UNHCR guidelines the appellant would be protected as  someone
    who was involved in a group like the Taliban.

Conclusions

39. At the outset I  make  it  clear  that  I  pursued  the  issue  of  the
    appellant's exclusion from the protection of the Refugee Convention and
    humanitarian protection but Mr Bramble confirmed that this  matter  was
    not taken forward by the Secretary of State although  it  was  explored
    and indeed the reasons for refusal letter do not  appear  to  challenge
    the appellant's right to such protection albeit that he was a low level
    Taliban combatant.

40. As a  second  point  the  respondent  did  not  challenge  the  certain
    credibility findings made by Judge Obhi and for clarification I set out
    those findings which she made in her determination and I will  at  this
    stage note that Judge Obhi had a difficult task ahead of her bearing in
    mind the appellant did not give evidence. The judge  accepts  that  the
    appellant was a member of the Taliban and there was reason  enough  for
    him to be imprisoned.  The judge also accepted that he may be wanted by
    the authorities. At paragraph 28 the judge records that  the  appellant
    considered the appellant would be at risk if he returned to Afghanistan
    because of the rise of insurgency.

41. The judge at paragraph 27 stated that Dr Giustozzi  did  not  have  the
    appellant's Asylum Interview Record before him and this it would appear
    was a mistake of fact on the part of the judge.  It is  clear  that  at
    paragraph 27 that the judge recorded  that  the  authorities  held  the
    appellant on the basis of the accusation that he had  murdered  MK  and
    the judge noted that Dr Giustozzi considered  "it  plausible  that  the
    appellant could have been  arrested  by  the  government  because  they
    suspected him of holding useful information, and that there is evidence
    that  they  tend  to  arrest  large  numbers  of  people  in  order  to
    interrogate them". That seems logical. Dr Giustozzi is a well respected
    expert who has given numerous  balanced  reports  to  the  Tribunal  in
    respect of Afghanistan and weight should be given to his report.

42. In particular the judge recorded that Dr Giustozzi believed there could
    be a risk to the appellant from the Taliban  who  had  a  sophisticated
    intelligence system in existence in Afghanistan  and  that  the  police
    were known to collaborate with the Taliban.  Although at  paragraph  29
    the judge appeared to reject Dr Giustozzi's account on the  basis  that
    he did not have an asylum interview  that  in  fact  was  an  error  as
    indicated because as indicated above he did have it.

43. More tellingly at paragraph 31 the judge states "I accept on the  basis
    of  the  two  expert  reports  that  the  appellant's   account   seems
    plausible".  Nonetheless she states that much of the evidence is widely
    available and he could have effectively heard about or read  about  the
    evidence and incorporated this into his own account.  I  find  that  in
    error she rejected his account in relation to Sarpoza Prison because of
    her mistaken understanding of the objective evidence.  She states  that
    "there are some aspects  of  the  appellant's  account  which  are  not
    supported by the objective evidence.  In particular those  relating  to
    Sarpoza Prison (31)."

44. She accepts that he has his father were involved with the  Taliban  but
    goes on to state "his claims of torture at the prison are not supported
    by the objective evidence and importantly there is no evidence that his
    father was killed as a result of being shot by the  authorities  during
    the jailbreak from Sarpoza".  The judge further adds "those  that  were
    injured or were  killed  are  accounted  for  and  it  seems  that  the
    Canadians who had oversight of the prison have come  in  for  criticism
    for not doing enough to stop the breakout or  preventing  inmates  from
    escaping". There was a mistake by the judge in respect of the objective
    evidence of torture at Sarpoza Prison and a mistake  by  the  judge  in
    respect of the Canadians having oversight of the prison at the relevant
    time of claimed torture.  The  background  material  such  as  Sabawoon
    Online and the Edmonton Journal articles and the Canwest  News  Service
    referred to torture in Sarpoza prison and the issue that it had  raised
    in Canada. Indeed there was reference to the jail breakout in  2008  in
    response to torture at Sarpoza.  A  further  article  entitled  'Canada
    complicit in Torture of innocent Afghans' referred  to  allegations  of
    Canadian involvement in torture. There were references in the paperwork
    to United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan dated 21st  January
    2013 documenting sufficiently reliable and credible  cases  of  torture
    with reference to Sarpoza.

45. The fact is that there  were  country  background  reports  of  torture
    relating to Sarpoza Prison and his  claims  of  torture  were  in  fact
    further supported by the medical evidence of Dr Bennett.

46. There does not appear to have been sufficient weight attached either to
    the report of Dr Giustozzi bearing in mind he did have all the relevant
    documents and the report of Dr Bennett bearing in mind he also had  all
    the relevant documents.

47. As noted at paragraph 30 of the judge's determination  Dr  Bennett  did
    not merely accept that the injuries to his feet could be  "attributable
    to torture,  hitting  the  soles  of  the  feet  with  hard  implements
    sometimes referred to as falaka".  In particular he  states  that  they
    were 'typical' and the judge herself records that "in his  opinion  are
    more likely to have been caused in that way and that the flashbacks and
    general mood of the appellant is attributable to PSTD".

48. The fact that the report was prepared as long  ago  as  2009  does  not
    undermine the fact that the appellant did indeed have injuries  to  the
    soles of his feet and the judge did not give sufficient weight to those
    injuries.

49. The judge appeared to accept that the report of Dr Bennett was balanced
    and measured.  She appeared to accept that the appellant  was  involved
    with the Taliban (36) and she appears to accept that "at some point  he
    was arrested and imprisoned" (paragraph 36).

50. It would appear that the judge became confused because at paragraph  32
    she stated "therefore although I accept that the account is plausible I
    am not satisfied on the lower standard that the appellant was  tortured
    or that his father was killed whilst  attempting  to  escape  from  the
    prison". In conclusion the judge stated at 37 that the  appellant  "may
    be wanted by the authorities in relation to his escape from the  prison
    but that would not place him in need of international protection".

51. I find that the above is  an  incorrect  assessment  of  the  objective
    evidence before her, particularly when considering the reports  I  have
    cited,  and  therefore  I  find  an  error  of  law  and   remake   the
    determination.

52. What was accepted by the respondent was that he had an involvement with
    the Taliban and Judge Obhi too found  the  appellant's  account  to  be
    plausible.  She accepted he had been associated with the  Taliban.   On
    the basis of the above findings by the judge, which were not challenged
    by the respondent, the appellant was a former combatant in the Taliban,
    who had then left, and on the basis of the findings he may be wanted by
    the authorities in relation to his escape from the prison.  The finding
    by Judge Obhi was that the appellant would be  at  risk  on  return  of
    detention from the authorities. Bearing in mind  the  findings  of  the
    judge which remain  unchallenged  and  preserved  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's account he may well be rearrested on return.  The  evidence
    of Dr Giustozzi, who is  a respected expert in this field, supports the
    assertion that the appellant may well be  re-arrested  on  his  return.
    Clearly he would be at risk from the  authorities  and  sufficiency  of
    protection and relocation would not be options.

53.  A further question is whether he would  still  be  at  risk  from  the
    Taliban on  his  return?   The  report  of  Dr  Guistozzi  recorded  at
    paragraph 11 of his  report  that  the  Taliban  have  an  increasingly
    sophisticated operation growing in Kabul which is where  the  appellant
    would be returned to.   However, as Dr Giustozzi indicated  the  police
    are often known to collaborate with the Taliban and thus it is  a  risk
    that if the authorities want the appellant that the Taliban might  also
    be informed of his return.

54. Even if that were not the case I find that the appellant would  be,  on
    the basis of the judge's findings, to be at risk from the government on
    the basis of his perceived connection with the Taliban albeit that  his
    account that he had left and was a bodyguard was accepted.

55. Paragraph 3.16.5 of the  Operational  Guidance  Report  on  Afghanistan
    confirmed that 'there were widespread reports that government officials
    security forces, detention  centre  authorities  and  police  committed
    abuses' 'security forces continued to use excessive force' and evidence
    cited of 'torture at nine NDS facilities  and  several  ANP  facilities
    such as beating with sticks, electric cables, pipes and rubber  hoses'.
     The report continued 'overall prison  conditions  in  Afghanistan  are
    severe  and  taking  into  account  the  levels  of  overcrowding  poor
    sanitation s prevalence of disease and absence of  medical  facilities,
    lack of food and the high incidence of torture are likely to reach  the
    Article 3 threshold'.

56. I apply AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT  163  such  that
    return to Kabul is, in general, a safe option but in this  instance  he
    would be at risk from the authorities of detention  for  his  perceived
    connection with the Taliban and perceived imputed political connection,
    should he return to Afghanistan and he would be at real risk of inhuman
    and degrading treatment, in view of  the  critical  conditions  in  the
    Afghan prisons as recorded in the Country of Origin Information Report.
    Therefore he should be afforded asylum and Article 3 protection.

57. As I found an error of law in respect of the appellant's risk on return
    and I set aside the  determination  of  Judge  Obhi  in  that  respect,
    remake the decision and allow the appeal.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



DECISION

I allow the appeal on Asylum grounds
I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds
I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.





Signed                                  Date 3rd October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

