
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09040/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th October 2015                 |On 3rd November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                     gfj
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

It has  previously  been  found  appropriate,  given  this  appeal  involves
children and asylum issues,  that  the  Appellant(s)  be  granted  anonymity
unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise.   As  such,  no  report  of
these proceedings shall directly, or indirectly, identify the Appellant  (s)
or any members  of  his/her/their  family.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to a contempt of court.

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Clemes, promulgated on 6th March  2015,  in  which  the
    Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  brought  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.  The Grounds of Appeal before me do not  challenge  the
    dismissal of the protection  claim.   Permission  was  not  granted  in
    respect of the challenge  that  the  Judge's  consideration  failed  to
    assess the best interests of  the  Appellant's  child.  The  Ground  of
    Appeal upon which permission was granted was directed at the Article  8
    decision.

 2. Mr Lam before me sought to argue that

      i) Immigration Rules Private Life test of paragraph 276ADE:

          a) the judge only looked at one sub paragraph i.e. (vi)  that  of
             20 years residence, rather then the one  applicable,  i.e.  to
             less than 20 years residence at (v) and,

          b) when looking at 276 ADE (vi)  looked  at  the  wrong  version,
             assessing the quality  of  ties  existing  ties,  rather  then
             asking whether there were very significant  obstacles  to  re-
             integration, which Mr Lam asserted was an easier test,

     ii) Further the Judge should have revisited the issue when he made  his
         proportionality assessment in the context  of  Article  8  ECHR  at
         large, and brought forward his own finding that   by  the  time  of
         the hearing  if the Appellant had made a new application  it  might
         be granted under the 20 year route.

 3. The ground at (i) is a spurious gloss on the position as it was  before
    the FtTJ. The Appellant had not applied under the Private  Life  Rules.
    He did not appeal on the ground that he met the Rules.  If  he  had  he
    could not have succeeded, whether under the 20 year route or  the  very
    significant obstacles provision, because the 20 year route  is  a  time
    line which is calculated as at the date of  application  not  decision,
    and the Appellant did not meet it, and in any event, as applies to  the
    each of the time line routes, an application must have been made to the
    respondent, and no application had been made. Accordingly any appeal on
    Immigration Rules grounds regardless of the sub paragraph or  the  test
    was bound to fail.

 4. The ground at (ii) is without merit. Firstly it is clear that the judge
    was well aware of the position in  respect  of  any  fresh  application
    because he states  at  [28]  that  such  an  application  made  to  the
    respondent might well have to be granted.

 5. The Appellant argues that  the  Judge  must  have  lost  sight  of  the
    position in assessing the overall Article 8 proportionality exercise is
    little short of a perversity challenge because  it  is  argued  on  the
    basis that if he had had it in mind he would have  found  the  decision
    proportionate. I am asked to set  the  decision  aside  and  remake  it
    allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 6. As Mr Lam recognised the force in the  application  was  identified  by
    Upper Tier Judge Southern when he granted permission to the point  that
    when assessing the Appellant's Article 8 position the fact that he  had
    resided in the United Kingdom for a length of  time  which  would  mean
    that the Respondent might well have to grant an application,  if  made,
    on the basis of long residence is a matter which arguably  renders  the
    decision on proportionality perverse.

 7. I note that it was the judge's own understanding, in that  it  was  not
    the argument put forward by the representative. I note the shortness of
    the decision to the point  that  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  is
    unlikely to have forgotten it.

 8. I note that it was not submitted to  the  Judge  that  the  Appellant's
    length of unlawful residence should be  determinative  of  the  overall
    Article 8 position.

 9. The long residence Rules at 276ADE are not determined merely by  length
    of residence, or the context of a valid application  supported  by  the
    appropriate fee, but  also  require  the  satisfaction  of  suitability
    requirements.

10. At the date of the Judge's decision the length of residence is but  one
    of the issues, in the absence of an application having been made to the
    Respondent  issues  in  respect  of  suitability  had  not  even   been
    investigated or considered by her and  the  matter  was  not  canvassed
    before the Judge.

11. Whilst a cursory reading of the Judge's finding at [28] might give rise
    to the impression that the Judge was  indicating  that  an  application
    based on long residence would be bound to be granted, a careful reading
    reveals that that is not in fact the case.  Whilst the  Judge  makes  a
    finding in favour of the Appellant in terms of the length of  residence
    such an application requires the Judge does not make any finding as  to
    the outcome of such an application.  The requirements of the  Rule,  as
    these grounds  have  illustrated,  change  from  time  to  time.   Even
    allowing that the Judge was correct in his  speculation  that  such  an
    application might well be granted  on  the  current  version  it  is  a
    speculative position.  This is not a case where there was a  concession
    made by the Respondent that in the event that such an application  were
    made it would be granted.  I understand that such an application is now
    outstanding but that does not affect the issue either.

12. The assessment to be made by the judge was an  evaluation  through  the
    lens of a failure to meet the requirements of the Rules  of  Article  8
    private and family life "outside of the Rules". The assessment was,  in
    the context including  factors which amendments  to  the  2002  act  by
    section 117 of the 2014 Act, none of which it is suggested make Private
    Life Rules based on length of residence  determinative, a question  for
    assessment  by the judge.

13.  The  family  had  no  entitlement  to  remain  under  the  Rules;  the
    Respondent's decision was a lawful decision in the Rules  context.  The
    judge  found  that  removal  would  not  unduly  interfere   with   the
    Appellant's family life or that of his partner and children, also  here
    unlawfully, as they would be removed as a family unit. The judge  found
    that they would be able to enjoy family and private life in  China  and
    there were no real obstacles to their being able to enjoy a  future  in
    China.

14. The Judge has adequately considered the position of  the  Appellant  in
    the round and found that there was nothing  in  his  and  his  family's
    position which made removal a disproportionate  interference.    Looked
    at the position in the round the ability of the  Appellant  to  make  a
    different Private Life application under the Rules, even allowing  that
    it might be  granted,  does  not  render  the  Judge's  own  assessment
    erroneous in law. In short the Judge, whilst recognising the length  of
    residence at 28, and the opportunity open to the Appellant  to  make  a
    different  Rules  based  Private  Life  application,  was  entitled  to
    conclude that as at the date of her consideration the removal  decision
    was not disproportionate. Whilst expressly saying so  would  have  made
    the point clear to the Appellant, to suggest that the failure to do  so
    is a material error is misconceived not least because it  was  not  the
    argument on the day.

15. I find that the reasoning of the Judge is adequate, dealing fully  with
    the case as argued, and reaching an evaluative  conclusion  sustainable
    on the evidence.  I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is not flawed by a material error of law and it stands.


Signed   E Davidge     Date 02 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
