

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               AA/09730/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th January 2016                          |On 17th May 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                Jaspal Singh
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms Smith, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms Johnstone,   Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on the 3rd March  1983.
    He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge D Pickup) to dismiss his appeal,  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds, against the Respondent's  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


    Background and Reasons

 2.  The  Appellant  claimed  asylum  in  2014  advancing  an  account   of
    persecution on account of his religion and ethnicity. This was rejected
    on the 31st October 2014. The Respondent expressly  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was from Afghanistan, and that he was Sikh,  and  that  as  a
    result there was a reasonable likelihood that he  and  his  family  had
    been "victims of mistreatment". It was not however  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's family's shop had been targeted, that  in  April  2013  his
    cousin had been murdered by people trying  to  extort  money  from  his
    uncle or that the Appellant himself had latterly received threats  from
    the Taliban.


 3. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup  heard
    oral evidence from the Appellant and his wife.   He did not find it  to
    be credible and rejected their entire account, bar those matters  which
    had already been accepted by the Respondent. He did not find it  to  be
    plausible that the Appellant's father would run a shop  for  26  years,
    and having been subject to threats and  extortion  for  many  of  those
    years would suddenly abandon his business  to  leave.  The  Appellant's
    wife had given inconsistent evidence  about  her  family  remaining  in
    Afghanistan and the Appellant himself was not believed when he  claimed
    that he did not know what countries he had passed through in  order  to
    get to the UK.  If he had suffered instances of "bullying" this did not
    amount to persecution.  The Appellant's  representative  accepted  that
    the the extant country guidance  of  SL  &  Ors  (Returning  Sikhs  and
    Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT 000137 indicated that there was  no
    general risk of persecution to the Sikh population; he  relied  however
    on the more recent case of DSG & Ors (Afghan Sikhs: departure from  CG)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC). In that case the Tribunal had held
    that the First-tier Tribunal had been entitled, in view of the evidence
    before it, to depart  from  the  2005  guidance  in  SL.  Judge  Pickup
    declined to do the same. He found no evidence to suggest that Sikhs are
    subject to persecution in Afghanistan and given  that  he  had  already
    rejected the Appellant's account he saw no reason to depart  from  that
    general principle, set down in SL.




    Error of Law


 4. The grounds of appeal are that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  declining  to
    follow DSG. The Tribunal in that case had upheld the conclusions of the
    First-tier Tribunal that Sikhs were subject to  persecution,  and  that
    there had been a material change in circumstances  since  SL  had  been
    heard, namely a dramatic fall in the number of Sikhs and Hindus  living
    in Afghanistan.   It is submitted  that  Judge  Pickup  has  failed  to
    assess this claim against the new  country  background  material  which
    shows Sikhs to be an embattled minority.   Permission  was  granted  on
    that basis.

 5. By the time that the appeal had come before me, the matters in  dispute
    had been overtaken by promulgation of the new country guidance case  on
    Afghan Sikhs: TG & Ors (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG  [2015]
    UKUT 00595 (IAC). The headnote in that case sets out the new guidance:



             i)  Some  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu   communities   in
                Afghanistan continue to suffer harassment at  the  hands  of
                Muslim zealots.

            ii) Members of the Sikh and Hindu communities in Afghanistan  do
                not face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment such as
                to entitle them to a grant of  international  protection  on
                the basis of their ethnic or  religious  identity,  per  se.
                Neither can  it  be  said  that  the  cumulative  impact  of
                discrimination suffered by the Sikh and Hindu communities in
                general reaches the threshold of persecution.

           iii) A consideration of whether an individual member of the  Sikh
                and Hindu communities is at risk real  of  persecution  upon
                return to Afghanistan is fact-sensitive.  All  the  relevant
                circumstances  must  be  considered  but  careful  attention
                should be paid to the following:


      a. women are particularly vulnerable in  the  absence  of  appropriate
         protection from a male member of the family;


      b.  likely  financial  circumstances  and  ability  to  access   basic
         accommodation bearing in mind

       - Muslims are generally unlikely to employ a member of the  Sikh  and
         Hindu communities
       -  such  individuals  may  face  difficulties   (including   threats,
         extortion, seizure of land  and  acts  of  violence)  in  retaining
         property and / or pursuing  their  remaining  traditional  pursuit,
         that of a shopkeeper / trader
       - the  traditional  source  of  support  for  such  individuals,  the
         Gurdwara, is much less able to provide adequate support;


      c. the level of religious devotion and the practical accessibility  to
         a suitable place of religious worship in light of declining numbers
         and the evidence that some have been subjected to harm and  threats
         to harm whilst accessing the Gurdwara;


      d.  access  to  appropriate  education  for  children  in   light   of
         discrimination against Sikh and Hindu children and the shortage  of
         adequate education facilities for them.

            iv) Although it appears there is a willingness  at  governmental
                level to provide protection, it is not  established  on  the
                evidence that at a local level the police are willing,  even
                if able,  to  provide  the  necessary  level  of  protection
                required  in  Refugee   Convention/Qualification   Directive
                terms, to those members of the Sikh  and  Hindu  communities
                who experience  serious  harm  or  harassment  amounting  to
                persecution.

             v) Whether it is reasonable to expect a member of the  Sikh  or
                Hindu  communities  to  relocate   is   a   fact   sensitive
                assessment. The relevant factors to  be  considered  include
                those set  out  at  (iii)  above.   Given  their  particular
                circumstances and declining number,  the  practicability  of
                settling  elsewhere  for  members  of  the  Sikh  and  Hindu
                communities must be  carefully  considered.   Those  without
                access to an independent income are unlikely to be  able  to
                reasonably relocate because of depleted support mechanisms.

            vi) This replaces the county guidance provided in the cases of K
                (Risk - Sikh - Women) Afghanistan CG [2003] UKIAT 00057  and
                SL and Others (Returning Sikhs and  Hindus)  Afghanistan  CG
                [2005] UKAIT 00137.

 6. As can be seen from that summary, the Tribunal have taken into  account
    the declining numbers in the Sikh community, but that this increase  in
    the vulnerability of those who are left does not undermine the  central
    conclusion reached at (ii). The clear finding is that there  is  not  a
    risk of persecution per se; this maintains the central  finding  of  SL
    adopted by Judge Pickup. There can therefore be no  arguable  merit  in
    the ground that he erred in failing to apply DSG.  The point  was  that
    in that case the First-tier Tribunal had found the  individual  account
    of persecution to be made out, and this had obvious  ramifications  for
    the forward looking risk assessment. In contrast  in  this  case  Judge
    Pickup found the account to be inherently incoherent, the witnesses  to
    be inconsistent and for that reason found the burden of proof not to be
    discharged.


 7. It follows that there was no error of  law  in  the  approach  to  this
    appeal.



    Decisions


 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
    is upheld.

 9. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and in the circumstances
    I see no reason to do so.









      Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            1st February
                                    2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on the 16th
February 2015.
 The Respondent expressly accepted that the Appellant was from Afghanistan,
and that he was Sikh
of persecution on account of hi

