
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA099532014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25th May 2016                         |On 10th June 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                   MR M B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant MB is a citizen of Pakistan born [ ]  1971.   He  entered
    the UK on 6th November 2010 in possession of a Tier  4  (Student)  visa
    valid until February 2012.

 2. He applied to extend this visa, but his application was  refused  twice
    by the Respondent; the first time in 2012 and the second time in  2013.
    Following those refusals the  Appellant  applied  for  asylum  on  30th
    October 2014.

 3. His application for asylum was refused and a decision was taken on 18th
    November 2014 to remove him from the UK.  The Appellant  appealed  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  Although there was a hearing  and
    a subsequent decision made on that appeal, the decision was  set  aside
    for procedural irregularity following the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in The Lord Chancellor v Detention Action [2015] EWCA  Civ  840.
    The Court of  Appeal  found  that  the  "fast  track"  element  of  the
    Immigration Rules was unlawful.

 4. The Appellant's appeal therefore was heard afresh and came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Maxwell) which in a decision promulgated  on
    29th  March  2016  dismissed  the   Appellant's   appeal   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.   The  Appellant  now
    appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. The Appellant's claims to international protection, are set out in [17]
    to [24] of the FtT's decision.  In summary they amount  to  this.   The
    Appellant fears  return  to  Pakistan  because  of  the  actions  of  a
    neighbouring family called 'B', who according to the Appellant [runs] a
    mafia type organisation.  It is also claimed that the local police  are
    in their pocket.  The Appellant says that his problems  began  in  2007
    when three brothers from the B family targeted him and his  family,  by
    placing their drainage over his land. This led to an  argument  between
    members of the appellant's family and the B family.  In retaliation for
    this the B family arranged for a false First Information  Report  (FIR)
    of burglary and theft to be issued against the Appellant's  father  and
    other "unknown persons". The Appellant's father was arrested by corrupt
    police officers and when the Appellant  and  his  brothers  complained,
    they too were arrested and detained.  The Appellant was released  after
    two days but his father and  brother  were  held  for  two  months  and
    subjected to torture. They were held  without  charge.   The  Appellant
    however reported this to a District Police  Officer  who  is  a  higher
    authority. He forced the corrupt officers to formally record the  false
    case against the appellant's father. This led to the case collapsing at
    court, as the B family did not attend to give evidence.

 6. In 2009 the Appellant began collecting evidence against  the  B  family
    regarding false allegations and  intimidation  and  this  evidence  was
    presented to the local police but  the  investigation  stalled  and  no
    action was taken.

 7. The Appellant then received information that the B family were planning
    to attack him, so he left Pakistan and came to the UK as a student.

 8. Whilst in the UK, the Appellant received information that another false
    allegation had been issued against him, this time alleging that he  was
    trafficking people into the UK and  was  guilty  of  embezzlement.   He
    claims therefore that he is wanted  in  Pakistan  and  fears  returning
    there as he would be arrested and tortured by corrupt  officials  based
    on these false allegations.  In addition, the Appellant's family, it is
    said, still live in fear within Pakistan.  The Appellant's brothers are
    constantly on the run for fear of being located  and  detained  by  the
    authorities and recently the Appellant's nephew was shot as an  act  of
    vengeance by members of the B family.  I pause here to  note  that  the
    grounds seeking permission claim that the Appellant's nephew  was  shot
    dead in a contract killing that the family attribute to the  B  family.
    I can find no evidence that the Appellant's nephew, has died. There  is
    evidence to say he has suffered  serious  multiple  injuries,  but  the
    statement in relation to this incident indicates that the perpetrators,
    were "unknown" people who came to the house.

 9. By way of background,  the  Appellant  comes  from  a  family  who  are
    considered to be of the lowest  possible  caste  within  Pakistan;  the
    Musalli.  His claim is that individuals of this caste are regularly ill-
    treated and discriminated against by those of a higher caste,  such  as
    the B family.  Nevertheless, the Appellant  is  an  educated  man.   He
    attended school in a nearby town when younger, followed  by  completion
    of a bachelor's degree and  a  master's  degree  in  Pakistan.   Before
    coming to the UK, he was employed as a high school teacher,  employment
    which he enjoyed from February 2006 to November 2010.  The Appellant is
    married.  His wife remains in Pakistan.  From the information before me
    she remains in their family home in Lahore and she too is employed as a
    school teacher.

10. In support of  his  claim  to  require  international  protection,  the
    Appellant submitted various documents which, the FtT noted, included an
    FIR detailing false allegations made  against  the  Appellant  and  his
    family, FIR made by the  Appellant  against  police  officers  and  two
    expert reports.

11.  The first expert report was compiled by Dr Niaz Shah who commented  on
    the accusations made against the Appellant and the social  standing  of
    the Appellant as a Musalli.  The second expert  report  was  a  medico-
    legal report from Dr Ranu, who was instructed to prepare a report based
    on  a  direct  medical  assessment  of  the  Appellant.   Dr  Ranu  was
    instructed to document physical evidence of scarring and  to  establish
    whether or not there is a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant's scarring is consistent with  his  account  of  torture/ill-
    treatment in Pakistan.  The FtT took full account of those reports.

12. The FtT identified that the Appellant's claim amounted to a fear of the
    B family on account of a number of reasons including  a  land  dispute,
    false allegations against him and his family member and  a  claim  that
    the B family's influence stretched to the police.  The  claim  is  that
    the influence of the Bhatti family is such that the Appellant's  family
    live in fear within Pakistan as a whole [21].

13. The FtT also took into account the report of Dr Shah and at  [25]  said
    the following:

         "25. In support of his appeal, the appellant relies upon  a  report
             commissioned from Dr Niaz A Shah who, I note,  was  an  expert
             witness in a number of  country  guidance  cases.   I  do  not
             intend to rehearse the contents of his  very  detailed  report
             however his conclusions, set out at page 9 of the  report  are
             worthy of reproduction in full:

                . Musallis are seen and treated as lower class  of  society.
                  Generally they are not persecuted but are unlikely  to  be
                  treated  fairly  if  their  interest  conflict  with   the
                  interests of people from non-Musalli background especially
                  rich and influential people.

                . Pakistani law treat everyone equally irrespective of caste
                  or creed.  Case law suggests that the 'equality clause' of
                  the Constitution is applied by the superior courts.

                . The constitution of Pakistan guarantees  the  right  to  a
                  fair trial.  A body of  case  law  indicates  that  it  is
                  applied  by  the  superior  courts  went   further   trial
                  guarantees are not  observed  by  actors  of  the  justice
                  system (including courts).

                . It is very likely that (MB) will get a bail  and  that  he
                  will receive a fair trial  irrespective  of  his  cast  or
                  social status.  Court decision supplied in the  bundle  by
                  (MB) indicate that (MB)  and  his  brothers  were  treated
                  according to the law.

                . The police is politicised and  susceptible  to  corruption
                  and may help treat (MB) because of his low caste  but  the
                  superior court can provide remedies against it.  (MB)  may
                  approach the High Court or Magistrate court  if  he  feels
                  that he is ill treated.  In other cases, courts have given
                  relief to him and his brothers."

14. At [26] the judge said the following:

         "26.  The  appellant  also  relies  on   what   is   described   as
             'Confidential Provisional  Medico-Legal  Report'  commissioned
             from Dr Amandeep Singh Ranu.  It  does  not  appear  that  the
             appellant suffers from any post-traumatic stress disorder  and
             although some scarring appears on him, in the main these scars
             either  bear  no  relationship  to  his  claim  or,  at  best,
             demonstrate moderate support.  There is  no  injury  which  of
             itself would give cause for concern and it is a worthy of note
             that Dr Ranu does not suggest  at  any  point  that  there  is
             evidence before him that leads him to the conclusion that  the
             Appellant was a victim of torture."

15. The judge notes at [28] that to succeed  in  a  claim  for  asylum,  an
    Appellant must prove to the necessary standard  that  he  has  a  well-
    founded fear of being persecuted for a Convention reason.  He  says  it
    is  not  the  Appellant's  case  that  his  fear  arises  from  racial,
    religious, national or political grounds whether real or imputed.   His
    case is that he is "a debtor who cannot repay his debt"  and  "will  be
    killed or seriously injured by his creditors".

16. That is not the full story  of  the  Appellant's  claim  and  what  the
    Appellant's claim amounted to could have been better expressed  by  the
    judge.  The Appellant claim is that there is a false allegation against
    him for people trafficking and embezzlement rather than an inability to
    repay a debt. That false claim would it  is  said  lead  to  him  being
    arrested on return to Pakistan and suffering at the  hands  of  corrupt
    officers.  However I find on a full reading of the decision, that error
    does not amount to a material one because it is clear  that  the  judge
    properly identified the issues before him in [21] to [24] and therefore
    had in mind what he had to decide.

17. The  judge  also  took  into  account  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 and considered that
    the Appellant did not seek to claim asylum promptly because he came  to
    the United Kingdom in 2010 and did not claim asylum until  almost  four
    years later in 2014.

18. Despite that finding however the judge went on to say at [39]:

         "For reasons given below, it is not necessary for  me  to  consider
         the factual matrix of the Appellant's case in any depth and I  have
         arrived at my conclusions on the  basis  of  the  Appellant's  case
         being largely accurate.  The issue  I  have  gone  on  to  consider
         further is whether the Appellant's claim, the  Bhatti  family  have
         the resources to find him anywhere in Pakistan."

19. It is correct that at [40], the FtT erroneously places the Appellant in
    Pakistan at the time that the false allegations  of  fraud  and  people
    trafficking are made.  But I find that nothing turns on that.  This  is
    because the judge correctly identified and  examined  the  question  of
    internal  flight  within  Pakistan.   The  judge  concluded  that  even
    accepting that the Appellant had suffered persecution at the  hands  of
    the neighbouring B family whose influence stretched as far as the local
    police, there was no evidence to support the  Appellant's  claim,  that
    their influence stretched throughout the whole  of  Pakistan  therefore
    making it unreasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate elsewhere in
    that country.

20. The grounds seeking permission claim that  the  judge  failed  to  make
    specific findings on the question of return.  I disagree.

21. The judge has clearly set out his reliance  upon  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence.  This is that the Appellant  is  an  educated  man,  who  has
    qualifications and training to gain employment as a teacher  [46].  The
    appellant has not identified any serious health problems.

22. Further the judge found at [44] the Appellant is someone who by his own
    account (see interview question 23) was able to invoke  the  aid  of  a
    District  Police  Officer  when  dealing  with  corrupt  local   police
    officers.

23. In addition the FtT noted [44] that Dr Shah reported that the Pakistani
    legal system treats everyone equally irrespective of  caste  or  class.
    Dr Shah reiterated what the judge found at [44] that the Appellant  and
    his family have in the past been treated in accordance with the law.

24. So far as the false allegations against  the  Appellant  regarding  the
    charge of embezzlement and people trafficking are concerned, again  the
    judge reports that Dr Shah notes that it is reasonably likely that  the
    Appellant would be bailed, if indeed he is arrested on return.

25. The FtT found that there was no evidence  to  support  the  Appellant's
    claim that the B family could find him everywhere  in  Pakistan.   That
    finding was open to the judge, on the evidence set out in [44] to  [46]
    above.   Therefore  taking  those  matters  into  account  the  judge's
    conclusion, that internal flight within  Pakistan  for  this  Appellant
    would not be unduly harsh, is sustainable.

26. For the foregoing reasons, I find the decision of the FtT  contains  no
    material error requiring it to be set aside.  The decision stands.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     09 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts

