
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/09071/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On July 17, 2015                     |On July 21, 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                              MR EHSHAN DASTGIR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms G Patel, Counsel, instructed by Broudie, Jackson & Canter
Respondent  Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran and is now almost  thirty-one  years
    of age. He arrived in the United Kingdom on or around June 19, 2012 and
    applied for asylum  on  June  20,  2012.  The  respondent  refused  his
    application on October 16, 2014 and at the same time  served  him  with
    removal directions as an illegal entrant.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on October 16, 2014 under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Brookfield  on
    February 16, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on  February  24,  2015
    she dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 4. The appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  on  March  13,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred because the Tribunal had:

          a. Failed to make clear findings regarding whether the  appellant
             had come to the attention of the authorities.

          b. Erred in considering whether  the  Iranian  authorities  would
             issue court documentation.

          c. Failed to give weight to the expert report of Dr Kakhki.

          d. Failed to consider the risk on illegal exit from Iran.

 5. On March 25, 2015 Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Zucker
    granted permission to appeal primarily on the fourth ground  albeit  he
    went on to state  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  the  appellant's
    representative to satisfy the Tribunal that the  concession  relied  on
    had not been made.

 6. The matter came before me on the  above  date  and  the  appellant  was
    represented as set out above and present at the hearing.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and  I  see
    no reason to make  an  Order  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 8. I reviewed the record of proceedings that the Tribunal had taken and in
    particular page  8  of  the  Judge's  notes.  The  Judge  recorded  the
    following:

         "Paragraph 2.4 of the skeleton argument-there is an allegation that
         he left illegally and this will give rise to screening. This  would
         be of no import if he were only of interest  as  a  result  of  his
         illegal departure.

         Dr Kakhki says that the position of returnees who left illegally is
         now worse than that in SB  (risk  on  return-illegal  exit)  [2009]
         UKAIT 00053 or BA (Demonstrators in Britain-risk on return) Iran CG
         [2011] UKUT 00036 (IAC)."

 9. Mr Harrison confirmed that his colleague's  note  of  hearing  did  not
    include any of the submissions. Ms Patel  submitted  that  the  Judge's
    note confirmed her  colleague's  submission  that  Dr  Kakhki's  report
    raised  the  stakes  regarding  risk  to  persons  who  had  left  Iran
    illegally. Ms Patel  submitted  that  her  colleague  had  argued  that
    following SB and BA illegal departure was not  enough  but  the  expert
    report demonstrated that the position had changed.

10. Having considered the Judge's record of proceedings and the submissions
    made I agreed that the appellant's original representative had not made
    the concession  set  out  at  paragraph  [10(xiv)]  of  the  Tribunal's
    decision. The record of proceedings confirmed that following SB illegal
    departure would not be sufficient but expert evidence now supported the
    appellant's claim that he would be  at  risk  because  of  his  illegal
    departure.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

11. Ms Patel adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that the  Tribunal
    had failed to have regard to country evidence  and  in  particular  the
    fact that summonses  were  not  always  issued  in  court  proceedings.
    Reliance was placed  on  the  country  of  origin  report  and  country
    evidence contained in pages 101 and 128 of the appellant's bundle. This
    evidence confirmed the Iranian authorities  detained  many  individuals
    without going through an official court process.  Whilst  the  Tribunal
    had considered the expert report  Ms  Patel  argued  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to consider  the  appellant  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker.  The
    Tribunal had selectively examined the expert report but had  failed  to
    have regard to all of its contents and in particular the risk he  would
    face having departed illegally and without  proper  documentation.  The
    Tribunal had accepted that the appellant had been arrested in both 2007
    and 2009 and his illegal departure was an aggravating factor. Ms  Patel
    submitted that taking into account matters accepted by the Tribunal and
    having regard  to  the  fact  the  appellant  had  left  illegally  she
    submitted that the appellant would be at risk. Permission to appeal had
    been given in a number of other cases on this very point and there  was
    an expectation the Upper  Tribunal  would  be  required  to  adjudicate
    afresh on this issue.

12. Mr Harrison adopted the  Rule  24  letter  dated  April  14,  2015.  He
    submitted the Tribunal had dealt with the  issue  of  illegal  exit  in
    paragraph 10 of its decision and had noted that the  only  evidence  of
    illegal departure was the unsupported  claims  of  the  appellant.  The
    expert report was of limited usefulness and had  to  be  considered  in
    light of SB. Illegal exit was not a significant risk factor and in  any
    event the Tribunal had not explicitly accepted, in this case, that  the
    appellant  had  exited  illegally  and  had   merely   considered   the
    appellant's position at its highest. The Tribunal found there  were  no
    other factors that would place the appellant at risk and those findings
    were open to the Tribunal. Ms Patel's submissions amounted  to  a  mere
    disagreement and were an attempt to re-argue the case. The Tribunal had
    carefully considered all of the paperwork and evidence  but  there  was
    insufficient evidence in the expert report to depart from the  findings
    of SB and there was no evidence that people  detained  at  the  airport
    would  be  detained  in  prison  and  detention  at  the  airport   for
    questioning was not unreasonable. Evidence showed that anyone  detained
    and found to have exited  illegally  was  usually  fined.  Mr  Harrison
    submitted there was no error of law in the decision.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

13. What is clear from the Tribunal's decision is  that  the  Tribunal  had
    regard to all the documents that had been  submitted.  The  appellant's
    account was  summarised  at  paragraph  [9]  of  the  decision  and  at
    paragraph [10] the Tribunal made a number of  significant  findings  on
    the evidence.

14. The Tribunal considered the appellant's claims of what happened in both
    2007 and 2009 and concluded that both accounts were credible but  noted
    that on neither occasion was the appellant charged  with  any  offence.
    The Tribunal concluded  he  would  not  be  perceived  as  a  political
    opponent of the regime.

15. In particular, during the demonstrations in 2009 the appellant was  one
    of thousands of people who had both taken part and had  been  arrested.
    The appellant did not claim to have experienced any problems after  his
    arrest and release in June 2009 and there was no evidence adduced  that
    supported any claim that he had joined any anti-regime  groups  or  had
    taken part in meetings or demonstrations after  June  2009.  There  was
    also no evidence that he had experienced any problems of harassment  at
    the hands of the Iranian authorities. The appellant claimed that he had
    allowed students to congregate in his shop and access  banned  internet
    sites and download books. The Tribunal considered this  claim  and  the
    alleged visit by the authorities and concluded that if the  authorities
    believed he was involved in anti-regime activities they would not  have
    raided his shop unless he was present. The Tribunal rejected  the  core
    of his claim.

16. Ms Patel argued that the Tribunal failed to make findings about whether
    the appellant accessed the  internet  to  download  illegal  books  and
    distribute  literature.  However,  it  is  clear  from  the  Tribunal's
    decision that careful consideration was given to  this  aspect  of  the
    claim. My attention  was  drawn  to  paragraph  1.2.1  of  the  country
    information and guidance report. This  paragraph  is  not  evidence  to
    suggest that the authorities would raid  his  shop  without  him  being
    present and the appellant has never suggested that he  had  bribed  the
    security forces or ensured that they went to his shop when he  was  not
    present.

17. In granting permission to  appeal  the  Designated  Judge  referred  to
    ground one of the grounds of appeal as being misconceived and that  the
    determination had to be read as a whole. I agree and find that there is
    no merit to ground one of the grounds of appeal.

18. The second ground of appeal related to whether the Iranian  authorities
    would issue  court  documentation  and  Ms  Patel  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal had erred by finding that because there had  been  no  contact
    with his family since July 2012 and no summons had been issued for  his
    attendance his account lacked credibility.

19. The second ground challenged this  finding  and  referred  to  evidence
    within the appellant's  bundle  that  many  individuals  were  detained
    without  going  through  an  official  court  process.   The   Tribunal
    considered the appellant's account and based on the fact that there had
    been neither visits to the family home since 2012 nor a summons  issued
    the Tribunal rejected his claim.

20. Ms Patel argued that this is an error  but  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Tribunal  was  entitled  to  reach  this  conclusion  on  the  evidence
    presented to it. As  the  Tribunal  rightly  pointed  out  there  is  a
    difference between a warrant for arrest and  a  summons.  The  findings
    made by the Tribunal were clearly open to it and I  find  there  is  no
    merit to the second ground of appeal.

21. With regard to the Dr Kakhki's report Ms Patel submitted no weight  had
    been attached to it  but  that  submission  is  not  supported  by  the
    detailed examination of the report carried out by the Tribunal detailed
    between paragraphs [10](ix) and [10](xii).

22. The Tribunal  examined  the  report  in  considerable  detail  and  the
    findings  made  were  clearly  open  to  it.  The  Tribunal  found   it
    significant that the report did not  contain  any  recent  examples  of
    prosecutions for the possession  of  banned  literature  and  that  the
    examples cited were between eight and fifteen years old.  The  Tribunal
    gave reasons for finding that the authorities had not pursued  persons,
    including students with a political profile, in  possession  of  banned
    books with any vigour over the last eight  to  fifteen  years  and  the
    Tribunal's finding that the appellant was of no interest was based  not
    only on findings taken from the report but also having  regard  to  the
    fact no proceedings have been issued against the  appellant  since  the
    raid on  his  premises  in  May  2012.  The  fact  that  the  appellant
    experienced no problems after his  release  in  2009  provided  further
    argument that he was not at risk.  The  Tribunal's  conclusion  on  the
    report was clearly open to it.

23. Mr Harrison had submitted to me that Ms Patel's arguments were  a  mere
    disagreement with the Tribunal's findings. I agree and find there is no
    error of law in respect of the first three grounds of appeal.

24. The final ground of appeal related to the issue of whether the Tribunal
    had considered the risk of illegal  exit  from  Iran.  I  have  already
    accepted,  as  a  preliminary  issue,  that  the  Tribunal  incorrectly
    interpreted the appellant's representative's submissions on  the  issue
    of risk.

25. In light of my other findings, I have to consider whether the  position
    would be  any  different  bearing  in  mind  I  upheld  all  the  other
    Tribunal's findings.

26. The Tribunal did not carry out an extensive examination on the risk  of
    return following illegal exit but this was  because  the  Tribunal  had
    considered the appeal based on the concession referred to above.

27. The Tribunal did consider the  fact  the  appellant  left  the  country
    illegally and the Tribunal took into account the  report  submitted  on
    the appellant's behalf. The expert sought to distance himself from  his
    earlier conclusions in the case of SB in which he had  provided  expert
    evidence. The Tribunal noted the examples put forward by the expert but
    concluded that the appellant's case could  be  distinguished  from  the
    examples that had been put forward by the expert because the appellant,
    on his own evidence,  had  demonstrated  an  ability  to  live  without
    harassment or problems after his arrest and detention in June 2009.

28. The Tribunal rejected his claim that he had  a  political  profile  and
    ultimately considered the case on the basis  of  the  country  guidance
    decision of SB.

29. The appellant's original representative  accepted  that  based  on  the
    guidance in SB a claim based on illegal departure would  not  to  place
    the appellant at risk of persecution  or  serious  harm.  Although  the
    Tribunal  may  have  misinterpreted  the  appellant's  representative's
    submissions I am left in no doubt that the Tribunal did  not  find  any
    support for the appellant in the expert evidence and it follows, on the
    representative's own submission, that illegal departure alone would not
    have placed the appellant at risk of persecution or serious harm.

30. I was reminded that the Court of Appeal has given leave  on  this  very
    issue in other cases but the mere fact that leave has been  given  does
    not mean the position in SB has changed.

31. The Tribunal assessed the evidence submitted and based on that evidence
    it reached conclusions that were  perfectly  open  to  it.  The  expert
    report was considered by the tribunal  and  nothing  further  has  been
    submitted  to  persuade  me  that  Tribunal  approached   that   report
    erroneously.

32. I am satisfied that the Tribunal was entitled to dismiss this claim  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and  human  rights  grounds.  There  is
    therefore no error of law.

    DECISION

33. There was no material  error  in  respect  of  the  asylum/humanitarian
    protection/article 3 or the article 8 ECHR  decisions.  I  dismiss  the
    appeal

Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
