
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09527/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 May 2016                              |On 19 May 2016                   |
|Determination given orally at the hearing  |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

          mr suranga rukman sodriya karagahagama sodriya bandarage
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis of Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  of
    the First-tier Judge.


2.   The applicant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  6  August  1979.  He
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tobin, who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 15 March 2016  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against  a decision of the respondent to  refuse  to  grant  him
    asylum.

3.    He asserted that he worked for a Government Minister between 2000  and
    2009. Because of this he was introduced to a Major Alwis who asked  him
    to sell gold for the LTTE. He did so to get the commission.  He stopped
    doing this in 2005 because the government changed.

3.   In 2006 he travelled twice to Britain, on the second  occasion  staying
    on to watch cricket before he returned to Sri Lanka.  In  2009  he  was
    asked by Major Alwis to accompany two Tamil men out of the country  and
    he went with them to Singapore.  It is not quite clear why he needed to
    do this given that they  appeared  to  have  gone  through  immigration
    control without any difficulty.

4.   He then came to Britain in 2009 as a dependent of his wife who came  as
    a student.  He did not apply for asylum until 2014.   He  claimed  that
    the police had gone to his family home in September 2014 and  that  had
    prompted him to claim asylum. At the screening interview he  was  asked
    "what is (or was)" his occupation. He replied "shop manager"  (Question
    1.9).

6.   Having set out the evidence  and  submissions  the  judge  reached  his
    conclusions in paragraphs 15 onwards of the determination. He took into
    account relevant country guidance.  He did not find that the  appellant
    was credible. He found that the appellant's evidence was "riddled  with
    inconsistencies" placing weight on the fact that the appellant had said
    initially said that he had been a shop manager rather than that he  had
    worked for the government.  He placed  weight  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant  considered that the LTTE was a terrorist organisation,  that
    his father and brother were policemen  and  that  he  was,  of  course,
    Sinhalese and that the appellant  was clearly not a  supporter  of  the
    LTTE.  The judge placed weight on the fact that the  claimed  visit  of
    the police to his father's house was around the time that his claim for
    asylum had been refused. In  paragraph    31  he  stated  that  if  the
    appellant was of interest to the authorities it would be likely  to  be
    because of  criminal  activities  such  as  gold  smuggling  or  people
    smuggling for money. He rejected the basis of claim which was that  the
    appellant would be "implicated by association, membership or activities
    with the LTTE".

7.   The grounds of appeal place weight on the report of Dr Smith  who  said
    that the appellant's claim was plausible. However, the judge took  into
    account that report and noted that Dr Smith accepted that  it  was  for
    the court  to  reach  conclusions  regarding  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant.  The grounds go on to state that the fact that the appellant
    had stated that he had not received money for taking the   two  men  to
    Singapore  somehow backed up his account. It is not, however, clear why
    that would be so.

8.    In his oral submissions  Mr  Lewis  argued  that  the  Judge  had  not
    engaged with the application's claim or given anxious scrutiny  to  the
    issues before him. He placed weight on the assertion that the appellant
    had misunderstood the question when he was asked  what  his  occupation
    was.

9.     While  I accept that  there might be an  argument that the  appellant
    thought that he was being asked about  what work he did in Britain  the
    reality is that on the totality of the evidence  I  consider  that  the
    Judge was entitled  to  find  that   the  appellant's  claim   was  not
    credible. He did properly consider the issues before him:  the  reality
    is that the appellant did not put his claim on the basis that he  would
    be subject to criminal sanctions on return.   There was  a  paucity  of
    evidence about Major Alwis.  The judge was entitled to place weight  on
    the fact that the appellant was Sinhalese and that he clearly  did  not
    support the LTTE and had never claimed to have done so. The judge   did
    take into account the various expert reports before him those  from  Dr
    Zapata and Dr Smith and  I consider that  he reached conclusions  which
    were fully open to him: he was entitled  to conclude that the appellant
    did not have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason.  I therefore consider there is no material error of law in  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge and I dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the Judge in the First-tier does not  contain  an  error  of
awl and his decision therefore stands. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date 19th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
