
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA093022014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2nd June 2016                           |On 13th June 2016              |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    P D P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.   This  direction
      applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and a  failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   Contempt   of   Court
      proceedings.



Introduction

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Angola who was born on  [  ]  2001.   He
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 June 2014 and claimed asylum on  26
      August 2014.

   3. The basis of the appellant's claim was that he feared  persecution  in
      Angola as a result of his father's political  association  with  Unita
      (the opposition to the current ruling party).   He  claimed  that  his
      father had disappeared and that he (the appellant)  had  been  injured
      during an attack upon his sister.

   4. Subsequently, the appellant also claimed to be at risk because of  his
      ethnicity and because of accusations of witchcraft in Angola.

   5. On 14 October 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
      claim for asylum, for humanitarian protection and under Arts 2, 3  and
      8 of the ECHR.  On 27 October 2014, the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
      decision to remove the appellant to Angola by way of directions.

The Appeal

   6. The appellant appealed  that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      Before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  now  relied  upon  the
      extended basis upon which he claimed  to  be  at  risk  on  return  to
      Angola.  In support of his claim, and in particular that his claim was
      credible, the appellant relied upon two  expert  reports:  one  by  Dr
      Longman dealing with the appellant's injuries and one by Dr  Judge,  a
      psychiatrist  dealing  with  the  appellant's  mental  health  and  in
      particular the diagnosis of PTSD which (it was  said)  was  consistent
      with his claim to have suffered in Angola.

   7. In a determination promulgated on 9 November 2015,  Judge  G  C  Solly
      dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The  judge  made  an
      adverse credibility finding and did not accept the  appellant's  claim
      to be at risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment because  of  his
      father's political involvement, the appellant's ethnicity  or  because
      of accusations of witchcraft.

   8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 7
      December 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Grimmett)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal.  In particular, the  judge  identified
      as an arguable error of law (as set out in Ground 1 of the Grounds  of
      Appeal) namely the judge's failure properly  to  consider  the  expert
      evidence.

   9. On 15 December 2015, the Secretary of State filed a rule  24  response
      seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

  10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

  11. At the outset of the hearing, Ms Capel  sought  to  argue  that  Judge
      Grimmett had granted permission to appeal not only  on  Ground  1  but
      also on Grounds 2 and 3 despite the  wording  of  her  decision  which
      could be read as refusing permission on Grounds 2  and  3.   Ms  Capel
      pointed out that the notice sent out by the  Tribunal,  following  the
      grant of permission, was IA66.  That was not the notice (namely  IA68)
      sent out when permission was granted only on  a  limited  basis  which
      identified for the appellant the option of  renewing  his  application
      for permission to appeal on the  "refused"  grounds  directly  to  the
      Upper Tribunal.

  12. Mr Richards submitted that the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      was, indeed, only a grant of permission on Ground 1.

  13. Having heard both representatives,  I  indicated  that,  in  my  view,
      whilst Judge Grimmett had indicated that there was no merit in Grounds
      2 and 3, the form of her  decision  did  not  amount  to  a  grant  of
      permission solely on Ground 1.  That view is borne  out  by  the  fact
      that Judge Grimmett's comments on Grounds 2 and 3  do  not  cover  the
      full range  of  points  raised  under  those  grounds.   I  indicated,
      however, that if I were wrong in that I would allow Ms Capel to  renew
      her application for permission.

  14. Mr Richards indicated that he would like some  time  to  consider  his
      submissions on Grounds 2 and 3 and the appeal was put back to the  end
      of my list giving Mr Richards time to prepare for his submissions.

  15. When the appeal came back on at the end of the list, I heard  detailed
      submissions from Ms Capel on all three grounds.  It is unnecessary for
      me to set out  those  submissions  developing  Grounds  1,  2  and  3,
      because, having heard Ms Capel's  submissions,  Mr  Richards  conceded
      that the judge had materially erred in law (as set  out  in  Ground  1
      upon which permission had  been  granted)  by  failing  to  take  into
      account, or indeed refer to at all, the expert evidence  of  Dr  Judge
      concerning the  appellant's  psychiatric  condition  and  its  evident
      relevance to the appellant's credibility.  Mr Richards  accepted  that
      the report was consistent with the appellant suffering from PTSD as  a
      result of events in Angola.  The judge had made no mention  whatsoever
      of that evidence and, Mr Richards accepted,  his  decision  could  not
      stand as a result.

  16. Mr Richards accepted that the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      should be allowed and the First-tier Tribunal's decision set aside and
      the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing
      before a different judge.

Decision and Disposal

  17. In the light of the Secretary of State's concession  that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal's decision cannot stand - a concession which in my  view
      was properly made - I am satisfied that the judge did  materially  err
      in law by failing to take into account the expert psychiatric evidence
      in reaching his adverse credibility finding.

  18. In those circumstances, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set
      aside.

  19. Given the nature and extent of the fact finding  involved  and  having
      regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the
      appropriate disposal of this appeal is to remit it to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a de novo rehearing  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
      Solly.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date: 13 June 2016
