
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  AA/09151/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 25th September  2013                         |On 26th September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                             mr BERWA MOHAMMEDI
                         (Anonymity Order NOT Made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim (instructed by Kesar & Co, Solicitors)

For the Respondent:  Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant against a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Vaudin d'Imecourt) dated 11th December 2012 by which he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    him asylum and return him to Iran.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK in July 2012 where he was  apprehended.
    He claimed asylum. He claimed to be a minor and was placed in the  care
    of Kent Social Services. His asylum application was  rejected  on  27th
    September 2012 and it is his appeal against  that  decision  which  was
    before Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt.

 3. The grounds upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted  are  three.
    Firstly, it is asserted that the Judge failed to treat the Appellant as
    a minor notwithstanding a Merton compliant  age  assessment  report  by
    Kent County Council, accepted by both sides as correct which  made  the
    Appellant a minor at the date of hearing. It is asserted in the grounds
    that the Judge made a finding contrary to the age  assessment  evidence
    accepted by both parties and in so doing erred.

 4. Secondly, it is asserted that the Judge erred in failing to  treat  the
    Appellant as a minor thereafter and in failing to consider  Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  and  the  best
    interests of the Appellant as he was required to do.

 5. Thirdly and finally it is asserted that the Judge   ought  to  have  to
    found, on the basis of the Respondent's operational  instruction  dated
    August 2012 which confirmed that enforced escorted returns to Iran  are
    suspended, that the impossibility of removing  the  Appellant  to  Iran
    meant that he would remain in the UK indefinitely and it cannot  be  in
    the best interests of a child to remain the UK in a permanent state  of
    limbo.

 6. I note that the Appellant was represented by Counsel before the  First-
    tier Tribunal who was instructed by a different firm of solicitors than
    those who now act for him. Counsel and the solicitor  who  drafted  the
    grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  and  Counsel  before  me  are
    different from  the  Counsel  who  represented  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. With regard to the first ground,  I  find  it  is  not  made  out.  The
    paragraph of the determination in question is paragraph  35  where  the
    judge said this:-

         "In assessing the Appellant's age I have considered  the  whole  of
         the evidence before  me  including  the  Kent  County  Council  age
         assessment report, which I  read  in  detail  and  I  found  was  a
         comprehensive and full assessment which was Merton  compliant  made
         with regards to the Appellant who was observed for lengthy  periods
         of time by a number of social workers and  educationalists  in  the
         house where he is staying  at  the  moment.  I  have  also  had  an
         opportunity  of  observing  the  Appellant  in  court   through   a
         relatively lengthy period of time and noted his quick responses  to
         some of the questions that I posed to him.  Having  considered  the
         whole of the evidence in this case in the round, I  find  that  the
         Appellant is somebody  who  is  around  18  years  of  age.  I  was
         satisfied that the age  assessment  provided  by  the  Kent  county
         council was correct."

 8. It is not the case, as suggested in the grounds that  the  Judge  found
    the Appellant to be an adult contrary to the age assessment report. The
    Judge found the Appellant to be somebody who is  "around  18  years  of
    age". That is absolutely correct. On the basis of  the  age  assessment
    report, at the date of the hearing he was 17 years  and  10  months  of
    age. That is around 18 years of age.

 9. It is also not correct to say that the Judge has gone on to  treat  the
    Appellant as an adult in his consideration of the appeal. The judge has
    said specifically at paragraph 36 that he had  given  "the  utmost  and
    fullest care in assessing the evidence in this case bearing in mind  at
    all times that it was likely to come a young person".

10. It is true, as  suggested  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge  has  not
    specifically referred himself to section 55  nor  did  he  specifically
    consider where the Appellant's best interests lie, which  he  was  duty
    bound to do given the Appellant before him was a minor. However,  while
    it  was  an  error  it  would  only  lead  to  my  setting  aside   the
    determination if it can be shown that the error  was  material,  namely
    that if the Judge  had  not  made  the  error  it  could  have  made  a
    difference to his decision. Mr Halim in relation to that  point  argued
    that it would have affected the lens through which the  Judge  assessed
    the evidence as a whole. He referred me to KA v SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1014 which indicates that there is no bright line rule as to the age of
    majority. There is no dramatic change  in  an  Appellant  on  his  18th
    birthday.  It cannot be said that if there is a risk on the day  before
    his 18th birthday it disappears the day after.

11. Mr Halim argued that the Judge ought not to have attached weight to the
    observations contained in the age assessment. While the  conclusion  of
    the age assessment was accepted, the observations  ought  not  to  have
    been relied upon by the Judge because they  did  not  comply  with  the
    required safeguards of a contemporaneous note  having  been  made.  The
    primary function of the age assessment is to assess age and only that.

12. Mr Halim then submitted that the Judge had committed a clear procedural
    impropriety at paragraph 38 of the determination where he said:-

         "I was aware that the Appellant had claimed that he comes from  the
         Kurdish area of northern Iran. He has given as his home  address  a
         village name which clearly is an untraceable. I bear in  mind  that
         in the age assessment report from the KCC, he is reported as having
         claimed initially that he was from Sardasht, before giving the name
         of a village near to Sardasht which cannot be traced. He  has  also
         given the number of villages  apparently  close  to  his  own  home
         village which also cannot be traced. Nevertheless, I note  that  he
         has stated that the closest city or town from  where  he  lives  is
         Sardasht in Kordestan.   He  clearly  also  speaks  fluent  Kurdish
         Sorani. I note that he was able to give the name of a  broadcasting
         station in the area in which he claimed to live. Although I  formed
         the view that the Appellant was not telling  the  truth  about  his
         village and that he had deliberately provided the name of a village
         which was not his and which did not exist in order to  prevent  his
         parents from being contacted, I find that the  Appellant is without
         doubt from the Kordestan area and from Sardasht, which is where  he
         had initially said he came from to social workers from the KCC  who
         were considering a placement for  him  at  that  stage,  before  he
         changed his story."

13. Mr Halim argued that if the Judge was going to  make  that  finding  in
    relation to the villages  then  it  ought  to  have  been  put  to  the
    Appellant during the hearing so that he could have addressed the issue.
    It was not an issue that the Appellant was previously aware of.

14. I can deal with both of those submissions together. With respect to  Mr
    Halim it is a nonsense in my view to state that  the  only  part  of  a
    Merton compliant age assessment report that  can  have  any  evidential
    value is its conclusion. Its conclusion is based on the report  itself;
    the enquiries and observations of the experts who are  undertaking  the
    task. Where they record things that have been said by the Appellant, if
    the Appellant says they are inaccurate it is for him to say so. In this
    case he did not. What is clear is that he said things to those  experts
    which he later resiled from. In my view an age assessment report  which
    is Merton compliant, as in  this  case,  has  the  same  weight  as  an
    expert's report and the Judge was entitled to take  its  contents  into
    account along with all the other evidence in the case.

15. With regard to the alleged procedural impropriety I find that there was
    none. The Letter of Refusal  states at paragraph 24:-

         "No village named Benarwe/Binawa has been located in Iran,  and  no
         information has been found to support the  existence  of  the  four
         villages you have named in the vicinity of your own village or  the
         vicinity of Sardasht city."

16. The Secretary of State, at paragraph  25  of  the  Letter  of  Refusal,
    accepts that there is a city named Sardasht in Kordestan. At paragraphs
    26 and 27 the Secretary of State refers to questions that the Appellant
    was asked about his area.  At  paragraph  28  the  Secretary  of  State
    concludes:-

         "When considered in the round,  it  is  doubted  that  you  are  an
         Iranian national  as  claimed.  Consideration  has  been  given  to
         affording you the benefit of the doubt over this claim in  view  of
         your claimed age and level of education, however it  has  not  been
         afforded you over  this  matter  due  to  the  lack  of  supporting
         evidence regarding the village you claim to come from and a lack of
         knowledge of the official language of Iran."

17. It cannot possibly be said on the Appellant's behalf therefore that  he
    was taken by surprise by the issue of the  existence  of  the  villages
    named by him. It was clearly raised  as  an  issue  in  the  Letter  of
    Refusal as was the lack of supporting evidence. Indeed contrary  to  Mr
    Halim's submission the Secretary of State went further than  the  Judge
    by  disbelieving  the  Appellant's  nationality.  The  Judge  gave  the
    Appellant the benefit of the doubt by accepting he was from Sardasht in
    Iran.

18. So far as the issue of s55 and the  Judge's  failure  to  consider  the
    Appellant's best interests is concerned,  I  return  to  the  issue  of
    whether that failure could have made any difference. The Judge  clearly
    had in mind the Appellant'  youth  when  assessing  the  evidence.  His
    factual findings in which I find there is no error can be summarised as
    follows

19. The Appellant came to the UK claiming to have been  born  in  1997  but
    later accepted he was in fact born  in  February  1995  after  the  age
    assessment  report.  The  Appellant   therefore   in   accepting   that
    acknowledged he lied when giving his date of birth as 1997 on arrival.

20. The Appellant claimed to have left Iran in July 2012 arriving in the UK
    on 26th July 2012. That was a lie because he was subsequently found  by
    Eurodac documents to have been fingerprinted in Greece  in  June  2012;
    before he claims he left Iran.

21. The Appellant claims to be from a village that could not be  traced  in
    the area of Sardasht in Iran and was found to be from Sardasht  itself.
    He lied about where he had lived.

22. The Appellant lied about being illiterate. The Judge found for numerous
    reasons including his ability in languages, mathematics and IT that  he
    was educated to a high level and is an intelligent young man.

23. The Appellant lied about being a shepherd as his knowledge of sheep was
    distinctly lacking.

24. The Appellant lied about his inability to contact his family  and  lied
    about not having been in contact with any members of his  family  since
    he left Iran as he had been in contact with his brother.

25. In short, this Appellant  had not told the truth about  any  aspect  of
    his claim and was found by the First-tier Tribunal  at paragraph 42  of
    the determination to have "made up his account to make  a  false  claim
    for asylum and that there was no truth at all in his  claim  to  be  in
    need of international protection".

26. With regard to the Secretary of State's failure to  trace  his  family,
    the Judge noted that in giving false addresses of  villages  which  did
    not exist  the  Appellant  had  made  it  impossible  for  the  British
    authorities to trace his family but that in  any  event  there  was  no
    necessity to do so because he was in  contact  with  them  himself  and
    could easily make contact with them now and on return.

27. In KA the Appellants had been granted leave until they were  17  and  a
    half in line with  policy.  Shortly  before  reaching  that  age,  each
    Appellant made an unsuccessful application for asylum.  In  each  case,
    the Upper Tribunal approached the assessment of risk on return  on  the
    basis of the facts as at the time of the hearing before  it,  including
    the fact of the Appellant's recently attained majority. The  Appellants
    relied on Council Directive 2003/9/EC of 27 January 2003 (the Reception
    Directive),  Article  19.3  of  which  provided  that  "Member  States,
    protecting the unaccompanied minor's best interests, shall endeavour to
    trace the members of his or her family as soon as  possible.  In  cases
    where there may be a threat to the life or integrity of  the  minor  or
    his or her close relatives, particularly if they have remained  in  the
    country of origin, care must be taken to ensure  that  the  collection,
    processing and circulation of information concerning those  persons  is
    undertaken on a confidential basis, so as to avoid  jeopardising  their
    safety." The appellants' factual case was that between  2006  and  2010
    the SSHD had failed to discharge the duty to  endeavour  to  trace  and
    thereby undermined the  Appellants'  prospects  of  making  good  their
    asylum claims. The Court of Appeal   held  certain  principles  emerged
    from the authorities, particularly DS(Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2011]  EWCA
    DS and HK & Ors (minors - indiscriminate violence - forced  recruitment
    by Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT
    378 (IAC) : (i) The duty to endeavour to trace  is  not  discharged  by
    merely informing a child of the facilities of the  Red  Cross;  (ii)  A
    failure to discharge the duty may be relevant to judicial consideration
    of an asylum or humanitarian protection claim; (iii) Such a failure may
    also be relevant to  a  consideration  of  the  section  55  duty.  The
    application of the principles is likely to be fact specific. At one end
    an applicant who gives a credible and cooperative account of having  no
    surviving family in Afghanistan or of having lost touch with  surviving
    family members and having failed, notwithstanding his best  endeavours,
    to re-establish contact may, even if he has reached the age  of  18  by
    the time his appeal is considered by the  tribunal,  depending  on  the
    totality of the established facts,  have  the  basis  of  a  successful
    appeal by availing himself of the Rashid principle and/or section 55 by
    reference to the failure of the Secretary of  State  to  discharge  the
    duty to endeavour to trace. At the other end  of  the  spectrum  is  an
    applicant whose claim to have no surviving  family  in  Afghanistan  is
    disbelieved and in respect of  whom  it  is  found  that  he  has  been
    uncooperative so as to frustrate any attempt to trace  his  family.  In
    such a case, again depending on the totality of established  facts,  he
    may have put himself beyond the bite of the protective  and  corrective
    principle. Whether one is considering asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    or corrective relief, there is a burden of proof on  an  applicant  not
    just to establish the failure to discharge the  duty  to  endeavour  to
    trace but also that he is entitled to what he is seeking.

28. It is thus clear that there is a sliding scale of Appellants who may or
    may not benefit from the Secretary of State's failure to carry out  her
    tracing obligations. On the one hand is the credible Appellant who  has
    tried and failed to trace his family and at the other end of the  scale
    is the Appellant who has been obstructive and consistently  lied.  This
    Appellant falls into the latter category. Therefore even had the  judge
    considered section 55 and considered where the best interests  of  this
    young person lay the conclusion could not  conceivably  be  other  than
    that his best interests would be satisfied by his being returned to the
    bosom of his family in Iran. He had been in the UK less than six months
    and faced no risk whatsoever in his home country.

29. In short this Appellant's claim is wholly  without  merit  and  had  no
    prospect of success. The Judge has made clear and  devastating  adverse
    credibility findings. The result was inevitable.

30. So far as Mr Halim's final point about the Secretary of State's  policy
    to suspend enforced returns, it has  long  been  established  that  the
    Tribunal is not concerned with whether or not  there  is  a  policy  of
    actual return; rather it has to consider the appeal on the  basis  that
    an Appellant will be returned. That is the same principle that requires
    a Judge to assess risk on return as at the date of hearing for a  minor
    who has claimed asylum even though he has discretionary  leave  and  so
    will not actually be returned until he is an adult. It is also the same
    principle that required Zimbabwean cases to be determined on the  basis
    of risk on return at the date of hearing  even  though  there  were  no
    returns to Zimbabwe. That is what the Judge has done in this  case  and
    that is correct in law.

31. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law that materially affected the outcome such that it should be  set
    aside and accordingly the determination shall stand. The appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal dismissed.








Signed                              Date 25th September 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

