
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09766/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2015                            |On 3 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               NN (Bangladesh)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise her as a refugee as otherwise
    requiring international or human  rights  protection.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal made an anonymity direction, and I consider it is  appropriate
    that the appellant should continue to be accorded  anonymity  in  these
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, whose date of  birth  is  26
    October 1995.  The appellant arrived in the UK on 30 November 2011 with
    her mother and brother.  She had  been  issued  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor, and her visit visa was valid until 14 May 2012.  The appellant
    applied for settlement as the dependant of her aunt and grandmother  in
    the UK.  The settlement application was refused  on  23  January  2013.
    The appellant lodged an appeal against the decision, but then  withdrew
    the appeal.  The appellant claimed asylum on 13  June  2013,  at  which
    point she was still a  minor,  being  six  months  short  of  her  18th
    birthday.

 3. She was interviewed about her asylum claim on 12 August 2013.  Her core
    claim is set out in a witness statement which she had made  in  support
    of the application for settlement.  In that statement,  she  said  that
    her mother and brother had gone back to Bangladesh on 26 January  2012.
    She did not leave the UK with them at her  aunt's  request.   Her  aunt
    wanted her to stay longer, and  her  mother  agreed  to  let  her  stay
    longer, as she knew that  she  needed  a  change  of  environment  from
    everything that had happened to her in Bangladesh.  On  28  April  2011
    she had been abducted by a group of men in the presence of  her  father
    as she arrived home from college.  The men forced her  into  a  vehicle
    and pressed a handkerchief over her face until she became  unconscious.
    When she regained consciousness, she realised she  was  in  Chittagong.
    She was then taken to a hotel room.   The  last  thing  she  remembered
    before losing consciousness again was someone sticking a needle in  her
    arm.  When she  regained  consciousness,  she  noticed  she  was  in  a
    different place.  She was injected again, and lost consciousness.  When
    she regained consciousness, she begged one of the men to  let  her  go.
    The men started kicking and hitting her.  She was  injected  again  and
    became unconscious.  When she regained consciousness, she realised  her
    hair was cut and her eyebrows felt different.  She was also wearing new
    clothes.  She was taken to a brothel and she understood  that  the  men
    wanted to sell her.  She was injected, and fell unconscious.  When  she
    regained consciousness, she realised she was in Dhaka.   Her  relatives
    walked in and rescued her from there.

 4. At the asylum interview, she was asked why she had not  claimed  asylum
    at the beginning (Q and A 101).  She answered that when she first  came
    here, she only wanted to visit her grandmother.  After  that  she  felt
    happy here, so she wanted to stay here.

 5. On 21 October 2013 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    to recognise  the  appellant  as  a  refugee,  as  otherwise  requiring
    international or human rights protection.  In her witness statement she
    had given a relatively detailed account of the day of her abduction, as
    well as providing the specific date it happened.   But  in  her  asylum
    interview she could not provide any details when asked, and  could  not
    remember the date it happened.   It  was  acknowledged  that  a  person
    experiencing something so traumatic might have  difficulty  remembering
    all the details of what happened to them. But if a person had  given  a
    detailed account once, it was reasonable to expect that  person  to  be
    able to recall to the same level of detail again.   Not  only  did  her
    memory of her experiences appear to vary each time she  gave  evidence,
    it apparently diminished to the point when she could not even  remember
    what she had said in her witness statement.

 6. In her interview she claimed she could not remember where she was taken
    when abducted, yet throughout her witness statement she had provided  a
    detailed account of each of  the  locations  she  had  been  taken  to,
    including Chittagong, Coxebazar and Dhaka.  In her asylum interview she
    said she did not know any of the men that took her; she had never  seen
    them before and had no idea why they targeted her.  But in her father's
    statement to the police he said he had come to know from his daughter's
    friends that the number one defendant SH very often used to  tease  and
    offer love to his daughter; and when his  daughter  did  not  agree  to
    these offers from SH, they took her away forcefully by abducting her in
    front of him.  Also, in her own police statement she had referred to SH
    and had said that her relatives, the police and her father had  rescued
    her from the house of BN.

 7. So it was not accepted that she was abducted in 2011, and  it  was  not
    accepted  that  her  family  had  been  experiencing   any   continuing
    harassment as a result.  But even considering her claim at its highest,
    she would not in any event be at real risk of  persecution  or  serious
    harm on return to Bangladesh as there was  sufficiency  of  protection.
    She had not demonstrated that the Bangladeshi authorities  were  unable
    or unwilling to provide protection against persecution or serious harm.

 8. She had submitted a medical report by Dr Clare Arnold in support of her
    claim.  Dr Arnold concluded she was suffering from  PTSD  and  a  major
    depressive disorder.  The Bangladesh COIS Report detailed  the  various
    options for mental health care in Bangladesh.  The  list  of  essential
    medicines  available  in  Bangladesh  included  anti-psychotics,  anti-
    depressants and mood stabilisers.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Oakley sitting at Hatton Cross
    in the First-tier Tribunal on  23  January  2014.   Both  parties  were
    legally  represented.   The  judge  received  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant and from her maternal uncle.  He said he was in Bangladesh in
    2011 when she was abducted, and had taken part in a police  manhunt  to
    find her.  It took them nine days to find the appellant.   He  said  he
    had to pay a lot of money to track down the suspects, and the appellant
    was eventually tracked down  to  a  brothel.   He  confirmed  that  the
    suspects had been arrested, but there was a trial  in  Bangladesh  that
    was  ongoing.   The  judge  also  received  oral  evidence   from   the
    appellant's maternal grandmother, and from two maternal aunts.

10. The judge's findings and conclusions were  set  out  in  paragraphs  32
    onwards of his  subsequent  decision.   The  judge  did  not  find  the
    appellant  credible.   His  first  reason  was  that   it   was   quite
    extraordinary, if the account was true, that her parents would wait  to
    take her out of the country; and once  they  had  brought  her  to  the
    United Kingdom they would not have got her to claim asylum at the first
    opportunity.

11. He found that her credibility was further damaged by the  fact  that  a
    claim for settlement was made, rather than a claim for asylum; and that
    the asylum claim had only been made after  the  settlement  application
    had been rejected.  The whole process of making an asylum claim led him
    to the conclusion that the whole account had been concocted with a view
    to enabling the appellant to settle permanently in the  United  Kingdom
    possibly for educational purposes.

12. The judge then referred to what he said were  numerous  inconsistencies
    in the appellant's account  which  had  been  rightly  highlighted  and
    detailed in the decision letter.

13. At paragraphs 46 and 52 the judge considered the medical reports of  Dr
    Arnold and Dr Kramer, and a letter  dated  22  January  2014  from  the
    appellant's course tutor and lecturer.  He found that the  report  from
    the  educationalist  had  painted  a  very  different  picture  of  the
    appellant, and he reached the conclusion that the appellant was frankly
    trying to pull the wool over the doctor's  eyes.   She  might  well  be
    anxious about her current immigration status in the United Kingdom, and
    he could completely understand that. But this did not arise as a result
    of any events that occurred in Bangladesh, but simply as  a  result  of
    her uncertain immigration status.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

14. The  appellant's  legal  representatives  applied  on  her  behalf  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Ground  1  was  that  the
    judge had misdirected himself in law regarding the  assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility.  Although she  was  an  adult  when  she  gave
    evidence before Judge Oakley, she was a child  when  the  events  which
    triggered her protection claim occurred.  She was also a child when she
    entered the UK, and when an application was made for settlement on  her
    behalf, and still a child when she was interviewed by the respondent in
    connection with her asylum claim.  Although she was interviewed in  the
    presence of a responsible adult, the decision of the Secretary of State
    made no allowances for the fact that the appellant's  account  was  the
    account of an asylum seeking child.

15. Ground 2 was the judge had erred in assessing the significance  of  the
    appellant's delay in claiming asylum.  The judge had been wrong to find
    that the appellant's delay in claiming asylum was totally  unexplained.
    The judge failed to have regard  to  the  appellant's  initial  witness
    statement at section B of the respondent's bundle, where she  explained
    that her mother had made her promise not to tell anyone in  the  UK  or
    Bangladesh about her abduction.  The judge also failed to  have  regard
    to JT (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ  878  on  the  proper  application  of
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act.

16. Ground 3 was the judge failed to have regard  to  material  matters  in
    assessing the mental health evidence.  The  judge  considered  that  Dr
    Arnold,  unlike  Dr  Kramer,  had  failed  to  consider   whether   the
    appellant's presentation might be attributable to uncertainty over  her
    immigration status.  In so concluding, the judge  had  failed  to  have
    regard to the entirety of Dr Arnold's report.  Dr Arnold was well aware
    of the changes in the appellant's presentation over the preceding year.
     She documented  her  initial  presentation,  her  improvement  through
    treatment, and the worsening of her condition as the uncertainty of her
    immigration status increased.  There was therefore no contrast  between
    the reports of the two mental health practitioners.  Dr Kramer's  focus
    was on the situation in January 2014, whereas Dr Arnold's  was  on  the
    appellant's  presentation  throughout  her   initial   assessment   and
    subsequent treatment.

The Eventual Grant of Permission

17. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal, but  on  a
    renewed application to the Upper Tribunal,  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 1 May 2014 for the following
    reasons:

         It is arguable that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oakley  erred  in
         failing to have regard to the appellant's age  when  assessing  her
         initial statement, and in his approach to Section  8  of  the  2004
         Act.  Permission is granted on all grounds.

The Rule 24 Response

18. On 30 May 2014 a member of the Specialist Appeals Team settled the Rule
    24 response opposing the appeal.  In summary, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had directed himself appropriately and had  made  reasonable  and
    sustainable findings that were open to him on the evidence.  The  judge
    had  given  himself  the  appropriate  self-direction  concerning   the
    appellant's age  and  the  need  to  exercise  caution  when  assessing
    credibility.  He  had  done  this  at  paragraphs  12  and  14  of  his
    determination.  The determination was not vitiated by any errors of law
    capable of having a material impact upon the outcome of the appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

19. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal there was no appearance by  or  on
    behalf of the appellant.   In  a  letter  dated  19  January  2015  the
    appellant's solicitors, Maalik & Co, noted that the appeal  was  listed
    for hearing on 21 January 2015, but informed the  Upper  Tribunal  that
    they  were  without  instructions   in   relation   to   the   hearing.
    Accordingly, they would not be attending it.

20. Ms Vidyadharan submitted that the appeal should be  dismissed  for  the
    reasons given in the Rule 24 response.

Discussion

21. The judge did not expressly remind himself that  the  appellant  was  a
    child under the age of 18 at the various  stages  referred  to  in  the
    application for  permission  to  appeal,  beginning  with  the  alleged
    incident in April 2011.  But on the particular facts of this case,  the
    absence of such an express self-direction does  not  translate  into  a
    material error of law.

22. In 2012 the appellant gave a  detailed  and  coherent  account  of  her
    alleged experiences in Bangladesh.  She  was  sufficiently  mature  and
    well educated to be able to give such an  account,  which  was  in  any
    event capable of corroboration by responsible family  members  who  had
    direct knowledge of the core claim, such as her father.

23. The credibility challenge as to  the  reliability  of  the  appellant's
    account  of   her   experiences   in   Bangladesh   rested   on   stark
    inconsistencies between  the  witness  statement  and  the  appellant's
    performance in interview (by which time she was close  to  the  age  of
    18); and not upon discrepancies which might reasonably be attributed to
    the appellant's lack of maturity, either at the date of the incident in
    2011 or at the date of the interview in  August  2013.   Moreover,  the
    stark inconsistencies were not simply between  accounts  given  by  the
    appellant at different times, but also between the account given by the
    appellant and the account given by her father.

24. Section 8 of the 2004 Act  provides  that  in  determining  whether  to
    believe a statement made by or on behalf  of  a  person  who  makes  an
    asylum claim or human rights claim, the deciding authority  shall  take
    account, as damaging the claimant's credibility, of  any  behaviour  to
    which this Section applies.  Subparagraph 2  states  that  the  Section
    applies to any behaviour by the claimant the deciding authority  thinks
    -

    (c)  is designed or  likely  to  obstruct  or  delay  the  handling  or
         resolution of the claim or the taking of a decision in relation  to
         the claimant.

    SubSection 5 states that the Section also applies to a failure  by  the
    claimant to make an asylum claim or human  rights  claim  before  being
    notified of an immigration decision, unless the claim relies wholly  on
    matters arising after the notification.

25. The behaviour of the appellant in entering  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor, and not making an asylum claim until  some  months  after  her
    application for settlement had been rejected, plainly falls within  the
    scope of Section 8.  The judge  was  bound  to  take  account  of  such
    behaviour as damaging her credibility.  The  judge  correctly  directed
    himself as to Section 8 at paragraph 14 of his decision.   He  did  not
    add the gloss that he had discretion as to how much weight he  attached
    to any behaviour which came within the scope of  Section  8.   But  the
    judge was not bound to add this gloss.  Moreover, it is  apparent  from
    his line of reasoning that the judge did not need  to  be  prompted  by
    Section 8 to find that the appellant's credibility was damaged  by  her
    behaviour in not claiming asylum earlier.

26. It is argued on behalf of the appellant  that  the  judge  should  have
    given no weight at all to the  appellant's  delay  in  claiming  asylum
    because (a) she was at all material times  a  child;  and  (b)  in  her
    initial witness statement she claimed that her parents told her not  to
    tell  anyone  about  the  terrible  incident  which  had  occurred   in
    Bangladesh, not even their relatives in Bangladesh  or  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

27. The judge was not bound to make a specific finding on  this  particular
    explanation, especially as it was only a partial one.  Even if  it  was
    taken at its face value, it did  not  explain  why  the  appellant  had
    disclosed the alleged incident as part  of  a  settlement  application,
    rather than making a claim for asylum.

28. Moreover, by the time of the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    there was a considerable amount of additional evidence which undermined
    the explanation.  The additional evidence included the fact that  there
    had been initial court hearings in  the  criminal  prosecution  of  the
    suspects before the appellant had travelled to the United Kingdom on  a
    visit visa. As male members of the appellant's family had  assisted  in
    the  manhunt,  and  as  the  alleged  incident  had  led  to   criminal
    proceedings conducted in public in Bangladesh, it is not credible  that
    relatives in the UK would not have been aware of the  alleged  incident
    by the time the appellant arrived here.

29. At paragraph 16 of her initial statement the appellant said  that  when
    she came to the United Kingdom she was still extremely scared  "but  my
    aunties told me that I was finally safe here and no-one  was  going  to
    kidnap me".  This suggests that her relatives in the  UK  were  already
    aware of the incident before she arrived here.

30. In her substantive asylum interview the appellant did  not  repeat  the
    explanation that the reason for her not  claiming  asylum  earlier  was
    that she had been sworn to secrecy by her mother.

31. Although Judge Rintoul granted the appellant permission  to  appeal  on
    all three grounds raised,  he  did  not  indicate  that  he  found  any
    intrinsic merit in ground 3.

32. The appellant's  argument  on  ground  3  ignores  the  fact  that  the
    dichotomy upon which the judge placed the greatest weight was  not  the
    difference of emphasis in the two medical  reports,  but  the  striking
    contrast between the appellant's demeanour and presentation as reported
    by, on the one hand, her tutor and, on the other hand, the two doctors.
     It was open to the judge to find that the appellant  had  feigned  her
    reported symptoms of PTSD for the reasons he gave.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

