
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09440/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 January 2017                    |On 26 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                             ahmed basher yakoub
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ahmed Basher Yakoub, was born on 1 January 1989 and is a
    male citizen of Sudan.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge N
    M K Lawrence) against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  dated  12
    June 2015 to refuse him asylum.  The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision
    promulgated on 17 October 2016, dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appeals on the grounds that the judge  failed  to  engage
    with the expert report of Dr Peter  Verney  as  regards  his  ethnicity
    further, the appellant argues that the judged failed to rely  upon  the
    existing country guidance  (MM  (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG  [2015]  UKUT  10
    (IAC)).  The judge had concluded  the  report  was  immaterial  as  the
    appellant had not claimed to be at risk by virtue  of  ethnicity.   The
    Tribunal in MM had  concluded  that  non-Arab  Darfuris  (such  as  the
    appellant claims to be) were at risk on return to Sudan.

 3. The respondent did not oppose the appeal (see the Rule 24 letter  dated
    7 December 2016).  I also agree that the judge has failed  to  consider
    all the evidence and, in particular, the expert report.

 4. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  There  will  need
    to be another finding exercise; none of the findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 17 October  2016
    is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The appeal is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge N M K Lawrence) for that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.



Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
