
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09802/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Sent           |
|on 6th August 2013                            |On 23rd September 2013       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                           RAJASINGHAM BRAD HARRIS
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Ficklin instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors (Leeds)
For the Respondent: Ms R Pettersen - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge  Kelly,  promulgated  following  a  hearing  at  Bradford  in
        February 2013, in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against
        the direction of his removal to Sri Lanka following  the  rejection
        of his  claim  for  asylum  or  any  other  form  of  international
        protection.


     2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by a Designated Judge of
        the First-tier Tribunal but thereafter renewed and granted by Upper
        Tribunal Judge Dawson on 22nd April 2013.







Background


     3. The appellant was born on the 21st February 1976 and it is accepted
        that he is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  Having  examined  the  evidence
        Judge  Kelly  set  out  his  findings  from  paragraph  23  of  the
        determination which may be summarised as follows:


          i.  Whilst the appellant  has  provided  documentary  evidence  of
   events that             are said to have occurred  in  Sri  Lanka  during
   July and August 2012,  18               months  after  his  departure  in
   January 2011, the evidence linking those           events to the  alleged
   association by the appellant with LTTE between 2004             and  2008
   is tenuous [23].


          ii. There is no eyewitness account of  Fresly's  (the  appellant's
   brother)                alleged arrested on 2nd  July  2012,  such  as  a
   written statement from his            mother and the  appellants  account
   of what was reported to him is                extremely vague.  There  is
   thus no evidence that if Fresley was arrested it            had  anything
   to  do  with   the   appellant's   supposed   involvement   in   printing
   materials for the LTTE many years earlier. The documentary  evidence  did
     not indicate why his other brother may have been  arrested  at  sea  on
   19th           July 2012 [24].


          iii.     The  letter  from  the  Sri  Lankan  lawyer  stating  the
   appellant's wife was             granted  bail  on  8th  August  2012  is
   silent with regard to the charges she              faces. Judge Kelly was
   not satisfied his wife's arrest had anything to do              with  the
   appellant's supposed activities in Sri Lanka [25].


          iv. There is documentary and photographic evidence suggesting that
   the            family printing press may have been closed by court  order
   on 23rd July            2003 although the reasons for  this  are  obscure
   [26].


          v.  Given the significant period of time that has elapsed  between
   the events at           the core of the appellants claim and the  alleged
   recent interest of the Sri            Lankan authorities  in  the  family
   and their printing press, it  is  highly                  unlikely  there
   would be any connection between them [27].


          vi. It is very likely that  the  recent  interest  occurred  as  a
   result of suspected              recent criminal activity  in  Sri  Lanka
   for which the appellant has a cast-iron            alibi for due  to  his
   presence in the United Kingdom. Any suggested  link               between
   the  two  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  explanation  the  appellant
   himself gave on 12th March 2012 for why  the  family  printing  shop  had
     been permitted to remain operational for as long as it had [27].


          vii.    The only other significant event  that  is  said  to  have
   occurred since the           appellant left Sri Lanka is  the  arrest  of
   his wife on 15th January 2011, a              week after he had left  the
   country in order to study in the United                 Kingdom.  If  the
   incident   occurred,   evidence   linking   it   to    the    appellant's
   supposed activities in Sri Lanka is "extremely nebulous".  It is  limited
   to             the appellant's claim his wife was  questioned  about  him
   during her brief             but traumatic detention. There is no witness
   statement from his wife in            order to  clarify  the  matter.  He
   said his wife has been safely  residing  in               Dubai  for  six
   months  at   the   date   of   the   appeal   hearing.    The   appellant
   claimed to be in telephone contact with her  and  it  was  therefore  not
          considered unreasonable to expect that such  evidence  would  have
   been           forthcoming if it was truly relevant  to  the  appellant's
   claim [28].


          viii.   Three most striking features  of  the  account  of  events
   prior to his departure           from Sri Lanka are (a) nobody appears to
   have shown any interest in him            until some two years  after  he
   had ceased to print material for the LTTE, (b)               he  was  not
   apprehended  during  the  eight  months   that   he   remained   in   the
   country after the Karuna Group first supposedly attended at his house  in
          order to kill him and (c) he was able to leave Sri  Lanka  without
   hindrance           using his own passport [29].


          xi. It was found improbable that if the appellant was been  sought
   by pro-             government forces for suspected involvement with  the
   LTTE  that  they                would  have  been  unable  to  trace  his
   whereabouts  during  the  eight-month             period  prior  to   his
   departure.  The alleged failure to  apprehend  him                 during
   this period contrasts  markedly  with  the  evidence  of  their  apparent
   success in arresting his wife (twice),  his  father,  and  both  brothers
   during              the period of 18 months that followed  his  departure
   from Sri Lanka [31].


          xii.    The appellant does not have an explanation for how he  was
   able to leave           Sri Lanka using his own passport without  falling
   foul of the numerous             checkpoints which are described  in  the
   background country information            recited at paragraph 22 of  the
   refusal letter [32].


          xiii.   The evidence, when considered  in  the  round,  is  highly
   inconsistent with            the claim of adverse interest being taken in
   the appellant in Sri Lanka [33].


          xiv.    Notwithstanding the claim  that  he  came  to  the  United
   Kingdom because              he feared for his life, he only sought leave
   to enter in order to study,               undertook those studies in  the
   United Kingdom for five or six  months,              and  did  not  claim
   asylum until he was forced to do so having been                  returned
   to  the  United  Kingdom  by  the  Swiss  authorities.   Such   behaviour
   is inconsistent with his claimed reasons for not wishing to return to Sri
              Lanka and damages his general credibility [34].


          xv. It is accepted that in  2005  the  appellant  was  stopped  by
   members of the Sri           Lankan task  force  as  he  was  riding  his
   motorcycle. He was asked about the            whereabouts of a particular
   individual whom they were seeking  and                   when  he  denied
   knowledge   of   the   matter   they   beat   him   up.   This    is    a
   discrete  aspect  of  the  account  and  other  than  this  none  of  the
   appellant's             account of events preceding  his  departure  from
   Sri Lanka in 2011 and            what may  have  occurred  following  his
   departure are accepted [35].




     4. The Judge then assessed risk on return in  light  of  the  findings
        made.




Discussion



     5. The grounds on which permission to appeal was  granted  allege  the
        Judge fundamentally erred by requiring corroboration when he refers
        to the need for an eyewitness account of his  brother's  arrest  as
        this was, in effect, asking the appellant to prove his  case  to  a
        much higher standard than that  which  was  required.  It  is  also
        alleged the  Judge  repeats  this  error  by  holding  against  the
        appellant the requirement to provide a statement from his wife.  It
        is  alleged  that  in  addition  to  requiring  corroboration   the
        appellant has never been given the opportunity  of  explaining  why
        such evidence was not sought.  These issues should have been raised
        giving the appellant the opportunity to comment.


     6. In ST (Corroboration - Kasolo)  Ethiopia  [2004]  UKIAT  00119  the
        Tribunal  said  that  it  was  a   misdirection   to   imply   that
        corroboration was necessary for  a  positive  credibility  finding.
        However, the fact that corroboration was not required did not  mean
        that an Adjudicator was  required  to  leave  out  of  account  the
        absence  of  documentary  evidence,  which  could   reasonably   be
        expected: the Adjudicator was entitled to comment that it would not
        have been difficult to provide the relevant documents in this case.
          In particular, the Adjudicator was entitled to  comment  that  it
        would not have been difficult for the Appellant to provide a  death
        certificate concerning his brother or some evidence to support  his
        contention that he had  received  hospital  treatment.  These  were
        issues of fact for the Adjudicator to assess.  The  Tribunal  noted
        that the Adjudicator had taken into account the fact that claimants
        could well have difficulty  in  presenting  documentation  and  the
        provisions of the UNHCR handbook on giving claimants the benefit of
        the  doubt.   In  the  circumstances,  the  Tribunal  declined   to
        intervene and said that an appeal must be determined on  the  basis
        of the evidence produced but the weight  to  be  attached  to  oral
        evidence may be affected by a failure to produce other evidence  in
        support.


     7. In TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 the Court of Appeal  said
        that where there were circumstances in which evidence corroborating
        the appellant's evidence was easily obtainable, the  lack  of  such
        evidence must affect the assessment of the appellant's credibility.
         It followed that where a judge in assessing credibility relied  on
        the fact that there was no independent  supporting  evidence  where
        there should be and there was no credible account for its  absence,
        he committed no error of law  when  he  relied  on  that  fact  for
        rejecting the account of the appellant.  In this case the  evidence
        concerned a partner in the UK.


     8. A reading of the determination shows Judge Kelly was concern  about
        the lack of evidence supporting alleged events.  It  is  clear  the
        Judge considered that  such  evidence  could  be  easily  obtained,
        especially from the appellant's wife with whom  he  is  in  regular
        contact, yet it had not been.  I do not find  it  proved  that  the
        Judge erred in not placing the weight upon the evidence that he was
        invited to do only as  a  result  of  the  lack  of  corroboration,
        although this was a factor he was entitled to take into account.


     9. I find the allegation of a procedural irregularity in  not  putting
        these issues to the appellant, such as  to  amount  to  a  material
        error on the basis of a failure to have  a  fair  hearing,  has  no
        merit.  Following the lodging of the appeal directions  were  given
        which made it clear that all evidence the parties  intend  to  rely
        upon should be provided within a specified  period.  The  appellant
        provided a bundle which did not include evidence of  the  type  the
        Judge referred too  or  an  explanation  of  the  absence  of  that
        evidence. The above cases make it clear that the burden of  proving
        the case is upon the  appellant  and  the  Judge  was  required  to
        consider the merits of the  case  on  the  basis  of  the  material
        provided. The  appellant  had  ample  opportunity  to  produce  the
        evidence he wished to rely upon yet chose not  to  do  so  in  this
        respect.   The reasons for refusal  letter  put  the  appellant  to
        proof of his claim, which was not accepted, yet he appears  not  to
        have taken the chance to present the case fully for which there  is
        no plausible explanation.


    10. The grounds seem to have focused on the phrase "eyewitness account"
        but it is clear from a reading of the determination  that  this  is
        not all the Judge was seeking, he was commenting  in  general  upon
        the lack of relevant evidence.  Mr Ficklin accepted it  would  have
        been possible to get the evidence and that in  fact  the  appellant
        has now done so, without explaining why it was not available on  an
        earlier occasion. However this evidence was not  before  the  Judge
        and so it cannot be a material error for him not to have considered
        it.


    11. I do not accept that it has been proved  Judge  Kelly  applied  too
        high a standard of proof when reading the determination as a whole.
        The Judge did  consider  the  evidence  with  the  degree  of  care
        required in an appeal of this nature, that of anxious scrutiny, and
        gave adequate reasons for findings made.


    12. In relation to the submission that there was a responsibility  upon
        the respondent to  test  the  evidence,  and  that  the  Judge  has
        discretion in this respect, this is not accepted and I find has  no
        merit. Mr Ficklin was asked whether he was referring  to  the  case
        Singh in which it was held that evidence  that  could  easily  have
        been obtained by the respondent by a simple  enquiry  of  an  UNHCR
        office in Europe should have been obtained by her.  He confirmed he
        was not saying that the respondent should contact the  Attorney  in
        this case in Sri Lanka and accepted that  the  burden  was  on  the
        appellant. I find there is no burden on the Secretary of  State  to
        gather evidence to prove the appellant's case. It  is  outside  any
        obligation that this Tribunal or the law places upon her and I find
        the attempt to argue that such a burden is separate from  her  duty
        to check the evidence is an attempt to merge the two issues,  which
        has no arguable merit.  The burden is upon the appellant to provide
        such evidence as is required to prove the case. If the Secretary of
        State wishes to check such evidence that is a matter for  her,  but
        if she chooses not to this does not  reduce  the  burden  upon  the
        appellant. I find no arguable error in this ground or that relating
        to the challenge of the Judge's treatment of the evidence from  the
        Attorney in Sri Lanka.


    13. Mr Ficklin summarised his grounds of challenge as containing  three
        distinct elements being (i) that  the  Judge  applied  too  high  a
        standard of proof. I find this is not substantiated on the evidence
        and  has  no  arguable  merit.  (ii)   That   the   Judge   applied
        inappropriate weight to the evidence. I find no arguable  merit  in
        this ground as weight is a matter for  the  Judge  provided  it  is
        shown he considered the evidence with the degree of  care  required
        in an appeal of this nature and gave adequate reasons for  findings
        made, which he did - see SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155.  (iii)
        The requirement of corroboration. I find no arguable merit in  this
        ground for the reasons set out above.


    14. During the course of my deliberations I have reviewed the  evidence
        and submissions made and would find that in light  of  the  current
        country guidance case of  GJ  and  others  [2013]  UKUT  00319  the
        evidence made available to the Judge does not support a claim  that
        the appellant's profile fits within the class of those deemed to be
        at risk on return to Sri Lanka in any event.


Decision

    15. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as there was no application made or  evidence
   provided       to warrant the same.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20th September 2013


