
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09311/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th August 2015                  |On 15th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr GHASSAN ALBADAWI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     The present appeal is brought by the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department against the decision of the First tier Tribunal
    (Judge Maxwell) dated 19th of June 2015, in which the First tier  Judge
    allowed on the appeal brought by the Appellant against the decision  of
    the Respondent of 30 November 2014 to refuse him  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom, and to remove him into  Algeria.  I  shall  retain  the
    designations of the parties before the Fist tier, i.e. that  Mr  Ghasan
    Albadawi is the Appellant and the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department is the Respondent.

2     The appeal was called on at 10:40 am but there was  no  appearance  by
    or on behalf of the Appellant. I caused enquiries to be made  to  those
    acting for the Appellant, JD Spicer Zeb Solicitors, and  I  received  a
    message from Ms K Dhanjal of  that  firm  that  neither  they  nor  the
    Appellant had received notice  of  hearing  of  today's  hearing.   The
    Tribunal file contains a notice of hearing  dated  23rd  of  July  2015
    addressed to the Home Office Presenting Officers Unit,  JD  Spicer  Zeb
    solicitors, and to the Appellant personally. I determined that  it  was
    not necessary to establish whether or not this notice  of  hearing  had
    been posted out to the Appellant and their representatives,  because  I
    was, on a preliminary basis, inclined to proceed with the appeal in the
    Appellant's absence, as his absence was not  likely  to  prejudice  his
    case.

    Background and First tier decision

3     The background to this appeal is that the Appellant is a  national  of
    Syria. He worked  as  an  accountant  and  left  Syria  in  June  2012,
    asserting that he was in danger from the Syrian  authorities,  who,  he
    asserted, had killed his uncle. He moved to Algeria, later marrying  an
    Algerian National.

4     He left Algeria and travelled to the  United  Kingdom  on  31  January
    2014, claiming asylum upon arrival. He asserted that  he  was  at  real
    risk of harm in Syria on the basis of an imputed political opinion.  He
    also asserted that he was likely to be re-fouled from Algeria to  Syria
    if he were to be returned to Algeria. The Respondent refused his  claim
    for asylum in a letter dated 30th October 2014,  and  made  a  decision
    refusing leave to enter on the same date.

5     The Appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  the  matter  came
    before the First tier Tribunal on 4 June 2015. In a thorough  and  well
    reasoned decision, the Judge rejected the historical account  that  the
    Appellant gave of  having  problems  in  Syria.  He  also  rejected  an
    assertion by the Appellant that his mother-in-law in Algeria had made a
    complaint against him to the Algerian  authorities,  which  might  have
    caused him to be removed to Syria.

6     The Appellant had also engaged in some sur  place  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom which included  demonstrating  outside  the  Syrian  and
    Russian Embassies in London, and taking part in an interview  with  the
    BBC, said to have been broadcast on the Arabic network. The  Judge  was
    of the view that any  demonstration  outside  the  Russian  Embassy  in
    London would not cause him to be of any adverse interest to the  Syrian
    authorities. Further, there was inadequate evidence of the  Appellant's
    participation in the BBC interview.  However, the Judge did accept that
    the Appellant had demonstrated outside the Syrian  Embassy,  and  there
    was photographic evidence to support that contention. The Judge held:

         "46. The respondent, in considering  the  monitoring  of  suspected
         persons  inside  Syria  draws  the  conclusion  that  there  is   a
         significant  level  of  surveillance  (see  paragraph  17  of   the
         Refusal). Further, given the present  circumstances  prevailing  in
         Syria I find there is a reasonable prospect of them identifying the
         appellant who, were he to fall into their hands as  a  demonstrator
         and failed asylum seeker would be at serious risk."

7     The Judge also held at paragraph 51:

         "In the light of my findings in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  sur
         place activities at the Syrian Embassy in London  there  is  now  a
         reasonable prospect he will be regarded as a dissident by the Assad
         regime."

8     However, it is to be recalled that the Respondent did  not  intend  to
    remove the Appellant to Syria, but rather to  Algeria,  where  he  last
    resided and where his wife continues to live. The Appellant argued that
    he would be re-fouled  from  Algeria  to  Syria.  He  relied  upon  the
    reported case of RR (refugee-safe country) Syria [2010] UKUT  422  IAC,
    in which the Upper Tribunal, having considered the evidence before them
    and the relevant case law, concluded at paragraph 30(g):

         "Perhaps the most telling  item  of  evidence  is  that  which  the
         Secretary of State in fact produced in response to directions  from
         the Tribunal seeking her assistance in obtaining  information  from
         the Algerian Embassy. The  Secretary of State was able to obtain an
         opinion from an Honorary Legal Advisor   to  the  Algerian  Embassy
         which noted that co-operation agreements between the two  countries
         covered the security aspects and,  in  the  Honorary  Advisors  own
         words,  "Algeria would in this context, hand over opponents of  the
         Syrian regime". Given the appellant's family profile we  considered
         reasonably likely that the claimant could be  seen  to  fall  under
         such agreements."

9     Judge Maxwell held at para 53-54:

         "53 The appellant  does  not  have  permanent  status  in  Algeria.
         Although he does not  require  a  visa  to  re-enter  Algeria,  his
         Syrian passport has expired therefore at  some point he would  need
         to draw himself to the attention of the Syrian   authorities  which
         would, in my judgement place him  at risk if  this  took  place  in
         Algeria as it would alert the Syrian authorities to his presence in
         that country.

         54. Although I find the appellant has placed himself  at  risk  and
         has done so deliberately by his actions since  December  2014,  the
         test still remains the risk of refoulement if returned  to  Algeria
         and, for the reasons I have already  given,  I  am  forced  to  the
         conclusion such a risk exists and that the appellant has proved, to
         the lower standard required, this is a real risk and that  for  him
         Algeria is not a safe third country."

10    Accordingly the appeal was allowed on asylum grounds.

11    The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    grounds dated 25 June 2015. The grounds  assert  that  the  First  tier
    Judge misdirected himself as to the application   of  the  case  of  RR
    Syria and that a letter to the FtT written by  Mr Milstead, Home Office
    Presenting Officer, dated 13th of May 2015 addressing the relevance  of
    RR Syria, had not been taken into account by the Judge. It was asserted
    that the Judge had not properly considered 'the evidence', no reference
    had been made to the length of time since RR was  decided,  or  of  the
    different context in which that case had been decided.  It  was  argued
    that the reasons advanced by the Judge for finding that  the  Appellant
    had demonstrated a real risk of being re-fouled from Algeria  to  Syria
    were flawed.

12    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First  tier  Tribunal
    Fisher on 6th July 2015 on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    Judge had erred in law by failing to consider the Secretary of  State's
    letter, or in failing to deal with the points raised therein.

    The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

13    Noting that the Appellant was not present  at  the  hearing  today,  I
    nonetheless invited Mr  Kandola  to  address  me  on  the  Respondent's
    grounds of appeal. He did so, adopting those grounds of  appeal  making
    little if any amplification upon them.

14    I was able to give my decision in open court, which I now  confirm  in
    this written decision.

    Discussion

15    I find that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First  tier
    decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.

16    The arguments advanced in the Respondent's letter 13th  May  2015  may
    fairly be summarised as follows:

    (i)    The case of  RR  highlighted  examples  of  where  the  Algerian
         authorities had re-fouled Syrian nationals; however this was  prior
         to the start of the civil war and it  was  to  be  noted  that  the
         examples provided were of opponents to the Syrian  authorities  and
         those considered to be security risks in  Algeria  such  as  Syrian
         Muslim Brotherhood and those considered to  be  security  risks  in
         Algeria.

    (ii)   It was argued that the Appellant's case was  entirely  different
         in that the Appellant was not considered to be actual or  perceived
         opponent of the Syrian regime. It was argued that  he  was  not  of
         adverse interest to the Algerian authorities for any reason.  There
         would be  no  evidence  available  which  would  suggest  that  the
         Appellant would be a real risk  of  refoulement  to  Syria  by  the
         Algerian authorities.

    (iii)  It was further argued that when he was resident in  Algeria  the
         Appellant had been able to extend his Algerian residents permit.

17    I deal first with the suggestion that  this  document  was  not  taken
    into account by the First tier  Judge.  I  am  of  the  view  that  the
    Respondent's argument in that regard is not made out.  At  paragraph  7
    of the FtT decision, the Judge says "The appellant gave  oral  evidence
    through  an   interpreter   and   I   heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives". In my view, the Respondent's letter of 13th May  2015
    may be rightly described as part of the  Respondent's  submissions.  It
    certainly does not contain any evidence. The Judge says  he  took  into
    account the submissions from both representatives.

18    Further, at paragraph 10 of the decision, the Judge notes:

         "In reaching my decision I have taken into  account  the  following
         documents which were before me:

         (i) ...

         (ii)      A  supplementary  bundle  of  documents  filed   by   the
             respondent, including a typed copy of the  Appellant's  asylum
             interview."

19    I note that the Respondent's letter of 13th May states that  it  is  a
    document of seven pages (even though the representations themselves are
    only two pages long). The first paragraph of the letter states  that  a
    typed transcript of the Appellant's substantive  asylum  interview  was
    attached to the letter. I am therefore satisfied that the supplementary
    bundle of documents referred to at para 10(ii) of the Judge's  decision
    included Mr Milstead's letter of 13 May 2015, in addition to the  typed
    transcript of the asylum interview.

20    In any event, even if (which I find not to  be  the  case)  the  Judge
    failed to take the letter of 13 May into account, I am of the view that
    the arguments contained within that letter would have had  no  material
    effect on the way  in  which  the  immigration  Judge   approached  the
    present appeal.

21    The Respondent's submission, within that  letter,  is  essentially  to
    the effect that  the  Appellant  was  of  no  interest  to  the  Syrian
    authorities, or the Algerian authorities, prior to leaving Algeria  and
    coming to  the United Kingdom.   Those  arguments  completely  fail  to
    engage with the Appellant's sur place activity in the  United  Kingdom,
    which resulted Judge finding at para 50 and 51 that he will be at  real
    risk of serious harm in Syria, and would result in him being considered
    a dissident by the Assad regime.

22    Further, the Respondent's letter of 13th May does not in any way  seek
    to challenge the validity or continuing  effect  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's own evidence, referred to at paragraph 30(g) of the case of  RR
    Syria, quoted above, in particular the reference to the Honorary  Legal
    Adviser's note suggesting that Algeria would hand over opponents of the
    Syrian regime. The Judge had held that the Appellant  would  eventually
    have to bring himself  to  the  attention  of  the  Syrian  authorities
    present in Algeria. There  is  no  challenge  within  the  Respondent's
    grounds of appeal to that finding of fact.

23    Further,  the argument in the Respondent's letter  of  13th  May  that
    the case of RR Syria was decided prior to the start of the civil war in
    Syria does nothing to reduce the effect  and relevance of the  evidence
    referred to in that case. If anything, the Syrian authorities  are  now
    likely to be more sensitive about political opponents  and  dissidents,
    during the civil war, then they were prior to it.

24    Further, when the Secretary of State's letter suggests that  the  case
    of RR dealt with opponents to the Syrian, it  is  clear  that  that  is
    exactly what the First tier Judge held the Appellant  would  be  viewed
    as, by the Syrian authorities.

25    I therefore conclude that the First tier Judge did take  into  account
    the Respondent's letter  of  13th  of  May  2015.  Further  or  in  the
    alternative, if he did not, the arguments advanced within  that  letter
    would do nothing to demonstrate that there was any  material  error  of
    law in the reasoning applied by the Judge in finding that the Appellant
    would be at risk of being  refouled  by  the  Algerian  authorities  to
    Syria, where he faced a real risk of serious harm.

    Decision

26    I find that the making of the first tier decision did not involve  the
    making of any error of law.

27    I do not set aside the First tier decision.

28    I dismiss the Respondent's appeal against the First tier decision.

29    In the light of my decision, I find that the Appellant's absence  from
    the proceedings on the day of the hearing did not prejudice him.

Signed:


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

Date: 14.9.15
