
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09593/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 February 2016                   |On 8 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                  SAM AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ouattara of Christian Gottfried & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J  D  L  Edwards  promulgated  on  2  March  2015  which
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 4. The Appellant was born on 17 June 1992 and claims he is a  national  of
    Syria, a stateless Kurd, although the Respondent disputes this and says
    he is a citizen of Iraq.

 5. On 1 November 2013 the Appellant applied for asylum. He claimed to be a
    Kurdish farmer. He spoke Kurdish Sorani and Arabic. He claimed that  he
    had been arrested in August 2013 tortured and then  released.  He  fled
    from Syria in September 2013.

 6. On 18 October 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Appellant was the subject of a language analysis by Sprakab who
         concluded that there was a high degree of likelihood that  he  came
         from Iraq and it was very unlikely he came from Syria.

      b) The Appellants explanation as to why he spoke Sorani which is  very
         rare in Syria was not credible.

      c) The Appellant displayed little knowledge of stateless Kurds.

      d) The Appellant displayed little knowledge of Qamishli city which was
         � KM from where he lived.

      e) The  Appellant  displayed  little  knowledge  of  Syria's  history,
         geography, politics or currency.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Edwards  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

      a) The Appellant advanced no evidence that he was  Syrian  other  than
         his oral evidence.

      b) The Respondent produced a Sprakab report to support their assertion
         that the Appellant  was  an  Iraqi.  The  Judge  found  the  report
         compellingly researched and argued.

      c) The Judge therefore concluded that the Appellant was Iraqi.

      d) The Judge found that a  number  of  other  matters  undermined  the
         credibility of  his  claim  as  the  explanations  given  were  not
         accepted  the  Appellants  claim  to  be  Syrian  which  the  Judge
         rejected; he stated that the Syrian currency was  the  Lira  rather
         than the Syrian pound; the Appellant was fingerprinted  in  Dunkirk
         and gave a false name, date of birth and nationality and lied about
         it in interview; the events  described  in  Syria  were  vague  and
         insubstantial.

      e) The Judge found that there was nothing to show that  the  Appellant
         would be at risk on return to Iraq.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that there  were  factual  errors
    that suggested that the Judge had not exercised  anxious  scrutiny;  he
    had given undue weight  to  the  Sprakab  report;  the  Judge  was  not
    entitled to conclude that the Appellant  was  wrong  about  the  Syrian
    currency; the Judge failed to properly assess risk on return to Iraq.

 9. On 17 March 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Astle  gave  permission  to
    appeal .

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Ouattarra on behalf  of  the
    Appellant that :

      a) He relied on the grounds of appeal and although not  identified  in
         the grounds he summarised four headings for the grounds.

      b) Ground 1 he suggested was covered by paragraphs 6-8 of the  grounds
         which he suggested amounted to lack of anxious scrutiny: the  Judge
         had failed to consider that while one of the reasons the Respondent
         gave for not believing he was Syrian was  that  he  did  not  speak
         Arabic at his interview when he spoke Arabic at the asylum  hearing
         and before the Judge; there were  factual  errors  at  paragraph  2
         where  the  Judge  stated  the  Appellant's  asylum  interview  was
         conducted in Arabic when it was in Kurdish Sorani and at  paragraph
         3 he referred to removal to Egypt.

      c) Ground 2 he suggested was covered by paragraphs 9  and  10  of  the
         grounds and argued that the Judge gave undue weight to the  Sprakab
         report and incorrectly treated the report as infallible. He  failed
         to take into  account  that  Sprakab  is  no  longer  used  by  the
         Respondent for language analysis.

      d) Ground 3 he stated was covered by paragraph 11 of the  grounds  and
         argued that the Judge should not  have  given  any  weight  to  the
         assertion that the  Appellant  incorrectly  identified  the  Syrian
         currency  when  Mr  Ouattara  had  an  internet  article  correctly
         identifying the currency. He also suggested that the  Judge  should
         not have concluded from  the  Appellant  giving  false  details  in
         France that he was Syrian.

      e) Ground 4 was the argument that the Judge had failed  to  adequately
         address the risk on return to Iraq as a Kurd to the contested areas
         of Iraq.

11. On behalf of the Respondent Ms Johnstone submitted that :

      a) In relation to Ground 1 she argued that the reference to Egypt  was
         a typographical error as he referred to Syria  and  where  relevant
         Iraq throughout the determination.

      b) The Judge gave adequate reasons for finding the Sprakab  report  to
         be weighty.

      c) In relation to the Syrian currency the refusal letter set  out  why
         the Appellant was wrong and the App adduced no evidence before  the
         first tier to address this issue.

      d) In relation to the risk on return the difficulty  is  that  as  the
         Appellant denies being from Iraq the Judge is unable to  accurately
         address that risk. Nevertheless that would  be  a  matter  for  the
         Respondent to address in the removal directions.

12. In reply Mr Ouattara on behalf of  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the
    Sprakab report also went beyond its remit in addressing credibility and
    he  relied  on  those  matters  1.3  of  the  report.  The   'knowledge
    assessment' did not justify the conclusion that  the  Appellant  showed
    'limited knowledge.'

The Law

13.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration. In  Mibanga  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging
    such findings:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

15. In relation to Sprakab reports the grounds referred to M.AB.N. & Anor v
    The Advocate General for Scotland & Anor [2013] ScotCS CSIH  68,  where
    the Secretary of State refused asylum to as a result of linguistic from
    'Sprakab'.  The Sprakab reports concluded that each  Claimant  did  not
    speak a dialect of Somali found in the area they claimed to be from and
    that they had deficient knowledge of that area.  The key issue in  each
    appeal was the evidential standing of the 'Sprakab' reports. The  Court
    found that the author of each report was stepping outside their  proper
    field of expertise and that there was no evidence that  either  analyst
    had any expertise in the identification of  Somali  dialects  or  their
    geographical and social distribution. On appeal in SSHD  v  MN  and  KY
    [2014] UKSC 30, the decision in the Court of Sessions was upheld albeit
    that the Supreme Court held that regard could be had, by the  Secretary
    of State  determining  asylum  applications  and  tribunals  in  asylum
    appeals, to linguistic analysis reports provided  by  the  organisation
    known as Sprakab.  Sprakab could report  on  language  as  evidence  of
    place of origin  and  on  familiarity  with  claimed  place  of  origin
    provided that the expert's  expertise  was  properly  demonstrated  and
    their reasoning adequately explained. By way of  pointers  the  Supreme
    Court said "i) On the basis of the material we  have  seen,  I  see  no
    reason in principle why Sprakab should not be able to  report  on  both
    (a) language as evidence of place of origin and  (b)  familiarity  with
    claimed place of origin provided, in both  cases,  their  expertise  is
    properly demonstrated and their  reasoning  adequately  explained.  (As
    will be seen below, the problem in relation to (b) was not  the  nature
    of the evidence, but the lack of demonstrated  expertise.)  ii)  As  to
    (a), language: a) The findings (on evidence)  in  RB  are  to  my  mind
    sufficient to demonstrate acceptable expertise and  method,  which  can
    properly be accepted unless the evidence in  a  particular  case  shows
    otherwise; b) The Upper Tribunal ought to give further consideration to
    how the basis for the geographical attribution of  particular  dialects
    or usages can be better explained and not (as it often currently  seems
    to be) left implicit. The tribunal needs to be able to  satisfy  itself
    as to the data by reference to which analysts make  judgements  on  the
    geographical range of  a  particular  dialect  or  usage.   c)  The  RB
    safeguard requiring the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  the  recording
    available to any  expert  instructed  for  the  claimant  is  not  only
    sensible, but essential. iii) As to (b),  familiarity:  a)  The  report
    needs to explain the source and nature of the knowledge of the  analyst
    on which the comments are based, and identify  the  error  or  lack  of
    expected  knowledge  found  in  the  interview  material;  b)   Sprakab
    reporters  should  limit  themselves  to  identifying  such   lack   of
    knowledge, rather than offering opinions on  the  general  question  of
    whether the claimant speaks convincingly. (It is not the function of an
    expert in language use to offer an opinion on general credibility.) iv)
    On the issue of "anonymity", since the approach in RB was  a  departure
    from the norm, it would be appropriate  for  the  tribunal  to  satisfy
    itself both that the departure remains justified in  the  interests  of
    security of Sprakab personnel or otherwise, and, if it does, as to  the
    safeguards necessary to ensure that the evidence is reliable  and  that
    no prejudice arises in  individual  cases.  Consideration  for  example
    could be given to requiring assurances  that  the  identifying  numbers
    remain with  an  individual  throughout  his  work  with  Sprakab,  and
    requiring disclosure of other work done in any  related  field  by  the
    individual (e.g. advice to Governments,  interpretation,  translation),
    and of any occasion on which his  conclusions  have  been  rejected  by
    courts or tribunals."

Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

17. The first ground  suggests  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give  anxious
    scrutiny of the Appellants appeal. I am satisfied  that  the  Judge  in
    what was a detailed and well-reasoned decision made two factual  errors
    : he suggested that the Appellants asylum interview  was  conducted  in
    Arabic when in fact  he  was  interviewed  in  Kurdish  Sorani  and  in
    paragraph 3 he refers to the Appellant being removed to Egypt.

18.  However,  I  am  satisfied  that  these  two  factual  errors  do  not
    demonstrate a lack of anxious scrutiny. It is  clear  to  me  that  the
    reference to Egypt was a simple typographical error because  the  Judge
    otherwise in the decision, at  paragraphs  2,6,17,1819,20,25,  26,  27,
    29,30(a) (b) (c) ,31,32 and  33  repeatedly  makes  it  plain  that  he
    understands that the Appellant claims to be a Syrian but the Respondent
    believes he is an Iraqi. In relation to the reference in paragraph 2 to
    the interview being conducted in Arabic I am  satisfied  that  this  is
    another minor typographical error as the passages referred to  in  this
    paragraph make plain that the Judge understood the issues in  the  case
    and specifically paragraphs 19, and 25-29 make plain that he understood
    that the language analysis had been based  on  the  Appellant  speaking
    what he claimed was Syrian Kurmanji.  I am satisfied that the Judge was
    not entitled to place any weight on the fact that the  Appellant  spoke
    Arabic before him as Arabic is spoken in a  number  of  Muddle  Eastern
    countries and is not determinative of the Appellant being  Syrian  and,
    moreover, the Judge recognised (paragraph 17) that the Appellant  spoke
    Arabic.

19. The other matters cited in the grounds to suggest that  the  Judge  has
    failed to give anxious scrutiny, that he referred in  paragraph  19  to
    only one Sprakab analyst  when  there  were  two  and  failed  to  give
    evidence of the detailed examples of the failure to pronounce words  as
    a Syrian Kurmanji speaker have  no  merit.  The  Judge  refers  to  the
    language assessment being conducted by Peter  Lovgren.  The  report  is
    indeed signed by Mr Lovgren (C5 of the Respondents  bundle)  under  the
    summary 'Language analysis report compiled and reviewed by'. The  Judge
    does not suggest that no one else assisted in the  preparation  of  the
    report and indeed as is the practice no one  else  is  identified.  The
    Judge has merely referred to the report being conducted by  the  person
    who signed it.  In relation to the Judge not identifying the  'detailed
    examples' of failure to pronounce words according  to  Syrian  Kurmanji
    these were detailed in the report  itself  at  2.3  and  given  that  3
    examples were given and explained  I  am  satisfied  that  he  was  not
    required to repeat them and was entitled to refer to them as detailed.

20. It is argued that the Judge accepted the Sprakab report without  giving
    adequate reasons but I am satisfied that this argument has no merit and
    that the Judge was entitled to give considerable weight to  the  report
    and gave adequate reasons for doing so. While the Respondent no  longer
    uses Sprakab as Mr Ouattara argued this does not mean that the  reports
    cannot be relied on and indeed there is nothing in MN to  suggest  that
    they cannot be relied on provided the guidance is followed.  The  Judge
    refers to the fact that he had regard to the appropriate guidance given
    in MN & KY.  He was of course entitled to take into account Mr Lovgrens
    qualifications  to  give  expert  evidence  (paragraph  19)   and   his
    experience as detailed at C6 of the report  and  that  his  conclusions
    were to a 'high degree of certainty'. In fact  the  Judge  inaccurately
    summarised the finding of the report which was at C3 to a  'very  high'
    degree of certainly that the Appellant was an Iraqi rather than  simply
    a 'high' degree. While not specifically referring to it the Judge would
    also have been entitled to note that the report concluded that  it  was
    'very unlikely' that the Appellant was a Syrian. The Judge  could  also
    have detailed the expertise of the analysts as set out in C6 and  noted
    that one had lived in the Kurdish parts of Syria when  determining  the
    weight to be given  to  the  report.  While  the  Judge  recognised  in
    paragraph 28 that MN states that Sprakab reports are not infallible  in
    that it was possible to challenge them the Judge was entitled  to  note
    at paragraph 26 and  27  that  the  Appellants  had  not  advanced  any
    evidence to challenge the conclusions of the expert language report and
    therefore accept it.

21. I do not accept that the Sprakab report has gone beyond  its  remit  in
    the summary of findings (C3). Mr Ouattara sought to argue that  it  was
    addressing credibility but I am satisfied  that  in  referring  to  the
    Appellants 'non-genuine way of speaking' the author is referring to his
    'extensive manipulation' of the language rather than any reflection  on
    the credibility of his account.

22. I am satisfied that there is no merit in the argument  that  the  Judge
    was entitled to conclude that the Appellant had  failed  to  adequately
    address the challenge in 15(f) of the refusal letter than he had failed
    to properly identify the Syrian currency. While  Mr  Outtara  had  come
    armed with an internet article before me that he  claimed  showed  that
    the Syrian currency was the Lira as  the  Appellant  asserted  no  such
    evidence was produced before the Judge. The Judge was told in  evidence
    by the Appellant that he did not handle money so  was  unfamiliar  with
    the  currency.  It  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  find  this  argument
    incredible.

23. I am satisfied that the  Judge's  assessment  of  risk  on  return  was
    adequate given the Appellants denial that he was an Iraqi and continued
    assertion that he was Syrian. Given  the  Judge  does  not  reject  the
    Appellants claim to a Kurd albeit one from Iraq he was not required  to
    accept the assertion made before him that the  Appellant  would  be  at
    risk because he would be returned to a contested area as the likelihood
    would be that he would be returned to Kurdistan. No evidence was placed
    before the Judge to suggest that the Appellant  would  be  at  risk  if
    returned to Kurdistan.

24. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

25. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

26. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

27. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
3.2.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

