
IAC-AH-VP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09035/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined On the Papers at Manchester        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2015                            |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     nAM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Representation
For the Respondent:    No Representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, NAM, claims to be a citizen  of  Somalia.   This  matter
    last came  before  me  on  15  May  2014  when  I  made  the  following
    directions:

         1.   For the avoidance of doubt it is recorded that the  respondent
             has withdrawn the decision to remove the  appellant  which  is
             dated 29 July 2009.

         2.   Having regard to SM (Withdrawal of  appeal  decision;  effect)
             Pakistan [2014]  UKUT  64  (IAC)  it  remains  for  the  Upper
             Tribunal to decide, following withdrawal of  the  respondent's
             decision, to proceed to allow or dismiss the appeal  (see  SM,
             head note [3]) in light of  all  relevant  matters  (including
             those set out at head note [4] of SM).

         3.   The parties have permission to file with  the  Upper  Tribunal
             and to serve upon each other no later than 4pm on 30 June 2014
             written  submissions   (annexing   thereto   such   items   of
             documentary evidence as may be appropriate) concerning (1) and
             (2) above.  The Tribunal will then decide how to proceed,  and
             should give its decision in writing and shall,  if  necessary,
             give  further  directions  should  a  substantive  hearing  be
             required.

 2. I have received no written submissions from either party following  the
    making of that direction.  Having regard to all  the  circumstances  in
    this appeal and to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in SM, I  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    remove her.  In doing so, I refer to the decision of  Designated  Judge
    McCarthy dated 25 January 2010 by which he set aside  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 25 September 2009 (which had allowed  the
    appellant's appeal against the immigration decision.)  The appellant is
    currently in prison following the unfortunate death  of  her  daughter;
    she has never been produced before me at any hearing.  In the light  of
    the considerable lapse of time since the  making  of  the  decision  to
    remove the appellant and the intervening events and  having  regard  to
    the withdrawal of the immigration decision by the  respondent,  I  find
    that the only appropriate course of action is to dismiss  this  appeal.
    It will be for the Secretary of State to consider her position.  If she
    issues a further immigration decision it is likely that  the  appellant
    will, if she is so  advised,  be  able  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. However, I leave those matters to  the  parties.  Finally,  I
    record that at no point during the currency of the present  proceedings
    before either the First-tier Tribunal or the  Upper  Tribunal  has  any
    evidence been produced which would indicate that the appellant is of  a
    nationality other than Somali.

DECISION

 3. The appeal of NAM is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Date 2 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
