

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09583/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House London           |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 22 August 2017                     |On 6 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     EY
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Nazami, instructed by Davjunnel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision and  reasons
    statement of FtT Judge Landes that was  issued  on  14  February  2017.
    Judge Landes decided the appellant  is  not  a  refugee  from  Iran  or
    otherwise in need of international protection.

 2. Judge Landes imposed an anonymity direction.   Given  the  age  of  the
    appellant and the issues in this appeal, it is appropriate to  continue
    anonymity and I make the appropriate order at the end of this decision.

 3. At the start of the hearing, Ms Nazami confirmed the appellant was  not
    pursuing any issue relating to  his  private  and  family  life  rights
    (article 8 ECHR) and there is no need for me  to  consider  any  matter
    relating to those issues.

 4. Ms Nazami relied on the  grounds  of  application  as  her  grounds  of
    appeal.  In essence, she argues that Judge Landes erred by  failing  to
    give appropriate weight to  the  background  country  information  that
    indicates how family members of journalists have been targeted  by  the
    Iranian authorities.  This factor was  highly  relevant  because  Judge
    Landes accepted the appellant's father had been a journalist  and  that
    he had been targeted by the Iranian authorities.

 5. I mentioned that the background evidence had become detached  from  the
    appeal file.  Ms Nazami provided  copies.   It  was  clear  that  Judge
    Landes addressed the specific references in the background evidence  at
    paragraph 42.  The question  was  whether  Judge  Landes  had  confused
    herself by saying at paragraph 44 that she had no, "background material
    which indicates that the authorities would transfer their  interest  to
    the appellant just because they have been unbale to arrest his father."

 6. Ms Nazami explained that Judge  Landes's  failure  meant  she  had  not
    adhered to the country guideline decision, SSH and  HR  (Illegal  exit:
    failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]  UKUT  308  because  she  had  not
    assessed whether the appellant's relationship  to  his  father  was  an
    additional factor that meant he would come to the adverse attention  of
    the Iranian authorities on return.

 7. In addition to these points, Ms Nazami also argued  that  Judge  Landes
    failed to consider whether the appellant's father had been coerced into
    giving an undertaking to the  Iranian  authorities  so  that  he  could
    obtain his release.  If that were the case, then it was  plausible  the
    appellant's father continued his activities after  his  release,  which
    would have brought him to the  adverse  attention  of  the  immigration
    authorities.  This factor was material to the question of  whether  the
    appellant had given a truthful account about what happened when he went
    to his grandmother's house shortly before leaving Iran.

 8. Mr Singh adopted the rule 24 notice,  which  opposed  the  appeal.   He
    submitted that when read as a whole, the comment in  paragraph  44  was
    drawn from the findings at paragraphs 42 and 43.  Judge Landes assessed
    the background  country  information  and  found  it  did  not  provide
    sufficient evidence to show that the appellant's account was reasonably
    likely.  Mr Singh reminded me that the country information had a  range
    of criteria to consider and the risk of interest being  transferred  to
    the appellant from his father was not  simply  to  be  based  on  their
    relationship.  Judge Landes looked at all the relevant factors.

 9. Mr Singh reminded me  that  Judge  Landes  had  found  the  appellant's
    account to lack truthfulness because even when taking into account  his
    young  age,  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  sound  evidence.
    Although the key negative credibility finding, that  Judge  Landes  did
    not believe the  appellant  about  the  circumstances  leading  to  his
    departure from Iran, are not central to the claim, which relates to his
    father being a journalist, the negative finding prevented Judge  Landes
    giving the appellant the benefit of the doubt.  Mr Singh suggested  the
    grounds of appeal are mere disagreement with the findings made.

10. I reserved my decision and reasons, which I now give.

11. Having carefully examined the decision and reasons statement  of  Judge
    Landes, and having considered the competing submissions, I am satisfied
    there is no legal error.

12. It is evident from paragraph 42 that Judge Landes had proper regard  to
    the background country information.  Her  analysis  is  thorough.   She
    recognised that the evidence was insufficient to raise the risk  facing
    the appellant from a mere possibility level to a reasonable  likelihood
    level.  In other  words,  the  background  country  evidence  does  not
    support the appellant's claim that he would be at risk merely for being
    the son of a journalist who has been arrested in the past.

13. In addition, it was open to Judge  Landes  to  reject  the  appellant's
    account of the events  leading  to  his  departure  from  Iran  as  not
    credible.  In reaching this finding she applied all  relevant  criteria
    and I note the finding itself is unchallenged.  Although not central to
    the claim, the fact Judge Landes rejected this part of the  appellant's
    claim means she did not accept the appellant's father faced any further
    problems with the Iranian authorities.  That  finding  meant  that  any
    risk facing the appellant was greatly reduced.

14. Judge Landes took these  findings  and  found  the  appellant  did  not
    benefit from any of the findings in SSHD and HR.  That is a  reasonable
    conclusion to draw, given the findings she made and which  I  find  are
    unassailable.  There is  nothing,  therefore,  in  the  allegation  she
    misapplied the Upper Tribunal's country guidance.

15. It follows that I uphold Judge Landes's decision.

Decision

I dismiss the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

There is no legal error in the  decision  and  reasons  statement  of  Judge
Landes and her decision stands.

Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"EY".




Signed                          Date         29 August 2017


Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
