
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/09177/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 3 June 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M S
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION in force)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S B Smith, Counsel instructed by Lambeth Law
Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order because the respondent is an asylum  seeker  and  publishing
    his identify might endanger his safety.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull allowing  the  appeal  of  the  present
    respondent, who I will call "the claimant", against the decision of the
    Secretary of State on 4 October 2014 to refuse  him  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and to remove him.  It is his case that he
    is a refugee or otherwise entitled to international protection.

 3. His appeal was allowed by Judge Phull on asylum grounds  and  on  human
    rights grounds including a rather strange finding  to  allow  it  under
    Article 8 in a way that does not, with respect, make a  great  deal  of
    sense to us.  That is not important in the context of the appeal  as  a
    whole or our decision as a whole which is that the  decision  to  allow
    the appeal on asylum grounds was permissible in law.

 4. I think we may be permitted a rather  generalised  observation  that  a
    very large number of young men who have sought  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom can be returned safely to Kabul where they  are  not  refugees.
    It is also well-recognised by this Tribunal that this is  not  true  of
    all the young men who have been seeking asylum in  the  United  Kingdom
    but something has to exist in such a case to  separate  them  from  the
    general and to show that a particular claimant faces a real risk.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that there were two areas  of  risk
    for this claimant.

 6. Firstly, he is a refugee because he is the son of a police officer  and
    the Taliban are anxious to punish people for being  related  to  police
    officers no doubt with the intention of discouraging other people  from
    being police officers.  We do not think that it is disputed that if the
    appellant is at risk for that reason he is a refugee.

 7. The second reason, which is much less common but is a feature  of  this
    case, is that the claimant is also involved in a blood feud.  If he  is
    at risk for that reason he might not be a refugee but might be entitled
    to protection because blood feuds in Afghanistan are  nasty  and  long-
    lasting and may very well constituted a risk the claimant's rights that
    are protected by Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 8. Judge Phull was satisfied that in the event of the  appellant's  return
    to Afghanistan he would be at risk in Kabul because news of his arrival
    might travel to those who bear him harm.  With respect to Judge  Phull,
    her reasons for reaching that conclusion are not explained as  well  as
    they might have been in the Decision which is why we had to  have  this
    hearing.  We are quite satisfied having reflected on the Decision  with
    the assistance of  representatives  for  the  parties  that  it  was  a
    decision open to Judge Phull on the evidence before her.

 9. We make the point that the fact that the claimant is at risk because of
    a blood feud enhances his risk from the Taliban.  We say that  because,
    unlike the Taliban who, although they might be expected to take  action
    against the son of a police officer whose presence they discover, would
    not necessarily have the resources or inclination to go round  looking,
    the claimant's uncle, we are satisfied, would be  overtly  looking  for
    him because that is the nature of blood feuds in Afghanistan society.

10. We find it a reasonable  inference  from  the  evidence  that  if  news
    reached the uncle it would also reach the Taliban  because  it  is  the
    kind of information that would travel in  the  home  village  from  the
    uncle's family to the Taliban who  we  are  quite  satisfied  would  be
    active there.

11. This creates an enhanced  risk  that  puts  him  in  a  more  dangerous
    category than somebody who was simply related to a police officer. This
    was clearly in the judge's mind.

12. We now ask ourselves how the judge could  conclude  property  that  the
    claimant would be at risk in Kabul which is an hour and a  half  travel
    distance away from the claimant' home area.

13. There are two things that are readily identifiable.  The  first  is  an
    expert's report which was before the judge and  was  accepted  by  her.
    Paragraph 40 of that report refers expressly to  "interactions  between
    strangers meeting for the first time inevitably begin with establishing
    identity and trying to find common acquaintances  or  family  members".
    The expert explained how trust is broken down in Afghanistan because of
    the difficult times and it is the nature of that society for people  to
    ask questions to place each other in a particular social perspective.

14. We remind ourselves that if the claimant  were  returned  he  would  be
    looking for accommodation and he would be looking for work.  Whilst  he
    would undoubtedly be entitled to  some  help  he  would  have  to  make
    contact with people who would be asking questions about  his  identity.
    It is not something he could keep secret and therefore  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that it is something that would become  known  and
    there is a real risk of it being known by people who would do him harm.

15. The second associated point is from the country guidance  given  in  AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan ) CG  2012  UKUT  00016  (IAC)  where
    particularly the Tribunal approves of the evidence of Dr Giustozzi  who
    is a person well-known to the Tribunal as an expert  about  Afghanistan
    and adjoining states. The Tribunal said, "we also take into account his
    evidence that tracking somebody down from the provinces in Kabul is not
    difficult". This is precisely the point that was made in appeal  before
    us.

16. We want to emphasise that our ruling is  not  to  be  understood  as  a
    general ruling that the sons of police officers cannot be  returned  to
    Kabul.  Each case is fact  specific  and  there  is  in  this  case  an
    additional and, we find, significant aggravating factor  of  his  being
    actively pursued because of a blood feud.

17. All we are saying is that when we look at the  decision  carefully  the
    weak elements that were properly identified by the Secretary  of  State
    do not amount to material errors of law.

18. The reasons for the judge's decision are plain  if  we  step  back  and
    consider the Decision fairly.  The Secretary of  State  knows  why  she
    lost and the reasons given are sufficient in law.

19. We dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.  That is our decision.

    Notice of Decision

20. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 June 2015                   |

